FOREWORD
Chapter FWD
FOREWORD
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
MUNICIPAL CODE
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
FWD:1

Part 1
OFFICIALS
§ 1-101. Auditors. [Ord. 629, 11/16/1981, §§ 1-5]
§ 1-102. Mayor and Council's Compensation. [Ord. 505, 12/26/1973,
§§ 1-3; as amended by Ord. 1146, 11/7/2016]
§ 1-103. Borough Manager. [Ord. 659, 4/16/1984, §§ 1-21; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; by Ord. 862, 1/19/1998; and by
Ord. 1156, 8/21/2017]
1. From and after the effective date of this section, all of the accounts of
the Borough of Emmaus for the year 1981, and all subsequent years,
shall be audited by an Independent Auditor appointed each year by the
Borough Council of Emmaus pursuant to the provisions of the Act of
February 1, 1966, P.L. _____, No. 581, § 1005, as amended (53 P.S.
46005(7)).
2. Such Auditor shall be a certified public accountant or firm of certified
public accountants registered in Pennsylvania.
3. Such Auditor shall be appointed annually by resolution of Borough
Council at least 30 days prior to the close of the fiscal year to make an
independent examination of all the accounts and accounting records of
the Borough for the fiscal year then closing.
4. The compensation to be paid such Auditor shall be fixed by Borough
Council.
5. The powers and duties of the Independent Auditor shall be as set forth
in Section VII of the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. _____, No. 581, § 1005,
(P.A. 56006(7)), the text of which section is hereby adopted and
incorporated by reference and made a part of this section to the same
extent as though the same were set out verbatim.
1. Members of the Emmaus Borough Council who are successfully elected
and take the oath of office on or after January 1, 2018, shall receive
compensation set in the amount of $2,800 per annum.
2. The Council President, elected among his or her peers, whose term of
elected Borough Council office and whose oath of office is on or after
January 1, 2018, shall receive compensation set in the amount of $3,250
per annum.
3. The Mayor of the Borough of Emmaus, whose term of elected office and
whose oath of office is on or after January 1, 2018, shall receive
compensation set in the amount of $3,600 per annum.
1. Creation of Office. The Office of Borough Manager is hereby created by
the Borough of Emmaus, subject to the right of the Borough, by
ordinance, at any time to abolish such office.
§ 1-101 FOREWORD § 1-103
FWD:3
2. Appointment and Removal. The Borough Council shall elect by a
majority vote of all members one person to fill the office of Borough
Manager. That person shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough
Council. The Borough Manager shall be subject to removal at any time
by a majority vote of all of the members of the Borough Council. The
Borough Manager need not be a resident of the Borough of Emmaus or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of his appointment,
but shall, within a period of time agreed upon between Borough Council
and the Borough Manager, become so and, during his tenure as
Borough Manager, shall live within a twenty-air-mile radius of the
Borough.
3. Qualifications. The Borough Manager shall be chosen solely on the
basis of his executive and administrative qualifications without regard
to age, race, color, creed, sex, disability, sexual preference, political
affiliation, or any other protected class. The Borough Manager shall
possess no less than a bachelor degree in business administration,
public administration, or a closely related field. In lieu of a bachelor
degree in the field of study, the Borough Manager may have a bachelor
degree in another field and no less than 10 years' previous experience
in municipal management.
4. Bond. Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give
bond to the Borough with a bonding company as surety in such sum as
is set by resolution of Borough Council, conditioned for the faithful
performance of his duties, premium for said bond to be paid by the
Borough of Emmaus.
5. Compensation. The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation
as shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
6. General Duties.
A. The Borough Manager shall have and exercise all powers and
duties assigned to him by statute, all powers and duties assigned to
the Borough Secretary by statute, and such other authority as may
be granted by the Borough Council. He shall be charged with the
enforcement of all laws and ordinances within the municipality
insofar as their enforcement is within the powers of the Borough,
excepting however, that he shall in no way restrict, infringe, or
supplant the authority of the police who are directly responsible by
statute to the Mayor.
B. The Borough Manager shall attend all meetings of the Borough
Council, shall keep the Council informed as to the affairs of the
Borough, and shall recommend to the Borough Council such
actions as may be necessary or expedient for the welfare of the
Borough.
C. The Borough Manager shall be responsible for preparing the
agenda for each meeting of the Council of the Borough of Emmaus
and supply facts pertinent thereunto. The Borough Manager shall
§ 1-103 EMMAUS CODE § 1-103
FWD:4
have the authority, when necessary, in consultation with the
Council President or his/her designee, to call and schedule
meetings, including, but not limited to, special meetings.
D. The Borough Manager or his/her designee shall handle all
correspondence on behalf of the Borough of Emmaus.
E. The Borough Manager shall serve as the public relations manager
of the Borough of Emmaus and shall maintain relations by
newspaper releases, personal contact with citizens, handling
complaints, addressing civil groups, and issuing an annual
Manager's report.
7. Employees.
A. The Borough Manager shall administer, supervise and be
responsible for the activities of all office and clerical employees of
the Borough, other than such employees who may be assigned to
the Police Department. The Borough Manager shall administer,
supervise and be responsible for the activities of all code
enforcement officials, including, but not limited to: Code
Enforcement Officer, Zoning Officer, Building Official, Public Works
Inspector, Plumbing Inspector, Fire Official, Safety Inspector,
Surveyor, Health Officer, or their assistants. He shall have charge
of all personnel of Highway, Water, Sewer, Parks and Recreation,
Accounting, employed personnel in the Fire Department,
Ambulance Department, and General Administration Departments.
The Borough Manager shall represent the Borough Council in
matters relative to the union and union members and shall issue all
work rules and disciplinary notices to union employees on behalf of
the Borough Council.
B. In addition, the Borough Manager shall administer, supervise and
be responsible for activities of any other Borough employees who
shall be assigned to his jurisdiction by ordinance or resolution of
the Borough Council or assigned to his jurisdiction by the Mayor, in
writing, as provided under Subsection 21.
C. The Borough Manager shall investigate and dispose of, or
designate an officer to investigate and dispose of, all complaints
regarding Borough of Emmaus services and personnel, and shall
report to the Council of the Borough of Emmaus thereon. All
complaints regarding Borough of Emmaus services shall be
referred to the office of the Manager.
D. The Borough Manager shall hire and, when necessary for the good
of the Borough of Emmaus, suspend or discharge any employee
under his/her supervision, provided that persons covered by the
civil service provisions of the Borough of Emmaus Code and the
Pennsylvania Borough Code shall be hired, suspended or
discharged in accordance with such provisions, and provided
further that the Manager shall report, at the next meeting
§ 1-103 FOREWORD § 1-103
FWD:5
thereafter of the Council of the Borough of Emmaus, any action
taken by authority of this subsection; it is expressly understood
and agreed that notwithstanding any other provision of this part,
department managers and full-time employees of the Borough of
Emmaus shall be hired and discharged only by vote of the Council
of the Borough of Emmaus after consultation with the Borough
Manager. Neither Borough Council nor any member of the Borough
Council shall dictate or attempt to influence the hiring of any
person to, or their discharge from, municipal employment by the
Manager, or in any manner take part in the hiring, suspending,
or discharge of employees, except as otherwise outlined in this
section.
E. Any of the above duties may be assigned by the Borough Manager
to any subordinate officials, but the overall responsibility for proper
execution of said duties remains with the Borough Manager.
8. Planning. The Borough Manager shall be responsible for planning,
initiating, supervising, completing, costing and documenting all
projects and activities of all Borough Departments. He shall maintain
priorities in consonance with the requirements of committee chairmen
and shall be responsible to the appropriate committee of Council for all
works and projects of these departments. He shall insure that all
activities under his jurisdiction are accomplished in a timely and
orderly manner.
9. Contracts.
A. The Borough Manager shall examine all proposed contracts to
which the Borough may be a party and may sign on behalf of the
Borough any contract authorized by the Borough Council,
excepting where the Borough Council directs that some officer or
officers shall do so.
B. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to see to it that all
terms of any contract to which the Borough is a party are fully
performed by all parties thereof.
C. It shall be the responsibility of the Borough Manager to see that the
provisions of all franchises, leases, permits, and privileges granted
by the Council of the Borough of Emmaus are observed.
D. The Borough Manager shall also be responsible to employ, by and
with the approval of the Council of the Borough of Emmaus, experts
and consultants to perform work and to advise the Borough.
10. Purchases.
A. The Borough Manager shall serve as the fiscal officer of the
Borough of Emmaus and shall be ultimately responsible for all
purchasing, accounts payable, and accounts receivable. The
Borough Manager shall serve as the purchasing officer of the
§ 1-103 EMMAUS CODE § 1-103
FWD:6
Borough of Emmaus and purchase, in accordance with provisions
of the Borough of Emmaus Code and Pennsylvania Borough Code,
all supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments,
and other offices of the Borough of Emmaus. The Manager shall
keep an account of all purchases and shall, from time to time or
when directed by the Council of the Borough of Emmaus, make a
full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and regulations
to department managers, subject to approval of the Council of the
Borough of Emmaus, governing the procurement of all municipal
supplies and equipment. No purchase shall be made or obligation
incurred excepting upon authorization by Borough Council and no
expense shall be incurred, except for the purpose for which no
prior appropriation is required by law if the amount thereof is not
covered by an unexpended appropriation for the purpose.
B. Any of the above duties may be assigned by the Borough Manager
to any subordinate officials, but the overall responsibility for proper
execution of said duties remains with the Borough Manager.
11. Appropriation and Levies. The Borough Manager shall see that all
money owed the Borough is promptly paid, and that proper proceedings
are taken for the security and collection of all the Borough's claims.
12. Accounts. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to keep current
accounts showing at all times the fiscal condition of the Borough,
including the current and anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on
hand and anticipated revenue of all municipal funds and accounts, and
he shall see to the collection of all money due the municipality.
13. Budgeting and Fiscal Responsibilities.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to prepare and submit
to the Borough Council a preliminary budget for the next fiscal year
and an explanatory budget message, in such a timely fashion as will
enable the Council of the Borough of Emmaus to consider and
adopt the budget and related tax ordinances according to the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Borough Code. In preparing the
budget, the Manager or an officer designated by him/her, shall
obtain from the head of each department, agency, or board, or any
qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues and expenses and
such other supporting data as is required. The Manager shall
review such estimates and may revise them after consultation with
the submitting party prior to submitting the budget to the Council
of the Borough of Emmaus. The Borough Manager shall submit to
the Council of the Borough of Emmaus a preliminary budget by
October 31 of each year.
B. The Borough Manager shall be responsible for the administration
of the budget after its adoption by the Council of the Borough of
Emmaus. The Borough Manager shall also be responsible for
developing, in conjunction with preparation of the budget, long-
§ 1-103 FOREWORD § 1-103
FWD:7
range fiscal plans for the Borough of Emmaus, with such plans to
be presented annually to the Council of the Borough of Emmaus for
its review, consideration, and adoption.
C. The Borough Manager shall be responsible to maintain all Borough
accounts and financial records.
D. Any of the above duties may be assigned by the Borough Manager
to any subordinate officials, but the overall responsibility for proper
execution of said duties remains with the Borough Manager.
14. Inventories/Property. The Borough Manager shall keep a current
inventory showing all real and personal property of the Borough and its
location, and shall be responsible for the care and custody of all such
property, including equipment, buildings, parks and all other Borough
property which is not by law assigned to some other officer or body for
care and control.
15. Reports and Publications.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager to see to the
publication of all notices, ordinances, or other documents required
by law to be published, and to prepare or cause to be prepared, all
reports which the Borough or any of the officials thereof are
required by law to prepare.
B. The Borough Manager shall submit to the Council, as soon as
possible after the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the Council of the Borough
of Emmaus as well as those for the Borough of Emmaus for the
preceding year.
16. Records/Certificates.
A. The Borough Manager shall prepare and have custody of all
municipal records required by law to be kept by the Borough and
not by a specific officer. Where the law makes it the duty of a
specific officer to keep or maintain records, the Borough Manager
shall make available to such officer all necessary clerical assistance
for the preparation of such records and shall make available a place
for the custody of such records. And in compliance herewith, the
Borough Manager shall make available to the Clerk stenographic
or clerical assistance necessary for the preparation of the journal of
Council proceedings and the record of ordinances and all other
documents which by law the Clerk is required to keep; and he shall
perform similar service for the Treasurer in the maintenance of
bond registers and all other records or documents which by law the
Treasurer is required to keep or prepare.
B. Where the law requires or provides for certification of any records
or documents by any officer of the Borough, the Borough Manager
§ 1-103 EMMAUS CODE § 1-103
FWD:8
shall cause such records or documents to be properly prepared and
presented to such officer for his signature.
17. Collector and Comptroller. The Borough Manager shall be ex officio
Borough collector and Borough comptroller unless such officers, or
either of them, are duly filled by appointment; and he shall perform the
duties of each such office in the absence of such appointment to either
of them.
18. Maps/Plats. The Borough Manager shall cause to be kept a complete set
of maps and plats showing the location of all Borough utilities and other
Borough properties, all street and other public places, and all lots or
parcels of land subdivided according to law.
19. Offices.
A. The Borough Manager shall maintain an office in Borough Hall and
shall spend such time in the performance of his duties as may be
required by Borough Council.
B. The Borough Manager shall hold such other Borough of Emmaus
offices and head such Borough of Emmaus departments as the
Council of the Borough of Emmaus may from time to time direct,
provided the office held is allowable by the Pennsylvania Borough
Code.
20. Grants and Other Funding.
A. The Borough Manager shall be responsible to apply for and manage
grants, as directed by Borough Council. The Borough Manager
shall become familiar with federal and state funding regulations
and programs and shall report to Council periodically on the
availability of programs in the form of grants and/or loans with a
recommendation as to projects for which the Borough might
qualify.
B. The Borough Manager shall also be required to be familiar with all
state and federal contracts and funding requirements, including,
but not limited to, Community Development Block Grants,
Pennsylvania Liquid Fuels, Pennsylvania Firemen's Relief, and
Pennsylvania Co-Stars.
21. Absence from Borough. In the event the Borough Manager shall be
absent from the Borough or incapacitated from performing the duties of
his position, the Assistant Borough Manager or in the absence of an
Assistant Borough Manager, a designee appointed by Borough Council,
shall act as Borough Manager during such absence or incapacity.
22. Mayor's Powers and Duties. The Mayor is hereby authorized to
delegate, in writing, to the Borough Manager subject to recall by
written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative and
nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 1-103 FOREWORD § 1-104
FWD:9
§ 1-104. Use of Motor Vehicles and Property Belonging to the
Borough. [Ord. 842, 2/18/1997, § I-IV]
1. Definitions.
BOROUGH PROPERTY — Any electronic equipment, tools, hardware,
materials or live animals purchased by or donated to the Borough
of Emmaus and in possession of the Borough, which have not been
formally liquidated or disposed of by the Borough.
BOROUGH VEHICLES — Any and all motorized vehicles licensed for
use on the roadways or which have been purchased by or donated to the
Borough of Emmaus, and for which the Borough of Emmaus holds legal
title and which have not been liquidated or disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of the Borough Code and the Ordinances of the
Borough.
2. Use of Borough Property and Vehicles. From and after the effective date
of this section, where an officer or employee of the Borough of Emmaus
intends to use a Borough vehicle for travel beyond the territorial limits
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or utilize other Borough property
outside of the territorial limits of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania,
prior approval must be obtained from the Borough Council before such
use except as hereinafter specified. Said request for use may be
presented through a department head or the Borough Manager, setting
forth the reason for the use of a Borough vehicle or Borough property
outside of the Commonwealth, as well as the date and expected
duration of such use. Such request for use may be acted upon by motion
memorialized in the minutes of the Borough Council.
3. Exceptions.
A. Emergencies. Prior approval of the use of a Borough vehicle or
Borough property outside the territorial jurisdiction of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall not be required in bona fide
emergency situations such as hot pursuit by a police vehicle or in
response to a request for mutual aid in an emergency situation, or
to acquire products or materials on an emergency basis (i.e. road
materials, snow treatment materials, pipes or fittings, fire
suppression or absorption equipment, etc.). In such event, report of
such emergency and vehicle or property use shall be made to the
Borough Council at the next regular meeting of Council.
B. Scheduled Routine Use or Repair. Individualized prior approval of
Borough Council shall not be required for use of ambulances for
patient transport, use of police vehicles for extradition or courtordered
business; or where property (not including motor vehicles)
is mailed or shipped out of State for repair, service or maintenance.
4. Penalty. Unauthorized use of a vehicle or property owned by the
Borough of Emmaus in contravention of this section may result in
disciplinary action including, but not limited to, letter of reprimand
§ 1-104 EMMAUS CODE § 1-104
FWD:10
§ 1-105. Tax Collector Compensation. [Ord. 840, 2/3/1997, §§ 1, 2;
as amended by Ord. 861, 1/5/1998; and by Ord. 962, 1/6/2003]
placed in an employee's file, termination of the employment of the
employee if warranted by circumstances or other disciplinary action as
permitted by any applicable collective bargaining agreement.
1. The compensation of the elected Tax Collector shall be based on a
commission representing an established percentage of revenues
collected as follows:
A. Effective January 1, 1998, the compensation shall be 0.667% of
taxes collected and deposited in Borough accounts in calendar year
1998.
B. Effective January 1, 1999, the compensation shall be 0.694% of
taxes collected and deposited in Borough accounts in calendar year
1999.
C. Effective January 1, 2000, the compensation shall be 0.722% of
taxes collected and deposited in Borough accounts in calendar year
2000.
D. Effective January 1, 2001, the compensation shall be 0.750% of
taxes collected and deposited in Borough accounts in calendar year
2001.
2. Contingencies. This subsection identifies contingencies to address
potential changes in compensation as a direct result of potential
changes in taxes:
A. In the event that the per capita tax is eliminated by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania during the period covered by this
section, the elected Tax Collector shall be paid a minimum
commission representing 80% of the estimated amount of the total
commission for all taxes collected that would have been paid if
there was no change in the per capita tax.
B. In the event that Emmaus Borough increases tax millage
subsequent to the adoption of this section during the calendar year
1997 and in the period covered by this section, the Tax Collector
compensation will be an additional 0.1% (one tenth of one percent)
of the estimated additional revenue generated by the additional
millage.
C. In the event that Emmaus Borough decreases tax millage
subsequent to the adoption of this section during calendar year
1997 and in the period covered by this section, the Tax Collector
compensation rate will not be affected.
§ 1-104 FOREWORD § 1-106
FWD:11
§ 1-106. Procedures for Tax Collector Collection and Payment of
Revenues. [Ordinance 841, 2/3/1997, §§ 1, 2; as amended by Ord.
881, 3/15/1999]
§ 1-107. Rules and Regulations Governing Public Official, Employee
and Volunteer Conduct. [Ord. 853, 7/28/1997]
1. The following procedures for the collection and payment of revenues to
the Borough of Emmaus are established for the elected Tax Collector:
A. The Tax Collector shall establish and maintain an account for the
daily deposit of collected taxes and revenues. The Tax Collector
shall make transfers of all account funds to an account designated
by the Borough two times per week. In the event that the daily
balance of the Tax Collector's account is $1,000 or less, the Tax
Collector shall make a deposit one day per week. The Borough
authorized the Tax Collector to retain a maximum balance of
$1,000 in the Tax Collector's account. The Borough reserves the
unilateral right to modify this maximum retained amount based on
the needs of the Borough.
B. The Tax Collector shall continue to provide deposit and transfer
information to the Borough on a periodic basis as determined by
the Borough. The Tax Collector shall provide other reports as
necessary for the effective and efficient management of tax
collection records and payment of compensation to the Tax
Collector. The above information shall be provided on paper or
electronic media depending upon the needs of the Borough and the
capability of the tax collection records system.
2. Fee for Returned Checks. The Borough authorizes the Tax Collector to
charge a fee for the handling of returned checks. In addition to
recovering any bank fees for returned checks from taxpayers, the Tax
Collector may charge an additional fee up to 150% of the fee charged by
the bank for the returned check and any other bank fee resulting from a
potential overdraft or line of credit. In addition, the Borough authorizes
the Tax Collector to charge a fee of $3 per bill to the requesting party
for a duplicate bill. Any of the fees identified in this section shall be
charged to the taxpayer. No fees shall be charged to Emmaus Borough.
1. Sexual Harassment Policy of the Borough of Emmaus.
A. Background. Section 703(a)(1) of Title VII, 42 VII, 42 U.S.C.
§ 2000e-2(a) provides:
It shall be an unlawful employment practice for an employer —
. . . to fail or refuse to hire or to discharge any individual, or
otherwise to discriminate against any individual with respect to
his compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment,
because of such individual's race, color, religion, sex, or national
origin[.]
§ 1-106 EMMAUS CODE § 1-107
FWD:12
In 1980, the EEOC issued guidelines declaring sexual harassment
a violation of § 703 of Title VII, establishing criteria for
determining when unwelcome conduct of a sexual nature
constitutes sexual harassment, defining the circumstances under
which an employer may be held liable and suggesting affirmative
steps an employer should take to prevent sexual harassment. This
policy is enacted by the Borough of Emmaus which the intention of
complying with the statutory provisions and the "Policy Guidelines
on Sexual Harassment" published by the EEOC (N-915-050, 3/19/
90 and subsequent revisions.)
B. Scope. This policy covers all public officials and employees of the
Borough of Emmaus including, volunteer, part-time and seasonal
employees.
C. Definitions.
(1) Sexual Harassment. Title VII does not prohibit all conduct of a
sexual nature in the workplace. Thus, it is crucial to clearly
define sexual harassment: only unwelcome sexual conduct that
is a term or condition of employment constitutes a violation. 29
CFR 1604.11(a). The EEOC's guidelines define two types of
sexual harassment: "quid pro quo" and "hostile environment."
The guidelines provide that "unwelcome" sexual conduct
constitutes sexual harassment when "submission to such
conduct is made either explicitly or implicitly a term or
condition of an individual's employment," 29 CFR
1604.11(a)(1). "Quid pro quo harassment" occurs when
"submission to or rejection of such conduct by an individual is
used as the basis for employment decisions affecting such
individual," 29 CFR 1604.11(a)(2). The EEOC's guidelines also
recognize that unwelcome sexual conduct that "unreasonably
interfer[es] with an individual's job performance" or creates an
"intimidating, hostile or offense working environment" can
constitute sex discrimination, even if it leads to no tangible or
economic job consequences.
(2) Unwelcome Conduct. Sexual harassment is "unwelcome . . .
verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature . . ." 29 CFR
1604.11(a). Because sexual attraction may often play a role in
the day to day social exchange between employees, "the
distinction between invited, uninvited-but-welcome, offensivebut-
tolerated, and flatly rejected" sexual advances may well be
difficult to discern. Barnes v. Costle, 561 F.2d 983, (D.C. Cir.
1976). But this distinction is essential because sexual conduct
becomes unlawful only when it is unwelcome. In Henson v. City
of Dundee, 682F.2d at 903, the Eleventh Circuit provided a
general definition of "unwelcome conduct" as: the challenged
conduct must be unwelcome "in the sense that the employee
§ 1-107 FOREWORD § 1-107
FWD:13
did not solicit or incite it, and in the sense that the employee
regarded the conduct as undesirable or offensive."
D. Restatement of Policy. Emmaus Borough values our employees and
volunteers and is committed to providing a safe and secure
workplace. It continues to be the policy of the Borough that sexual
harassment of employees, elected and appointed officials,
volunteers, seasonal employees or applicants for employment is
unacceptable conduct which will not be tolerated by the Borough.
Sexual harassment includes any unwelcome sexual advances,
requests for sexual favors and other verbal, visual or physical
conduct of a sexual nature. No supervisor or other employee shall
threaten or insinuate, either explicitly or implicitly, that another
employee's or applicant's refusal to submit to sexual advances will
adversely affect that person's employment, work status, evaluation,
wages, advancement, duty assignments, shifts or any other
condition of employment or career development. Similarly, no
employee shall promise, imply or grant any preferential treatment
in connection with another employee or applicant engaging in
sexual conduct or the promise thereof.
E. Reporting and Complaint Procedure. Any employee or volunteer
who feels that he or she is a victim of sexual harassment by any
supervisor, management official, other employee or any other
person in connection with employment or service with the Borough
should bring the matter to the immediate attention of their
supervisor and complete and sign an incident report. An employee
who is uncomfortable for any reason in bringing such matter to the
attention of his or her supervisor should report the matter and
submit the incident report to the Borough Manager. Any questions
about this policy or potential sexual harassment should also be
brought to the attention of the same persons. The Borough will
promptly investigate all allegations of sexual harassment in a
manner which will protect the confidentiality of the persons
involved as much as possible during the investigation and take
appropriate corrective action, up to and including dismissal from
position, if warranted.
F. Sanctions, Discipline, Dismissal Resulting from Violation of Policy.
Any employee or volunteer who is determined, after an
investigation, to have engaged in sexual harassment in violation of
this policy will be subject to appropriate sanctions up to and
including termination. In the event of suspension, reassignment,
loss of salary, loss of position or termination of employment, the
Borough shall follow the applicable provisions of the collective
bargaining agreement, if any, or the disciplinary procedures of the
Borough if contractual provisions do not apply.
G. Education and Questions Regarding Policy. The Borough Manager
shall assure that all new employees receive orientation including
the terms of this policy, and sign a statement acknowledging review
§ 1-107 EMMAUS CODE § 1-107
FWD:14
of this policy within three weeks of their hire date. The Borough
Manager shall also assure that current employees review and
receive training concerning this policy and sign a statement
acknowledging review of this policy within two months of the
enactment of this section. Any questions regarding this policy
should be directed to the Borough Manager.
2. Physical Assault, Violence and Harassment Policy of the Borough of
Emmaus.
A. Scope. This policy covers all public officials and employees of the
Borough of Emmaus, including volunteer, part-time and seasonal
employees.
B. Definitions. The terms "violence" and "threats of violence" shall
include, without limiting the language thereof:
(1) Obscene language directed toward a person, or verbal
attempts to intentionally threaten, ridicule or provoke another
person.
(2) Direct verbal threats of violence to an individual or group.
(3) Harassing or intimidating behavior because of an individual's
race, sex, creed, color, national origin, disability, marital status
or sexual orientation.
(4) Physically touching another person in an intimidating,
malicious or sexually harassing manner. This includes, among
other behaviors, hitting, spitting on slapping, kicking,
pinching, grabbing, pushing, shoving, striking or throwing
objects at another person.
(5) In the workplace or while on duty, being in possession of and/or
displaying dangerous weapons, including firearms, explosives,
knives, blackjacks, brass knuckles or other weapons which
would pose a threat to others without a lawful reason to
possess such weapon.
C. Restatement of Policy. Emmaus Borough values our employees and
is committed to providing a safe and secure workplace. The
Borough will not tolerate violate or threats of violence in our
workplace and will take action in any situation where an employee
is found to have violated this policy up to and including termination
of employment or service.
D. Reporting and Complaint Procedure. Any person or volunteer who
feels that he or she is a victim of violence, threat of violence,
physical assault, battery or harassment by any supervisor,
management official, other employee or any other person in
connection with employment or service with the Borough should
bring the matter to the immediate attention of their supervisor
§ 1-107 FOREWORD § 1-107
FWD:15
consistent with the procedures for reporting other workplace
safety concerns.
E. Sanctions, Discipline or Dismissal May Result From Violation of
Policy. Any employee or volunteer who is determined, after an
investigation, to have engaged in the conduct prohibited
hereinabove, will be subject to appropriate sanctions up to and
including termination. In the event that suspension, loss of salary,
loss of position or termination of employment, the Borough shall
follow the applicable provisions of the collective bargaining
agreement, if any, or the disciplinary procedures of the Borough.
F. Education and Questions Regarding Policy. The Borough Manager
shall assure that all new employees receive orientation including
the terms of this policy and sign a statement acknowledging review
of this policy within three weeks of hire date. The Borough
Manager shall also assure that current employees receive training
and review of this policy and sign a statement acknowledging
review of this policy within two months of the enactment of this
section. Any further questions should be directed to the Borough
Manager.
§ 1-107 EMMAUS CODE § 1-107
FWD:16
Part 2
EMMAUS MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY
§ 1-201. Intent to Organize. [Ord. 352, 9/15/1958, § 1]
The Borough of Emmaus hereby signifies its intention and desire to
organize an Authority under the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382 and its
amendments, and known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945."
§ 1-202. Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 352, 9/15/1958, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 673, 6/30/1986, §§ 1 & 2]
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council are hereby authorized
and directed to execute, on behalf of the Borough of Emmaus, Articles of
Incorporation for said Authority in substantially the following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382
and its amendments known as "Municipality Authorities Act of 1945" the
Borough of Emmaus, a municipal corporation located in the County of
Lehigh and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, desiring to incorporate an
Authority thereunder, does hereby certify:
1. The name of the Authority is Emmaus General Authority, its registered
office being Borough Hall, Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
2. Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of May 2, 1945,
P.L. 382 and its amendments, known as "Municipality Authorities Act of
1945".
3. No other Authority has been organized under the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945 or under the Act, approved the 28th day of June,
1935, P.L. 463, and none is in existence in or for the Borough of
Emmaus, the incorporating municipality, with the exception of the East
Penn Union School District Authority, which school district has as one of
its component parts the territory within the Borough of Emmaus.
4. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of Emmaus
and the names and addresses of its Municipal Authorities are as
follows: [Here followed the names and addresses of the Borough
officials.]
5. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of Authority to be formed hereby are as follows: [Here followed
the names, addresses and terms of the first Authority Board members.]
6. The project or projects to be undertaken by said Authority shall be
projects permitted and authorized by the laws of the Commonwealth of
§ 1-201 FOREWORD § 1-202
FWD:17
§ 1-203. Filing of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 352, 9/15/1958,
§§ 3, 4]
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council are further directed
to cause a notice of the substances of this Part, including the substance
of the above Articles of Incorporation and of the proposed filing of the
above Articles of Incorporation to be published once in the Morning Call,
a newspaper published and of general circulation in the County of Lehigh,
and in the Lehigh Law Journal, as directed by the Municipality Authorities
Act of 1945 and its amendments.
The President and Secretary of the Borough Council are directed to file
the said Articles of Incorporation, together with the necessary proofs of
publication, with the Secretary of the Commonwealth, and to do all other
acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of
"Emmaus Municipal Authority," including the payment of any filing fees in
connection therewith.
§ 1-204. First Project. [Ord. 356, 5/25/1959, §§ 1-4]
Pennsylvania as the Borough of Emmaus may from time to time by
Resolution or Ordinance specify.
7. A certified copy of the Ordinance of the Borough of Emmaus
authorizing the creation of said Authority, together with proof of
publication of Notice of Filing of these Articles of Incorporation, are
each submitted herewith.
8. The existence of the Authority shall terminate on June 30, 2030, unless
extended by an amendment to these Articles of Incorporation.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the Borough of Emmaus, the incorporating
municipality have caused these Articles to be executed by its proper
officers and have caused to affixed hereto the municipal seal of said
incorporating municipality this 15th day of September, A.D., 1958.
ATTEST:
LEWIS C. KRATZER
OSCAR T. IOBST President of Council
Secretary
1. This Borough specifies that the initial project to be undertaken by the
Authority shall be to acquire, hold, construct, improve, maintain,
operate, own and lease, either in the capacity of lessor or lessee,
sewers, sewer systems or parts thereof and sewage treatment facilities,
including facilities for disposing of industrial wastes, in and/or for this
Borough.
2. This Borough requests the Authority to undertake and consummate the
initial project specified in subsection 1 with all reasonable dispatch and
diligence.
§ 1-202 EMMAUS CODE § 1-204
FWD:18
3. This section shall not be construed to preclude this Borough from
specifying other projects, by future action of this Borough, which may
be undertaken by the Authority.
4. Enactment of this section is deemed necessary for the benefit of and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of
citizens of this Borough and will increase the prosperity of citizens of
this Borough.
§ 1-204 FOREWORD § 1-204
FWD:19

Part 3
ASSOCIATIONS, COMMISSIONS
A.
Planning Commission.
§ 1-301. Membership. [Ord. 243, 7/18/1938, § 1; as amended by Ord.
452, 3/17/1969; by Ord. 512, 4/15/1974, § 1; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986; by Ord. 693, 2/16/1988; by Ord. 752, 8/19/1991,
§ 1; and by Ord. 938, 12/3/2001]
In accordance with Section 201 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code Act No. 247, et seq., effective January 1, 1969, the Planning
Commission created by Ordinance No. 243 shall hereafter consist of seven
members whose appointments shall be made in accordance with the
provisions of Act No. 247. All powers and duties of the Department of
Planning shall be governed by Act No. 247.
§ 1-301 FOREWORD § 1-301
FWD:21

B.
Shade Tree Commission.
§ 1-321. Commission Established. [Ord. 335, 11/5/1956, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
A Shade Tree Commission is hereby created in and for the Borough of
Emmaus. The said Commission shall consist of five members, who shall
be appointed and shall perform all duties and may exercise all the powers
conferred in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-321 FOREWORD § 1-321
FWD:23

C.
Firemen's Relief Association.
§ 1-331. Recognition of Firemen's Relief Association. [Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
§ 1-332. Certification to Auditor General. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage
of service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such
certification shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 1-333. Annual Appropriation. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, § 701 et seq. as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) within 60 days of
receipt. The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of
service established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
1. The following association(s) [is/are] hereby recognized as actively
engaged in providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the
Borough.
Borough of Emmaus Firemen's Relief Association
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
2. The above named Association of the Borough is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 1-331 FOREWORD § 1-333
FWD:25

D.
Arts Commission.
§ 1-341. Creation and Composition. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 986, 12/6/2004; by Ord. 990, 1/17/2005; by Ord.
1018, 11/6/2006; by Ord. 1088, 10/15/2012, § 1; and by Ord. 1163,
10/16/2017]
An Emmaus Arts Commission consisting of up to 13 members shall be
created and its membership shall be appointed by the Emmaus Borough
Council. Said members are encouraged to be representatives of business,
education, artistic, governmental and civic communities of the Borough of
Emmaus. Membership shall be no less than nine Borough residents and no
more than four non-Borough residents. For the purposes of this section,
a resident shall include anyone living within the Borough of Emmaus, as
well as any business owner with a physical business address in the Borough
of Emmaus. Appointed members shall perform all duties and may exercise
all powers conferred in accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 1-342. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 2]
The Emmaus Arts Commission shall promote and encourage public artistic
programs; further the development and public awareness of an interest
in the fine and performing arts; provide for the assessment of the artistic
needs of the community; provide the means of development of a
comprehensive Borough wide plan to encourage and strengthen artistic
and cultural resources; develop programs in the arts which shall seek
to introduce the visual and performing arts to Borough residents who
have previously not participated in such activities and encourage existing
organizations to develop new ways to reaching the community; provide a
form of communications between representatives of the community and the
Borough; act as an advisory board to the Borough on all matters pertaining
to the arts and the cultural development of the Borough.
§ 1-343. Qualifications of Members. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 3; as
amended by Ord. 1032, 11/5/2007; and by Ord. 1163, 10/16/2017]
Said members shall be representatives of business, education, artistic,
governmental and civic communities of the Borough of Emmaus and shall
include at least one member of Borough Council.
§ 1-344. Terms. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 4; as amended by Ord. 1088,
10/15/2012, § 1]
The initial terms of the first 11 members shall be for a period of three years.
Members of the Emmaus Arts Commission, appointed by Borough Council
subsequent to the date of adoption of this amendment, shall be appointed
to a term of three years.
§ 1-341 FOREWORD § 1-345
FWD:27
§ 1-345. Removal and Vacancy. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 5; as
amended by Ord. 986, 12/6/2004]
The Emmaus Borough Council may remove any and all members of the Arts
Commission for official misconduct including, but not limited to, neglect
of duty and may fill the vacancy for any expired term of any previously
appointed member of the Commission.
§ 1-346. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 6; as
amended by Ord. 986, 12/6/2004]
Subject to the approval of the Emmaus Borough Council, the Emmaus Arts
Commission may enact its own rules and regulations in furtherance of
carrying out its duties.
§ 1-347. Annual Report. [Ord. 669, 9/17/1985, § 7]
The Emmaus Arts Commission shall annually report in writing to Council.
The report shall contain a statement detailing all activities conducted
during the year. In addition each annual report shall contain an income/
expense statement.
§ 1-345 EMMAUS CODE § 1-347
FWD:28
E.
Civil Service Rules and Regulations.
§ 1-351. Definition of Terms. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/20191]
1. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and
phrases, wherever used in the Rules and Regulations, shall be
construed to have the meaning indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission
in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination
for any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority
pursuant to their request of three names taken from the eligibility list
developed by the Civil Service Commission.
CERTIFICATION LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed
all civil service examinations, successfully completed the polygraph
examination and background investigation, and have been certified
by the Commission to be officially referred to Borough Council for
consideration of employment.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of
the Borough of Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of
Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
CONSORTIUM — The Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, consisting of the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police
Association with participating municipalities from Lehigh County for
the purposes of the beginning police hiring testing process, which
includes the written examination and physical fitness testing processes.
ELECTOR — A duly qualified voter who is a constituent of the Borough
of Emmaus.
ELIGIBILITY LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed
all civil service examinations for a particular position in the Police
Department, but have not yet been administered a background
investigation or polygraph examination.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligibility
list or furlough list.
1. Editor's Note: This ordinance repealed former Subpart E, Civil Service Commission,
adopted by Ord. No. 1114, 11/3/2014, as amended.
§ 1-351 FOREWORD § 1-351
FWD:29
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to applicants to determine
their qualifications for a position in the Police Department.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons
temporarily laid off from positions in the Police Department because
of a reduction in the number of officers. However, if the furloughed
employee does not express his intent in writing to remain on the list,
his name will be removed after two years.
MUNICIPAL POLICE DEPARTMENT — Any municipal or governmental
body police department from any state which has a selection process
for its police officers equivalent to or similar to the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania's Civil Service Statute contained in the Borough Code.
A municipal police department shall not include school police, private
police, part-time police, college or university police or any other police
department which does not specifically meet the aforesaid definition of
a municipal police department (including police departments which do
not have three or more officers and thus do not have a civil service
requirement).
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of the Rules and Regulations, an
entry-level sworn full-time position in a police department.
POSITION — A particular job or assignment within the Police
Department including, but not limited to, Juvenile, Detective, School
Resource Officer, Canine Officer, etc. These positions are not ranks and
the position is not protected by civil service. Assignment to a position
shall be made by the Borough Council or its designee and the term of
assignment shall be at will.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligibility list, but who has not yet completed the
work-test period.
RANK — A position of authority over other police officers. Ranks shall
be designated by the Borough Council. Where the Borough Council has
not designated a priority of ranks, the priority shall be the same as in
the military (or paramilitary organization).
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank
where the employee fulfilled all of the requirements of the Rules and
Regulations for both the prior and current position or rank. However, a
decrease in salary without a change to a different position or rank shall
not necessarily constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
STATE POLICE — Any police department of any state with general law
enforcement powers over the state as a whole.
§ 1-351 EMMAUS CODE § 1-351
FWD:30
§ 1-352. The Commission. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation without pay of a police
officer from the Police Department.
VICE CHAIRPERSON — The person who shall serve in the absence
of the Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of the Borough of
Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
2. Gender. The words "he," "his," "him" and "men" when used in the Rules
and Regulations represent both the masculine and feminine genders.
1. Civil Service Commission.
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
qualified electors of the Borough of Emmaus. Pursuant to the
Borough Code, the Commissioners were originally appointed by the
Borough Council to serve for the terms of two, four and six years,
and as terms expire, Commissioners shall be appointed for terms of
six years.
B. Any vacancy occurring on the Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled by the Borough Council for the unexpired
term within the period of 30 days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Members of the Commission (or alternates), before entering upon
the discharge of the duties of their office, shall take an oath or
affirmation of office pursuant to 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1141 (relating to
form of oaths of office) to support the Constitution of the United
States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform
their official duties with fidelity. No Civil Service Commissioner
shall receive compensation.
2. Appointment and Duties of Alternate Members of the Civil Service
Commission.
A. Borough Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors
of the Borough to serve as alternate members of the Commission.
The term of the office of the alternate member shall be for six
years. An alternate may participate in any proceedings or
discussions of the Commission but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Commission unless designated as a voting alternate
member as hereinafter set forth.
B. If by reason of absence or disqualification of a member a quorum is
not reached, the Chair shall designate as many alternate members
of the Commission to sit on the Commission as may be needed to
provide a quorum. An alternate member of the Commission shall
continue to serve on the Commission in all proceedings involving
the matter or case for which the alternate was initially designated
until the Commission has made a final determination of the matter
or case.
§ 1-351 FOREWORD § 1-352
FWD:31
C. Designation of an alternate member pursuant to this section shall
be made on a case-by-case basis in rotation according to declining
seniority among the alternates. No action of the Commission may
be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two
members.
3. Offices Incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner. No
Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed
office under the United States government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth,
including the Borough of Emmaus, except that one member of the
Commission may be a member of the teaching profession.
4. Organization of Commission; Quorum.
A. The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as the Chair, one as
Vice Chair, and one as the Secretary. The Commission shall
thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of each evennumbered
year.
B. Each Commissioner shall be notified in writing of each and every
meeting. Three members of the Commission shall constitute a
quorum and no action of the Commission shall be valid unless it
shall have the concurrence of at least two members (or alternates).
5. Duties of Chairperson. The Chairperson, or in his absence the Vice
Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform any
duties required by law or the Rules and Regulations.
6. Duties of Secretary. The Secretary shall carry on at the direction of the
Commission all official correspondence of the Commission, send out all
notices required by law and the Rules and Regulations, keep a record of
each examination or other official action of the Commission, and
perform all other duties required by law or the Rules and Regulations. If
the Secretary is unavailable, or if, in the sole discretion of the
Chairperson, the Chairperson determines that it is appropriate to
expedite the business of the Commission, the Chairperson may assume
the ministerial duties of the Secretary.
7. Commission Meetings. Except for the biannual organizational meeting,
all other meetings shall be held either at the call of the Chairperson or
at the call of two members of the Commission. All meetings shall be
open to the public except as provided by applicable law. At least 48
hours' written notice of each public meeting shall be given to each
member. Meeting notices to the public shall conform to law and the
Rules and Regulations. The order of business of all Commission
meetings shall include but not be limited to:
A. Roll call.
§ 1-352 EMMAUS CODE § 1-352
FWD:32
B. Approval of minutes of previous meetings.
C. Public comment.
D. Unfinished business.
E. Hearing of cases.
F. New business.
G. Communications and reports.
8. Clerks and Supplies. Borough Council shall furnish the Commission
with supplies and clerical assistance as may be necessary for the
Commission to fulfill its duties. In addition, the Commission shall select
and retain counsel to serve as its Solicitor and any other consultants or
experts, including physicians and psychiatrists/psychologists, as
necessary. The elected and appointed officials of the Borough shall
assist the Commission with all reasonable and appropriate expenses
including payment of reasonable compensation for any counsel or
experts retained by the Commission.
9. Amendment of Rules and Regulations. The Commission may propose to
amend, revise, void or replace the Rules and Regulations for any reason
by action of a majority of the Commission at any properly convened
meeting of the Commission. Before any changes to the Rules and
Regulations become effective, those changes must be approved by the
Borough Council. The Rules and Regulations, and any amendments
thereto, shall be made available to the public for distribution or
inspection.
10. Solicitor. The Civil Service Commission shall appoint its own Solicitor
whose fees shall be paid by the Borough. The Borough shall have the
authority to place a reasonable limit on the amount allowed each year
for the services of the Commission Solicitor.
11. Minutes and Records.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records
of examinations and other official action. All recommendations of
nonappointed applicants for appointment received by the
Commission shall be kept and preserved for a period of five years.
All records for all appointed applicants shall be kept for the life of
their appointment and five years thereafter. All records and written
causes of removal filed with the Commission, except as otherwise
provided in Section 1191 of the Borough Civil Service Law,2 shall
be open to public inspection and subject to reasonable regulation
as hereinafter stated.
B. Any and all records related to disciplinary action filed with the
Commission shall only be open to public inspection upon
2. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1191.
§ 1-352 FOREWORD § 1-352
FWD:33
§ 1-353. Applications and Qualifications for Initial Employment as a
Police Officer. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
completion of the disciplinary proceeding and a finding that at least
one of the charges was sustained. Upon request of the police officer
during the pendency of a disciplinary action, these records shall
be open to public inspection subject to reasonable regulation. The
Secretary shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question. If the member is absent or fails
to vote, the Secretary shall indicate that fact in the minutes.
12. Investigations. The Commission shall have the power to initiate and
conduct investigations concerning all matters relating to the
administration and enforcement of the Rules and Regulations. The
Chairperson of the Commission is authorized to administer oaths and
affirmations in connection with such investigations.
13. Subpoenas.
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson, or his designee, to require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers
pertaining to any investigation or inquiry. The fees of such
witnesses for attendance and travel shall be the same as for
witnesses appearing in the courts and shall be paid from
appropriations for the incidental expenses of the Commission.
B. All officers in public service and employees of the Borough of
Emmaus shall attend and testify when required to do so by the
Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued
by the Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect in a
summary proceeding, that person shall be sentenced to pay a
minimal fine of $100 or a fine not to exceed the maximum penalty
permitted by law. In default of the payment of such fine and cost,
that person shall be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lehigh County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of such
persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to
produce any records and papers necessary and in default thereof
shall be held in contempt of court.
14. Annual Report. The Commission shall make an annual report to the
Borough Council containing a brief summary of its work during the
year, which shall be available for public inspection.
1. Public Notice.
§ 1-352 EMMAUS CODE § 1-353
FWD:34
A. Public notice of the time and place of every examination, together
with the information as to the rank to be filled, shall be given by
publication once in a newspaper of general circulation, at least two
weeks prior to each examination, and a copy of the notice shall be
prominently posted in the office of the Commission or other public
place. The public notice shall contain, at a minimum, the following
information:
(1) Title and general requirements of the rank to be filled.
(2) Deadline for the acceptance of applications.
(3) Date, time and place for the commencement of the examination
process.
B. If the Borough of Emmaus, through the Civil Service Commission,
elects to participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police
Association Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee all
advertisement requirements pursuant to the written examination
as well as the physical fitness testing. The Consortium shall comply
with all state statutes regarding civil service advertising.
C. The public notice may further include a statement of the residence
requirements, starting salary and benefits, education
requirements, application processing fee, and/or any other
pertinent information as deemed appropriate by the Commission.
2. Application for Examination.
A. Borough Application Process.
(1) Each person desiring to apply for examination shall file with
the Commission a formal application in which the applicant
shall provide, under oath or affirmation, the following
information:
(a) Full name and residence or post office address;
(b) Citizenship, place and date of birth;
(c) Condition of health and physical capacity for public
service;
(d) Business or employment and his residence for the past five
years; and
(e) Other information as may be required by the Commission's
Rules and Regulations, showing the applicant's
qualifications for the position for which the applicant is
being examined.
(2) The Commission may require in the application any other
information that it deems appropriate.
§ 1-353 FOREWORD § 1-353
FWD:35
(3) The Commission shall establish the application form to be
used. Said application form shall be submitted to Borough
Council prior to its use and adoption for comment. The
Borough shall establish the amount of a nonrefundable
application/processing fee which must be paid at the time of
submission of the application.
(4) In order to be eligible for participation in any examination for
any position with the Police Department, every applicant must
submit a completed application form to the Commission and
meet all other applicable eligibility requirements before the
deadline stated by the Commission.
B. If the Borough of Emmaus, through the Civil Service Commission,
elects to participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police
Association Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the initial
application process. The Borough reserves the right to require
additional and supplemental information as required in Subsection
2A(1) above pursuant to the applicant's successful completion of
the written examination and physical fitness testing.
3. Discrimination.
A. The Borough of Emmaus is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Borough's and the Commission's policy to grant equal employment
opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race, religion,
color, national origin, gender, age, marital status or non-job-related
physical or mental handicap or disability. The Borough and the
Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment and
promotion.
B. Further, no discrimination shall be exercised against any disabled
person capable of performing normal customary police functions,
except to the extent permitted pursuant to the Americans with
Disabilities Act and the rules and regulations promulgated
thereunder or any other protected class as determined by federal
and state law.
4. Availability of Application Forms.
A. Application forms shall be available to all interested persons in the
office of the Borough Manager, and from such other offices and
officers that the Commission, from time to time, may choose to
designate. Application forms may be mailed upon written or
telephone request. However, the Commission assumes no
responsibility for missed filing deadlines due to a delay in the
receipt of the application.
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the application process.
If this option is selected, all applications for initial application
§ 1-353 EMMAUS CODE § 1-353
FWD:36
periods, forms, and paperwork to be filled out for the written
examination and physical fitness testing process shall be overseen
and controlled by the Consortium. All applicants shall follow the
process, rules and regulations set forth by the Consortium and
shall be in compliance with all state statutes regarding civil service
requirements.
5. Application Period.
A. The application period shall be no less than 14 calendar days in
length. The exact length of the application period shall be set by
the Commission for each application process.
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the initial application
process.
6. Filing of Applications.
A. Completed applications for police officer positions may be received
at any time during normal business hours in the office of the
Borough Manager and by such other offices and officers as the
Commission may designate. The receipt of such applications shall
be subject to the following conditions:
(1) Applications must be received on or before 4:00 p.m. of the day
set by the Commission as the close of the application period.
(2) At the time of filing, all applications must be accompanied by
the nonrefundable processing fee paid in cash or by personal
check. A receipt will be given for any fee paid. No application
will be accepted for filing without payment of the appropriate
fee. If payment is made by a personal check which is not
honored for any reason, it shall be considered that the
applicant failed to pay the appropriate fee.
(3) An application becomes invalid one year after the deadline per
Subsection 6A above or when an eligibility list is certified for
that position.
B. If the Borough elects to participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of
Police Association Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the
filing of applications. All applicants shall follow the process, rules
and regulations set forth by the Consortium.
7. Recording of Applications.
A. The Borough Manager or his/her designee shall conduct an initial
screening of the filed application. The application and initial
screening shall then be turned over to the Commission which shall
review each application as soon as practical after filing for the
purpose of determining that such application is complete and
§ 1-353 FOREWORD § 1-353
FWD:37
contains no omissions. Any application which is incomplete is
invalid and it shall not be considered. The Secretary or other
designated officer shall date, number and record in the order of
receipt all applications which, once recorded, become Commission
records and shall not be returned to the applicants.
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the recording of
applications. All applicants shall follow the process, rules and
regulations set forth by the Consortium.
(1) However, from the point of completion of the written
examination process and the physical fitness testing process
hereafter, applicants shall file all additional supplemental
information, forms, waivers, and any other paperwork with the
office of the Borough Manager or his/her designee.
8. Willful Prior False Application to Any Department. No person who has
made any willful false application in the past to any law enforcement
agency shall be permitted to make an application or future application
for any position in the Police Department.
9. Age Requirement. All applicants must have reached their 21st birthday
before the deadline for submitting completed applications.
10. General Qualifications - All Applicants for Patrol Officer. Except as
hereinafter provided, at the time the application is submitted, every
applicant must have or provide proof of the following:
A. Proof of being a United States citizen.
B. Physically and mentally fit to perform the full duties and essential
job functions of a police officer.
C. Possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license.
D. Meet the following educational requirement:
(1) A high school diploma or graduate equivalency degree.
E. Shall speak, read and write the English language.
F. Must be of good moral character.
G. Within one year after being sworn in as a police officer, must reside
within 20 air miles of Borough Hall. The definition of residency
shall be that place where an officer normally sleeps and carries on
the normal activities associated with a home.
11. Essential Job Functions and Tasks of a Police Officer. The rules hereby
incorporate by reference the essential functions and tasks of a police
officer as currently required by the Municipal police officers Education
and Training Commission, as outlined in Appendix A attached hereto.3
§ 1-353 EMMAUS CODE § 1-353
FWD:38
The essential functions and tasks will be automatically modified in the
future to be identical to any future changes made by the Municipal
Police Officers Education and Training Commission.
12. Rejection of Applicant.
A. The Commission may refuse to examine, or, if examined, may
refuse to certify after examination as eligible, any applicant who is
found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for examination
prescribed in the Rules and Regulations adopted for the position or
employment for which he has applied, or who is physically unfit for
the performance of the duties of the position to which he seeks
employment, or who is illegally using a controlled substance, as
defined in Section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (Public
Law 91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who has been guilty of any crime
involving moral turpitude, or of infamous or notoriously disgraceful
conduct, or who has been dismissed from public service for
delinquency or misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any
group whose policies or activities are subversive to the form of
government set forth in the Constitutions and laws of the United
States and Pennsylvania.
B. All applicants shall be required to completely and accurately
complete all applications, forms, waivers, and questionnaires
provided for the application and hiring process. Failure to
accurately, truthfully, and completely fill out any application, form,
waiver, or questionnaire may result in disqualification from the
process.
C. The Commission shall refuse to certify as eligible any applicant who
fails to accurately and truthfully disclose all facts and information
requested of the applicant in the application, psychological testing,
physical examination or interviews conducted pursuant to the
background examination. If an applicant fails to appear for any
scheduled examination or interview, that applicant shall
immediately be removed as an eligible applicant. If an applicant's
credit history is unsatisfactory so as to possibly affect police work,
this may disqualify the applicant.
D. If, at any time, an applicant desires to be removed from further
consideration for inclusion in the eligibility list, the applicant shall
submit that request in writing to the Commission. After receipt of
the same, the Commission shall remove that person's name from
further consideration as an applicant. The Commission shall notify
that person in writing of the same.
E. If a person on the eligibility list fails to respond to a notice sent to
that party's current address on file with the Commission or fails to
appear for any scheduled testing or interviews, that party's name
3. Editor's Note: Appendix A is in file in the Borough offices.
§ 1-353 FOREWORD § 1-353
FWD:39
§ 1-354. Examination and Grading Procedure for Initial Police
Officer Applicants. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
shall be removed from the eligibility list upon action of the
Commission.
13. Hearing for Disqualified Applicants/Refusal to Certify the Applicant as
Eligible after Examination.
A. The disqualified applicant or aggrieved party must make a request
to the Commission, in writing, for a hearing within 10 calendar
days of the date when the party knew or should have known of the
Commission's action which is being challenged. Upon receipt of the
request, the Commission shall, within 10 days, if possible, appoint a
time and place for a public hearing, with or without counsel, at
which time the Commission shall take testimony and review its
refusal to provide examination or certification. The decision of the
Commission shall be final.
B. In the instance where two examinations are on the same date, or
are within a time period shorter than the allowance for the appeal
and/or hearing, the applicant shall be permitted to proceed in
taking the next round in the examination process. The applicant
shall file a form advising the Civil Service Commission of their
intention. The test scores shall be contingent upon the results of
the appeal.
14. Continuing Duties of Applicants. All applicants shall have a continuing
duty to apprise the Commission/Borough, in writing, of the party's
current address and telephone number. All notices will be deemed
received by the party, if sent to the current address of that party on file
with the Commission by first-class mail.
1. Notice of Examination.
A. In addition to the public notice of § 1-353, Subsection 1, the
Commission shall give written notice of each examination to each
qualified applicant. The notice shall be mailed or otherwise
delivered to each applicant at least 10 days prior to the date of the
examination. The notice shall specify the date, time, duration and
place of the examination and explain the following:
(1) Only applicants receiving notices to report for any examination
shall be permitted to participate in such examination, and each
applicant shall present his/her notice and a photo I.D. or valid
motor vehicle operator's license to the examiner before being
examined.
(2) Any person who fails to report for the examination in
accordance with the instructions contained in the notice shall
be disqualified.
§ 1-353 EMMAUS CODE § 1-354
FWD:40
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the process for the
notice of examination for the written examination and the physical
fitness testing. All applicants shall follow the process, rules and
regulations set forth by the Consortium.
(1) The Consortium shall oversee the grading procedures and
notification process to all applicants who participate in the
written examination and the physical fitness testing.
(2) The Civil Service Commission shall send notification of scores
to the applicants in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 1A above.
2. General Examination Requirements for the Position of Police Officer.
A. The examination for police officer will consist of a written and an
oral examination which will be graded on a 100-point scale with the
written examination representing 50% of the final score and the
oral examination representing 50% of the final score. In addition,
each applicant will undergo a physical fitness test. Applicants who
successfully pass each examination will be subject to a background
investigation, and a polygraph examination in accordance with
§ 1-354, Subsections 8 and 9, of these rules. The physical fitness
test may be administered before all other tests. This test and
investigation will be graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant.
After an applicant has been extended a conditional offer of
employment, final appointment shall be contingent upon the
applicant passing a physical examination, psychological
examination, and all Pennsylvania Municipal Police Officers
Education and Training Commission (MPOETC) Act 120
requirements.
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the examination and
grading process for the written examination and the physical
fitness testing. All applicants shall follow the process, rules and
regulations set forth by the Consortium.
(1) The Consortium shall oversee the grading procedures and
notification process to all applicants who participate in the
written examination and the physical fitness testing.
(2) The Civil Service Commission shall send notification of scores
to the applicants in accordance with the provisions of
Subsection 2A above.
(3) Upon the conclusion of the written examination and the
physical fitness testing, all further notices of examinations and
procedures shall be according to Subsection 2A of this section.
§ 1-354 FOREWORD § 1-354
FWD:41
3. Appointment of Examiners.
A. The Commission shall appoint a written examination administrator,
an oral examination administrator, and a physical fitness/agility
examiner, to conduct the appropriate examination required by the
Rules and Regulations. The Chief of Police or his designee shall
perform the background investigation.
B. If the Borough, through the Civil Service Commission, elects to
participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of Police Association
Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee process for the notice of
examination and selection of examiners for the written examination
and the physical fitness testing. All applicants shall follow the
process, rules and regulations set forth by the Consortium.
4. Written Examination. The written examination shall be graded on a
100-point scale and it shall be administered before the oral
examination. To pass the written examination, a person must score 70%
or greater on the examination. Applicants scoring less than 70% shall
be rejected. In the event that a tie score occurs with people scoring
above 70% or higher, then all applicants with that score will be
considered as passing. Within 30 days of the administration of the
written examination, all applicants shall be given notice as to whether
they have passed the written examination. Those applicants who have
passed the above written examination will be eligible to continue with
the testing.
5. Physical Fitness Testing.
A. Administration of Test by Civil Service Commission.
(1) The Civil Service Commission shall administer a physical
fitness test to all applicants for the position of police officer in
accordance with the guidelines of the American College of
Sports Medicine and the Cooper Institute for Aerobics
Research. The physical fitness test to be administered will be
amended from time to time to conform to new amended
guidelines from the above-referenced entities. Currently, the
test battery consists of the following:
(a) 300-meter run: 66 seconds.
(b) Sit-ups: 30 repetitions in one minute.
(c) Push-ups: 25 repetitions in one minute.
(d) Vertical jump: 15.5 inches.
(e) 1.5-mile run: 15 minutes, 54 seconds.
(2) Each test will be preceded by a warm-up or rest period with a
mandatory cool-down period at the conclusion of the test.
§ 1-354 EMMAUS CODE § 1-354
FWD:42
(3) It is understood that MPOETC also administers a physical
fitness test for its applicants. The applicant must also pass the
MPOETC physical fitness examination as well, however, that
examination will be administered by MPOETC.
B. If the Borough elects to participate in the Lehigh County Chiefs of
Police Association Consortium, the Consortium shall oversee the
examination and grading process for the written examination and
the physical fitness testing. All applicants shall follow the process,
rules and regulations set forth by the Consortium. The
Consortium's physical fitness testing process shall be consistent
with MPOETC standards. In addition, the Consortium shall
administer a physical fitness test to all applicants for the position of
Police Officer in accordance with the guidelines of the American
College of Sports Medicine and the Cooper Institute for Aerobics
Research.
6. Oral Examination.
A. After successfully passing the written examination and the physical
fitness testing, the applicants who have placed in the top 35 shall
be eligible to take the oral examination.
B. The oral examination shall be graded on a 100-point scale with a
score of 70% or higher necessary for passing. The oral examination
shall involve questioning applicants on how they would handle
situations relevant to police work, their character and reasoning
abilities. Within 30 days following the oral examination, applicants
whose scores are passing shall be informed of their numerical
scores on the oral examination as well as their numerical score on
the written examination. If their scores on the oral examination are
not passing, they shall be informed of the same without the
necessity of providing a numerical score. Each applicant who has
passed the written and oral exams shall be informed of the date for
physical fitness testing if not already administered.
7. Veterans' Preference Points. Pursuant to the Soldiers Preference Act,4
any applicant for the position of Patrol Officer who qualifies as a
"soldier" under the Act shall receive an additional 10 points on top of
his total score if the applicant received passing scores under
Subsections 4 and 6. Any applicant requesting veterans' preference
points must furnish sufficient proof of both service and honorable
discharge in accordance with instructions from the Commission in
order to be eligible to receive the veterans' preference points.
8. Background Investigation - Polygraph Examination.
A. As part of the background investigation process, an applicant who
has successfully completed the requirements of § 1-354,
Subsections 1 through 7, of the Rules and Regulations, and is
4. Editor's Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 7101 et seq.
§ 1-354 FOREWORD § 1-354
FWD:43
determined to be one of the top three applicants pursuant to the
requirements of § 1-354, Subsection 9F, of the Rules and
Regulations, shall be administered a polygraph examination. The
Commission shall require an applicant to take and pass a polygraph
examination as a condition of further eligibility prior to the
completion of the remainder of the background process. The party
administering the polygraph examination shall be a qualified
professional who shall be appointed by the Commission. The
polygraph examiner shall render an opinion in writing to the Chief
of Police as to whether the conditional appointee has adequately
completed the polygraph examination. The polygraph examiner's
opinion concerning the applicant will address whether that party
has any issues which call into question the person's character,
history, records and other information revealed by the polygraph
examination which would call into question that person's ability to
perform the functions and tasks of a police officer in an appropriate
manner. In the instances where the polygraph examiner does not
suggest a "pass" or "fail" of the exam, the polygraph examiner
shall indicate any and all "significant responses" with a detailed
explanation of the response. The Commission shall have the sole
discretion as to the passing or failing of a candidate's polygraph
examination based on the report submitted by the polygraph
examiner.
B. Failure of the polygraph examination disqualifies the applicant
from any further consideration and shall result in the removal of
the applicant from the eligibility list. However, within 10 days after
notice of the applicant's failure of said polygraph examination, the
person may request, in writing, to the Borough Manager, a second
polygraph examination. The applicant must prepay 100% of the
costs related to such re-examination. Failure to request and pay for
such polygraph reexamination as set forth above shall conclusively
mean that that person has not met a condition of the background
investigation and he shall no longer be considered.
C. If an applicant fails the polygraph examination, the next eligible
applicant, based on the weighted scores pursuant to § 1-354,
Subsection 2, of the rules, and who has successfully completed all
requirements of § 1-354, Subsections 1 through 7, of the Rules and
Regulations, shall be administered a polygraph examination. This
process shall continue in order of the eligibility list, based on
weighted scores, until such time that there are three eligible
applicants for further consideration.
9. Background Investigation.
A. Pursuant to the applicant successfully passing the polygraph
examination requirements in Subsection 8 above, the Commission
shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's designee to conduct
a background investigation on each applicant who has passed the
written examination, oral examination, physical fitness test, and
§ 1-354 EMMAUS CODE § 1-354
FWD:44
polygraph examination. The background investigation shall
include, whenever reasonable or practicable, interviews with the
applicant's family, acquaintances, current and former employers,
current and former neighbors, references and current and/or
former teachers and school officials. In addition, the applicant's
record of criminal convictions shall be investigated. The applicant
may be interviewed directly when the information collected during
the background investigation requires clarification or explanation.
B. The Chief or his designee shall request a credit check on all
applicants that have passed the written, oral, physical fitness
testing, and polygraph examination. This information shall be
reviewed to determine whether, in the Chief or his designee's
discretion, the applicant's credit history is unsatisfactory so as to
possibly affect police work. The applicant may be interviewed
directly when the information collected during the credit check
investigation requires clarification or explanation.
C. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief, or his
designee, shall make a written recommendation to the Commission
on whether the applicant is appropriate for consideration for
appointment as a police officer.
D. This recommendation shall be in writing and if the
recommendation is to disqualify, then a detailed written
explanation of the reasons for disqualification must be included.
The Commission shall make the final determination on whether the
information collected during the background investigation
warrants rejection of the applicant.
E. Within 30 days after the Commission considers the
recommendation of the Chief of Police or his designee, each
applicant will be informed of whether he has passed the
background investigation.
F. The Chief of Police or the Chief's designee shall report the results
of the background examiner to the Commission in segments of
three at the election of the Commission. If the Commission requests
background investigations, the Chief shall begin his background
investigations on the applicants with the top three scores
(including, where applicable, veterans' preference points). When
requested by the Commission, the Chief will then proceed
sequentially with additional applicants until such time that there
are three successful eligible applicants. The process shall continue
with applicants having the next highest scores until the
Commission is satisfied that it has an appropriate number of
passing applicants for the current opening and/or all projected
openings, provided that there are either three eligible applicants
for certification or, if there are not enough applicants to fill the
requirement of three, that all eligible applicants have been
processed.
§ 1-354 FOREWORD § 1-354
FWD:45
§ 1-355. Certification of the List of Eligible Applicants and
Appointment. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
G. During the background investigation, there may be instances
where the Chief of Police and/or his appointed investigative team
may require additional information regarding an applicant's
background. Investigators shall have the right to conduct
fingerprint-based criminal history checks on any and all applicants
during the background investigation.
1. Creation of Eligibility List.
A. At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
§ 1-354, written examination, oral examination, background
investigation and physical fitness test, the Commission shall rank
the applicants who have satisfied the requirements for
appointment on an eligibility list. The eligibility list shall contain
the names of the individuals eligible for appointment listed from
highest to lowest based on their scores on the examinations
administered by the Commission and any points for which the
applicant was entitled by virtue of 51 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 71 (relating to
veterans' preference). In the case of tied scores, the tie will be
broken by giving preference to the applicant who has the highest
oral score. If both are tied, then the applicants will draw lots to
determine the eligibility list ranking.
B. At the election of the Commission, the eligibility list shall be
certified, beginning with a segment of the top three applicants,
based upon the receipt of the results of the background
investigation as set forth in § 1-354, Subsections 8 and 9, including
all other requirements of § 1-354 of the Rules and Regulations. The
certified list shall initially consist of three applicants and the same
shall be valid immediately without awaiting results from the
background investigations of the lower-scoring applicants. The
Commission shall add to the certification list further names upon
receipt and review of the results of the subsequent background
investigations on the remaining successful applicants.
C. The eligibility list shall be valid for one year from the date the
Commission approves the whole list or, if segmented, from the date
of approval of the first group of applicants. The eligibility list shall
include all applicants that have successfully completed all
requirements of § 1-354, Subsections 1 through 7, of the Rules and
Regulations. Before the expiration of the original first year, the
Commission may, at its sole discretion, by a vote of the majority of
the Commission at a duly authorized Commission meeting, extend
the list for up to an additional 12 months. The Commission may, at
its sole discretion, void an eligibility list at any time for any reason.
2. Removal from Eligibility List.
§ 1-354 EMMAUS CODE § 1-355
FWD:46
A. If a person on the eligibility list fails to respond to a notice sent to
that party's current address on file with the Commission or fails to
appear for any scheduled testing or interviews, that party's name
shall be removed from the eligibility list upon action of the
Commission.
B. If a person no longer desires to remain on the eligibility list, that
person shall notify the Commission of the same and the
Commission shall remove that person's name from the list.
C. The name of a person appearing on the eligibility list shall be
removed if that person declines or fails the additional testing for a
conditional appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department.
D. The name of a person appearing on the eligibility list shall be
removed by the Commission if that person indicated availability for
appointment and is so appointed but fails to report for duty at the
time prescribed, unless, in the opinion of Borough Council, such
person can show good and sufficient reason for failing to report.
E. The Commission may, at its own discretion, remove from the
eligibility list the name of any person certified for appointment
consideration and rejected (or not hired) three times.
F. In the event of any of the above after the Commission takes action
to remove the person's name from the eligibility list, it shall notify
the person in writing of that person's removal from the list.
G. The name of the person appearing on the eligibility list shall be
removed from the list if that person is conditionally appointed to a
position in the Police Department and no notice to the person
conditionally appointed shall be necessary.
3. Appeals from Removal from Eligibility List. Any person on the eligibility
list who is aggrieved by removal therefrom may request a hearing, in
writing, before the Civil Service Commission within 10 days after notice
of the same. Failure to make such a request within the aforesaid time
frame is a waiver of the person's right of appeal. The Civil Service
Commission will appoint a time and place for a public hearing within 10
days if possible, at which time the Commission shall take testimony and
review the decision to remove the applicant from the eligibility list. The
person removed from the eligibility list may have any attorney present.
A representative appointed by Borough Council may present the case
on behalf of the Borough. The decision of the Commission shall be final.
4. Certified List of Applicants.
A. The certified list of applicants shall include the applicants who have
the three highest weighted scores in the written and oral
examinations, with consideration of veterans' preference, and have
successfully completed all requirements of § 1-354 of the Rules and
§ 1-355 FOREWORD § 1-355
FWD:47
Regulations. The certification list may include more than three
applicants pursuant to the requirements of § 1-355, Subsection 1,
of the Rules and Regulations.
B. The applicants who have the three highest weighted scores and
have successfully completed all requirements of § 1-354 of the
Rules and Regulations shall be certified by the Commission for
consideration of employment by Borough Council.
C. Should any of the top three applicants remove their name from the
eligibility list or become ineligible pursuant to the Rules and
Regulations, the Commission shall process additional applicants in
accordance with § 1-354, Subsections 8 and 9, until such time that
there shall be three certified applicants.
D. If, for any reason, there are not enough eligible applicants to meet
the requirement of three certified applicants, the Commission may
certify and refer less than three applicants for Borough Council's
consideration.
5. Appointment.
A. Borough Council may fill any vacancy in an existing position in the
Police Department which occurs as a result of expansion of the
police force, retirement, resignation, disability or death by the
reappointment or reinstatement of a former employee of the Police
Department who had been furloughed. Except for physical and
psychological examinations, no other testing shall be required for a
furloughed employee or a rehired or reappointed employee.
B. If no furlough list exists or if positions remain to be filled after all of
the officers on the furlough list were offered reemployment, every
position, except that of Chief of Police, shall be filled only in the
following manner:
(1) Borough Council shall notify the Commission of any vacancy
which is to be filled and shall request the certification of three
names from the eligibility list;
(2) If three names are not available, then the Commission shall
certify the names(s) remaining on the list pursuant to the
requirements of successfully completing § 1-354, Subsections
8 and 9, of the Rules and Regulations;
(3) Borough Council may make a conditional appointment from
one of the three names certified based solely on the merits and
fitness of the applicants. However, when one of the three
applicants on the certified list is a veteran, that applicant shall
be given conditional hiring preference;
(4) Borough Council may, at its sole discretion, appoint any
applicant who has passed the required examinations for
§ 1-355 EMMAUS CODE § 1-355
FWD:48
appointment (or promotion) although the applicant's name
does not appear on the certified list of three when the
applicant qualifies for veterans' preference.
C. Borough Council may object to one or more of the persons certified
for the reasons set forth in § 1-353, Subsection 12, and/or § 1-355,
Subsection 2, of the Rules and Regulations. If the applicant to
whom Borough Council objects fails to timely exercise the rights of
appeal under § 1-355, Subsection 3, or if the Commission declines
to uphold the appeal, the Commission shall strike the name of that
applicant from the eligibility list and certify the next highest name
for inclusion on the list of three applicants for each name stricken
off.
6. Physical and Psychological Medical Examinations. After Borough
Council selects an applicant from the eligibility list, the applicant shall
receive a conditional offer of employment to the position.
A. The offer of employment shall be conditioned upon the conditional
appointee undergoing a physical and psychological medical
examination and a determination that the conditional appointee is
capable of performing all the essential functions of the position
including Act 120 certification. Physical medical examinations shall
be under the direction of a physician or other qualified medical
professional. Psychological medical examinations shall be under
the direction of a psychiatrist or psychologist.
B. The physician or other qualified medical professional and the
psychiatrist or psychologist shall be appointed by Council and shall
render an opinion as to whether the conditional appointee has a
physical or mental condition which calls into question the person's
ability to perform all of the essential functions of the position for
which the person was conditionally appointed.
C. If the opinion rendered by the physician, other qualified medical
professional, psychiatrist or psychologist calls into question the
conditional appointee's ability to perform all essential functions of
a position, a person designated by Council shall meet with the
conditional appointee for the purpose of having one or more
interactive discussions on whether the conditional appointee can,
with or without reasonable accommodation, perform all the
essential functions of the position.
D. If, at the conclusion of the interactive discussion under Subsection
6C, Council determines that the conditional appointee is not
qualified, the appointing officer or body shall give written notice to
the conditional appointee and the Commission.
E. Nothing in this act shall be construed to authorize physical or
psychological medical examinations prior to conditional
appointment.
§ 1-355 FOREWORD § 1-355
FWD:49
F. As used in this subsection, the following definitions shall apply:
MEDICAL EXAMINATION — An examination, procedure, inquiry
or test designed to obtain information about medical history or a
physical or mental condition which might disqualify an applicant
if it would prevent the applicant from performing, with or without
a reasonable accommodation, all of the essential functions of the
position.
PHYSICIAN — Has the meaning given to it in 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1991
(relating to definitions).
QUALIFIED MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL — An individual, in
collaboration with or under the supervision or direction of a
physician, as may be required by law, who is licensed:
As a physician assistant pursuant to the Act of December 20,
1985 (P.L. 457, No. 112), known as the "Medical Practice Act
of 1985,"5 or the Act of October 5, 1978 (P.L. 1109, No. 261),
known as the "Osteopathic Medical Practice Act";6 or
(1)
As a certified registered nurse practitioner pursuant to the Act
of May 22, 1951 (P.L. 317, No. 69), known as "The Professional
Nursing Law."7
(2)
7. Failure of Conditional Appointee to Pass All Conditions.
A. Borough Council, when making a conditional appointment, shall
include as conditions of the appointment passage of a physical
examination and mental examination. Borough Council may include
such other conditions as it deems appropriate.
B. Failure of the conditional appointee to pass all conditions imposed
by Council within the time frames set forth in their appointment
shall result in that person's immediate termination from any
further consideration for appointment as a police officer with the
Borough. A person who has failed one of the conditions may
request an opportunity to meet and discuss that person's failure of
the condition with Borough Council. Borough Council has the
option to grant such meeting and it may take any appropriate steps
concerning further opportunities for the conditional appointee. It is
specifically understood that such meeting with Borough Council is
not an appeal nor is Council bound to take any steps whatsoever.
The failure of the condition set by Council as a condition of
employment automatically ends the conditional appointee's status
with the Borough.
8. Probationary Period.
5. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 422.1 et seq.
6. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 271.1 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See 63 P.S. § 211 et seq.
§ 1-355 EMMAUS CODE § 1-355
FWD:50
A. Newly Hired Officer.
(1) Every successful applicant to the position of Patrol Officer
position within the Police Department shall serve a twelvemonth
probationary period commencing upon the swearing in
of the officer. For newly hired police officers, the one-year
probationary period shall not commence until after the officer
has completed training under Act 120 and receives a
certification number. During the probationary period, a newly
hired officer may only be dismissed for cause for the reasons
set forth in § 1-356, Subsection 1. However, at the end of the
twelve-month probationary period, if the conduct of the
probationer has not been satisfactory to the Borough of
Emmaus, and after a public vote of Borough Council, the
probationer shall be notified in writing by the Borough
Manager or his designee that the appointment will not be
permanent and the appointment shall cease. At that time, a
newly hired officer's employment shall end. Any officer, who is
not informed in writing of dismissal, shall receive a permanent
appointment to the new position. Any probationer who is
notified in writing that appointment will not be made
permanent has no rights of appeal under the Rules and
Regulations.
B. Newly Promoted Officer.
(1) Every successful applicant to a promotional position within the
Police Department shall serve a twelve-month probationary
period commencing upon the swearing in of the officer in the
new rank. A promoted officer, during probation, may be
returned to a prior rank only for cause for the reasons set forth
in § 1-356, Subsection 1, or because of incapacity for duty due
to the use of alcohol or drugs. However, at the end of the
twelve-month probationary period, if the conduct of the
probationer has not been satisfactory to the Borough of
Emmaus, and after a public vote of Borough Council, the
probationer shall be notified in writing by the Borough
Manager or his designee that the appointment will not be
permanent and the appointment shall cease. At that time, a
promoted officer shall return to a previous rank. Any officer,
who is not informed in writing of dismissal, shall receive a
permanent appointment to the new position. Any probationer
who is notified in writing that appointment will not be made
permanent has no rights of appeal under the Rules and
Regulations.
9. Provisional Appointments. Whenever there are urgent reasons for the
filling of a vacancy in any position in the Police Department and there
are no names on the eligibility list for such appointment, Borough
Council may nominate a person to the Commission for noncompetitive
examination, and such nominee may be certified by the Commission as
§ 1-355 FOREWORD § 1-355
FWD:51
§ 1-356. Suspension, Removals and Reductions in Rank. [Ord. No.
1189, 4/15/2019]
qualified after such noncompetitive examination, and may be appointed
provisionally to fill such vacancy. It shall thereupon become the duty
of the Commission, within three weeks of the provisional appointment,
to hold a competitive examination and certify a list of persons and
then a regular appointment shall then be made from the name or
names submitted by the Commission; provided that nothing within this
section shall prevent the appointment, without examination, of persons
temporarily as police officers in cases of riot or other emergency.
10. Academy Training. If an applicant for conditional appointment is
required to attend the academy to become Act 120 certified before
being sworn in as a police officer, the Borough will make it part of the
conditional offer of employment that the applicant will have the cost of
tuition and expenses for his taking the Act 120 coursework for
certification be deducted from his salary (to the extent not paid by the
state or any other agency). Borough Council shall determine the
amount of temporary salary, if any, to be paid to a conditionally
employed applicant who is not Act 120 certified until he is sworn in as a
police officer. Consistent with the CBA, all calculation of benefits will
only occur after the police officer is sworn in and begins work as a
police officer.
1. Grounds for Disciplinary Action.
A. No person employed in the police force of the Borough covered by
civil service shall be suspended without pay, removed or reduced in
rank except for the following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the person's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service;
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty;
(3) Violation of any law which provides that the violation
constitutes a misdemeanor or felony;
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience
of orders or conduct unbecoming an officer;
(5) Intoxication while on duty;
(6) Engaging or participating in or conducting of any political or
election campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using
Borough property otherwise than to exercise the person's own
right of suffrage;
§ 1-355 EMMAUS CODE § 1-356
FWD:52
(7) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or
election campaign for an incompatible office as provided in
Section 1104(f) of the Borough Code.8
B. A person so employed shall not be removed for religious, racial or
political reasons.
C. A written statement of any charges made against any person so
employed shall be furnished to the person within five days after the
same are filed. The person so employed shall have 10 days from the
date of receiving the notice in which to submit a written request for
a hearing to the Civil Service Commission.
2. Furloughs.
A. If for reasons of economy or other police officers in the department,
then the Borough shall furlough the person or persons, including
probationers, last appointed to the respective force. Such removal
shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical order
commencing with the person last appointed until such reduction
shall have been accomplished.
B. In the event said police force shall again be increased, the
employees furloughed shall be reinstated in the order of their
seniority in the service. The provisions of this subsection as to
reduction in forces are not applicable to the Chief of Police.
3. Removal of Names from Furlough Lists.
A. In addition to other reasons stated as grounds for removal in the
Rules and Regulations, the name of a person appearing on a
furlough list shall be removed by the Commission if that person:
(1) Is appointed to a position in the Police Department; or
(2) Declines an appointment to a permanent position in the Police
Department; or
(3) Indicated availability for appointment and is so appointed but
fails to report for duty at the time prescribed, unless, in the
opinion of Borough Council, such person can show good and
sufficient reason for failing to report.
B. Nothing in this subsection, however, shall be construed as
authorizing the removal of the name of a person from a furlough list
who refuses to accept a position of lower rank than that from which
furloughed.
4. Notice of Suspension, Removal or Reduction in Rank.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46104(f).
§ 1-356 FOREWORD § 1-356
FWD:53
A. Whenever a police officer is suspended without pay, removed or
reduced in rank, the specific charges warranting such actions shall
be stated in writing by the Borough Council or the Mayor. The
charges shall be stated clearly and in sufficient detail to enable the
officer to understand the charges and to allow the officer an
opportunity to respond to those charges. The charges shall specify
the clause of Subsection 1 which provides the basis for the
disciplinary action as well as an explanation of the factual
circumstances upon which the appointing authority relied in
finding a violation of Subsection 1.
B. Within seven days after Borough Council has voted or the Mayor
has determined to impose the disciplinary action, a written
statement of the charges shall be delivered to the officer either by
personal service or by certified and regular mail. In addition, the
charges shall notify the officer of the right to appeal under § 1-356,
Subsection 1, of the Rules and Regulations. A copy of the statement
of charges shall also be served upon the members of the Civil
Service Commission.
5. Appeals/Hearings on Suspension Pay, Removal or Reduction in Rank.
All appeals of disciplinary actions for full-time police officers (police
covered by the current CBA) will be handled in accord with the terms of
the CBA (collective bargaining agreement). If, for any reason, the
disciplinary actions are not covered by the CBA or in the future are
removed from the CBA (or are held to be required under civil service
law), then the disciplinary appeals will be heard by the Civil Service
Commission in accordance with the following Rules and Regulations:
A. The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank
may appeal the decision of the disciplinary authority by written
notice to the Secretary of the Commission at Borough Hall
requesting a hearing. This request shall be received by the
Borough Manager within 10 days after the officer received notice
of the discipline. The officer may prepare written responses to any
charges filed not later than the date fixed for the hearing. Failure of
the officer to provide written responses to any of the charges shall
not be deemed an admission by the officer.
B. The Commission shall schedule a hearing within 10 days from the
officer's written request for a hearing unless continued by the
Commission for cause at the request of the Commission, Borough
Council or the officer. At any such hearing, the officer against
whom the charges have been made may be present and
represented by counsel, may call witnesses and present testimony
and documentation in his defense. Borough Council may also be
represented by counsel, call witnesses and present evidence as is
necessary to support the charges. A stenographic record of all
testimony shall be taken at every hearing and preserved by the
Commission. In the event the charges are dismissed, the record
shall be sealed and not be available for public inspection.
§ 1-356 EMMAUS CODE § 1-356
FWD:54
C. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review
shall be to determine whether substantial evidence has been
presented to support the reason for the disciplinary action. If the
Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been introduced to
support the charge, the Commission shall not modify the penalty
imposed by the Borough Council unless it finds that the penalty
imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the Borough's
discretion. In considering the appropriateness of the discipline, the
Commission shall not substitute its judgment for that of the
Borough Council. The Commission may request post hearing briefs,
and shall issue a written decision containing specific findings of
fact and conclusions of law within 60 days of receipt of the hearing
transcript. Either the officer or the Borough has the right to appeal
the decision of the Commission to the Court of Common Pleas.
6. Hearing Procedure on Suspension, Removal or Reduction in Rank.
A. All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson. The Commission shall have the power to issue
subpoenas as set forth in § 1-352, Subsection 13.
B. Unless the Council or the person sought to be suspended, removed
or reduced in rank requests that the proceedings before the
Commission be open to the public, the proceedings before the
Commission, pursuant to this section (concerning hearings on
suspension, removal or reduction in rank) shall be held in the
nature of a closed executive session that shall not be open to the
public. Any such request shall be presented to the Commission
before the civil service hearing commences.
C. The deliberations of the Commission, including interim rulings on
evidentiary or procedural issues, may be held in private and shall
not be subject to a request for being open to the public, the Council
or the person sought to be suspended, removed or reduced in rank.
The Commission's disposition of the disciplinary action shall
constitute an official action which shall occur at a public meeting
held pursuant to 65 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 7 (relating to open
meetings).
D. If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer who was
suspended, removed or reduced in rank may file an appeal with the
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days from the date of entry by the
Commission of its final order. No order of suspension shall be made
by the Commission for a period longer than one year. In the event
that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the person
sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be reinstated
with full pay for the period of the suspension, removal or demotion
and no charges related to the suspension, removal or reduction in
rank shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.
§ 1-356 FOREWORD § 1-357
FWD:55
§ 1-357. Promotions - General Information and Qualifications. [Ord.
No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
1. Promotion Policy. Promotions in the Police Department shall be based
on the needs of the Police Department and the Borough. A rank shall be
filled only when, in the opinion of the Borough Council, the Police
Department and the Borough will benefit from such action. All ranks
specified in the Police Ordinance need not be populated.
2. Promotion Eligibility Lists. The Commission shall create eligibility lists
for the positions of Corporal, Sergeant, Lieutenant, and Captain when
requested by Borough Council. A promotional eligibility list certified by
the Commission shall remain in effect for a period of two years from the
date of its certification unless voided earlier by the Commission. The
Commission may remove the name of any applicant from the
promotional eligibility list who is subsequently determined to have been
actually ineligible according to the Rules and Regulations.
3. General Qualifications.
A. All applicants for a promotional position, except Chief, shall not
have been suspended without pay at any time within five years
prior to the deadline for submitting applications. A suspension to
which the applicant has timely appealed pursuant to a grievance
procedure or the Rules and Regulations shall be disregarded unless
the appeal is resolved prior to the creation of the eligibility list.
B. All applicants shall have continuous service with the Police
Department of Emmaus as follows:
(1) An applicant for the rank of Corporal shall have at least two
years of service within the Police Department;
(2) An applicant for the rank of Sergeant shall have at least five
years of service within the Police Department;
(3) An applicant for the rank of Lieutenant shall have at least two
years of service as a Sergeant within the Police Department;
(4) An applicant for the rank of Captain shall have at least two
years of service as a Lieutenant within the Police Department.
4. Notification of Vacancy. When a rank within the Police Department is to
be filled by promotion, Borough Council shall submit a written request
to the Commission for certification of a list of eligible applicants for the
vacant rank. If a current eligible list for the rank to be filled does not
exist, the Commission shall direct the Borough Manager to post a notice
of the opening on the bulletin board in Police Headquarters. This notice
shall be posted at least three weeks prior to the date set for the written
promotion examination, and shall contain the following information:
A. The rank to be filled and its qualification requirements;
§ 1-357 EMMAUS CODE § 1-357
FWD:56
§ 1-358. Application for Promption. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
§ 1-359. Promotion Examinations. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
B. The place, date and time of the written examination;
C. A statement specifying that all qualified officers interested in
applying for the opening must file a letter of intent with the
Commission Secretary or the Borough Manager;
D. The deadline for accepting letters of intent shall be at least 14 days
after the date of the notice.
1. Letter of Intent. Each person interested in applying for promotion shall
file a signed letter of intent with the Commission Secretary or Borough
Manager. Letters of intention may be received at any time during
normal business hours in the office of the Borough Manager. The
receipt of such letter of intention shall be subject to the following
conditions:
A. The letter shall be received on or before 4:00 p.m. of the deadline
date set by the Commission.
B. Letters of intent shall become invalid for testing purposes when a
current promotional eligibility list is certified for that position.
2. Investigation of Applicants. An investigation of the qualifications of the
applicant may be made by the Commission or its designee.
3. Rejection of Applicant. The Commission may refuse to examine for
promotion any applicant who:
A. Does not possess the qualifications specified in § 1-357, Subsection
3.
B. Is physically or mentally unfit to perform the full duties and
essential job functions of the position to which he/she seeks
promotion.
4. Hearing for Disqualified Applicant. Any applicant who believes he/she is
aggrieved by the action of the Commission in refusing to examine or to
certify him/her as eligible after examination may request a hearing
before the Commission. The applicant must make the written request
within 10 calendar days of the date of the written notice of such action.
The Commission shall, within 10 days following receipt of such written
request, designate a time and place for the hearing where the applicant
may appear in person and be represented by counsel. The Commission
shall review its refusal to make such examination or certification, shall
take such testimony as may be offered and render a written decision.
The decision of the Commission shall be final.
1. Notice of Examination. The Commission shall give written notice of
each promotion examination to each qualified applicant. The notice
§ 1-357 FOREWORD § 1-359
FWD:57
shall be mailed or otherwise delivered to each applicant at least 10 days
prior to the date of the examination. The notice shall specify the date,
time, duration and place of the examination and explain the following:
A. Only applicants receiving notices to report for examination shall be
permitted to participate in such examination, and each applicant
shall present his/her notice and photo I.D., or valid motor vehicle
operator's license to the examiner before being examined.
B. Failure to report for an examination in accordance with the
instructions contained in the notice shall be a cause for
disqualification, absent a waiver of such requirement by the
Commission upon good cause shown. The decision of the
Commission on any waiver request shall be final and binding.
2. Examination Process. Examination for promotion shall consist of a
written examination and an oral examination. Questions in the written
and oral examinations shall be practical in nature and fairly test the
merits, experience and fitness of the applicant.
3. Grading of Examinations and Evaluation. The written and oral
examinations shall each be graded on a scale of zero to 100%. The
minimum passing scores for the written examination and the oral
examination shall be 70% on each segment. Any applicant who fails to
attain the minimum passing score on any examination shall be
disqualified from further consideration for promotion and his/her name
shall not appear on the eligibility list. For those applicants who pass
each examination, a final overall score shall be determined by adding
40% of the written examination score and 60% of the oral examination
score to obtain the final score. Veterans' preference shall not be added
for calculation of promotional eligibility lists.
4. Notice of Applicant's Grade. When the grading of each examination is
completed, the Secretary shall give each applicant written notice of his/
her grade. Any applicant not receiving a passing grade on any
examination is disqualified from continuing in the selection process for
the position for which he/she applied.
5. Administration of Examinations. Administration of the written and oral
examinations and the evaluations of the service records and
performance shall be the responsibility of the Commission. The
Commission, however, may designate qualified agencies or individuals
to conduct or assist in the written and oral examinations while
reserving the right to accept or reject for cause, in whole or in part, the
recommendations, evaluations and conclusions provided by such
agencies or individuals.
6. Rules for Conducting Written Examinations. The Commission shall
prepare a statement of instructions and rules for the conduct of written
examinations. The designated examiner shall administer each
examination in accordance with the instructions of the Commission,
§ 1-359 EMMAUS CODE § 1-359
FWD:58
§ 1-360. Promotions - Certification of Eligible Applicants and
Appointments. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
§ 1-360.1. Chief of Police. [Ord. No. 1189, 4/15/2019]
and be responsible for enforcing the rules of conduct for written
examinations.
7. Breaking Tie Scores. When two or more eligible applicants receive the
same final overall score, the order in which the names of such persons
appear on the eligibility list shall be determined by giving preference to
the applicant who has the highest oral score. If a tie exists, the final tiebreaker
shall be the length of service of each applicant.
8. Eligibility List. When all examinations and evaluations have been
completed and final overall scores have been computed, the
Commission shall prepare a promotion eligibility list.
1. Certification of Promotion. Upon receipt of a request from Borough
Council for certification of a list of eligible applicants for promotion to
the rank specified, the Commission shall certify the names of the top
three persons, or a lesser number if three are not available, on the
promotion eligibility list for the rank to be filled.
2. Promotional Appointment. When Borough Council receives the certified
list of eligible applicants from the Commission, it may elect to make an
appointment from such list of eligible applicants, unless it makes
objections to the Commission. Should such objections be sustained by
the Commission, the Commission shall remove the name of such person
from the eligibility list and certify the next highest person on the list.
After an appointment is made, the names of those persons not
appointed shall be returned to the eligibility list unless removed for
cause as stated above.
1. Nomination. In the event of a vacancy in the office of Chief of Police,
Borough Council may nominate a person with the qualifications to fill
the position of Chief of Police. Such nomination shall be at will unless
Council elects as follows. Council, at its option, may request, in writing,
that the Commission certify the nomination by subjecting the nominee
to a noncompetitive examination administered by the Commission.
2. Job Qualifications. Any person seeking appointment to the position of
Chief of Police shall meet all of the following minimum requirements:
A. An outside applicant, not currently employed within the Emmaus
Police Department, shall have a minimum of 10 years' full-time law
enforcement experience.
B. The applicant shall demonstrate leadership ability to deliver and
supervise the work of subordinates.
§ 1-359 FOREWORD § 1-360.1
FWD:59
C. The applicant shall be medically fit and able to perform all of the
essential functions of a police officer as set forth in the Rules and
Regulations and any of the job-related functions of Chief of Police.
D. Internal applicants' qualifications shall conform with those outlined
in the most recent collective bargaining agreement.
3. Examination Procedure. If Borough Council elects to allow the nominee
to be covered by civil service protection, the nominee shall take both a
written examination and an oral examination.
A. The written examination administered to the nominee shall be of
such a nature as to fairly and thoroughly evaluate that person's
police job knowledge. The Commission shall select the type of
written examination to be administered and the examination shall
be specifically job-related to the duties, skills and responsibilities of
a Police Chief. At least four weeks prior to the administration of the
written test, the Commissioner or testing entity selected by the
Commission shall provide the nominee with information relative to
the length and format of the test and the subject areas which will
be covered in the test including any specific reading material that
should be reviewed.
B. The oral examination shall be administered by a panel of three
adult individuals known as the Examination Board who shall be
selected by the Civil Service Commission. One such member of the
Examination Board shall be a member of the Civil Service
Commission. One such member of the Examination Board shall
have law enforcement experience. The final member of the
Examination Board shall be an adult resident of the Borough of
Emmaus for a period of at least one year and shall be chosen by the
Civil Service Commission to represent the public interest. The oral
examination shall focus on the nominee's experience as a police
officer, goals for the department, goals for the Borough and his
interpersonal relations and administrative skills. The length and
format of the oral examination shall be determined by the oral
testing board and the results of the oral examination shall be
reported to the Civil Service Commission in writing.
C. If the Civil Service Commission determines that the nominee has
passed both the written and oral examination (the determination of
a passing score to be solely left to the discretion of the Civil Service
Commission), then he/she shall be certified by the Commission as
qualified and the same shall be reported to the Council for the
Borough of Emmaus which then has the option to appoint him or
her to the position of Chief of Police.
§ 1-360.1 EMMAUS CODE § 1-360.1
FWD:60
F.
Environmental Advisory Council.
§ 1-361. Creation and Membership. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
§ 1-362. Compensation and Expenses. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
Members shall receive no compensation for their services but may be
reimbursed for the expenses actually and necessarily incurred by them
in the performance of their duties when, as and to the extent that the
Environmental Advisory Council may have funds available for such
purposes. The participating municipalities may, from time to time, elect
in their sole discretion to make appropriations to or on behalf of the
Environmental Advisory Council. The Environmental Advisory Council may
accept funding from public or private sources to further its activities.
The adoption of this Part 3F does not in any way commit the adopting
1. The Borough of Emmaus and Upper Milford Township hereby create a
Joint Environmental Advisory Council.
2. The Environmental Advisory Council shall be composed of eight
members, four residents from each of the two municipalities.
3. Council members shall be appointed in accordance with the following
procedures:
A. Each governing body shall appoint four members of the Council,
each of whom shall be a resident of the appointing municipality.
B. Whenever possible, one member appointed by each participating
municipality shall also be a member of the municipal planning
commission of that municipality.
C. Council members' terms of office shall expire on the first Monday in
January following the last year of their term of office; provided,
however, that members shall continue to serve until their
successors are appointed by the appropriate municipality(ies), in
the event successors are not appointed as of the first Monday in
January following the last year of their term.
D. Members of the Council shall serve terms of three years, except
that the terms of the initial members appointed by their respective
municipality, shall be staggered as follows: one member's term
shall initially be for one year, one member's initial term shall be for
two years, two members' initial terms shall be for three years.
Terms of the initial members shall be determined after the
appointment of the initial eight members of the Council through the
drawing of lots among them or other method acceptable to the
members at their organizational meeting. Members shall continue
to serve until their successors are duly appointed by the
appropriate participating municipality(ies).
§ 1-361 FOREWORD § 1-362
FWD:61
municipality to make any appropriation or payment to or for the benefit of
the Environmental Advisory Council.
§ 1-363. Chair. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
A chair of the Environmental Advisory Council shall be elected annually
during the month of January by the members of the Council.
§ 1-364. Advisory Function and Limitation. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
§ 1-365. Meetings. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
Meetings of the Council shall be held at the call of the chair and at such
other times as the Council shall determine. All meetings of the Council
shall be open to the public, except for meetings which may be held in
executive session under applicable law for the purpose of preparing and
delivering advice to the governing bodies of the participating municipalities
concerning the acquisition or disposition of real estate. The Council shall
keep records of its meetings and activities and shall make a written annual
report to the governing bodies of the municipalities. To the extent that
either of the municipalities publish or file annual reports of their activities,
the annual report of the Environmental Advisory Council shall be included
in that municipality's annual report. If either of the participating
municipalities do not publish or file an annual report, such municipality(ies)
shall make appropriate arrangements to have the annual report of the
Environmental Advisory Council made known and available to its citizens.
§ 1-366. Duties of the Environmental Advisory Council. [Ord. 991, 2/
7/2005]
1. The Environmental Advisory Council is to be advisory to and shall
coordinate its activities with the elected officials of the participating
municipalities and with appropriate agencies of the participating
municipal ties, including, but not limited to, the elected officials, their
planning commissions and their park and/or recreation boards, on
matters dealing with environmental issues common to both
municipalities which the municipal officials direct the Council to
investigate.
2. The Environmental Advisory Council shall not exercise any powers or
perform any duties which by law are conferred or imposed upon a
Commonwealth agency.
1. The Environmental Advisory Council shall have the following duties:
A. Advise the appropriate governmental agencies concerning the
benefits of, potential for, methods of accomplishing and other facts
relevant to the management recommendations contained in the
Emmaus Wellhead Protection Plan and the Leibert Creek
Watershed Assessments.
§ 1-362 EMMAUS CODE § 1-366
FWD:62
§ 1-367. Funds and Accounting. [Ord. 991, 2/7/2005]
To the extent that the Environmental Advisory Council receives public or
private finding, all such funds shall be held, administered, and paid on
behalf of the Environmental Advisory Council by the finance officials of the
Borough of Emmaus or Upper Milford Township under and in accord with
the generally accepted accounting practices applicable to municipalities.
§ 1-368. Dissolution of the Environmental Advisory Council. [Ord.
991, 2/7/2005]
If either the Borough of Emmaus or Upper Milford Township determines
that future participation in the Environmental Advisory Council is no longer
beneficial, they may jointly or separately repeal this Part 3F with written
notice to the other municipality.
B. Identify environmental problems, issues, and trends affecting the
participating municipalities.
C. Recommend plans and programs to the appropriate agencies of the
municipalities for the promotion and conservation of the natural
resources and for the protection and improvement of the quality of
the environment within the corporate boundaries of the
participating municipalities.
D. Make recommendations as to the appropriate use of open land
areas.
E. Develop, recommend, and promote community environmental
programs designed to enhance public awareness of environmental
issues affecting the municipalities, the alternatives available to
address such issues and the impact each alternative may have upon
the environment and the development of the region.
F. To work cooperatively with public, private, commercial, and
industrial entities in the area to develop a better understanding of
the potential environmental impacts of public and private sector
actions and to coordinate activities to minimize any negative
impact arising therefrom.
G. To undertake such additional environmental tasks as requested by
the joint action of the governing bodies of the participating
municipalities.
H. Adopt by-laws of the Council governing the conduct of business.
§ 1-366 FOREWORD § 1-368
FWD:63

G.
Community Garden Commission.9
§ 1-371. Creation and Composition. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
A Community Garden Commission, consisting of up to seven members, shall
be created and its membership shall be appointed by the Emmaus Borough
Council.
§ 1-372. Powers and Duties. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
§ 1-373. Qualifications of Members. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
Commission members shall be current or past members of the Community
Garden and shall include one member of the Emmaus Borough Council and
the Borough Manager. Voting members shall have been an active member
of the Community Garden for at least one full growing season. The Borough
Manager and Council member shall be nonvoting members and shall serve
in an advisory position and liaison to the Borough Council. Nonvoting
members shall not count towards the membership total.
§ 1-374. Terms. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
The initial terms of the first four members shall be for a period of four
years. The initial term for the following three members shall be for a period
of three years. After their initial terms, all successive terms shall be for a
period of four years.
1. The Community Garden Commission shall oversee administration of
garden plots for residents and nonresidents of the Borough of Emmaus
and to maintain basic records of anyone leasing a garden plot.
2. The Borough of Emmaus seeks to foster and promote a welcoming
garden space for growing vegetables, herbs, fruits, and flowers to any
individual or representative of a community organization for their own
use, or to be collected and distributed to area organizations that feed
the disadvantaged. The Borough seeks to strengthen and educate
community gardeners and the public at large through outreach,
networking, and advocacy, to grow, harvest, use, and distribute food in
our community, while developing programs to train garden members.
The Community Garden Commission will strive to educate and include
the public at large in events at the garden and other facilities. The
garden will be well managed; all garden plots and common spaces will
be well-maintained and used productively.
3. The Commission shall have the authority to raise funds for its activities
and make those expenditures, as approved by the Borough Council,
necessary for the activities of the Commission.
9. Editor’s Note: Former Subpart 3G, Special Entertainment Commission, Ord. 1070, 6/7/
2010, as amended, was repealed by Ord. 1137, 4/4/2016.
§ 1-371 FOREWORD § 1-375
FWD:65
§ 1-375. Additional Responsibilities. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
The Commission shall maintain a set of bylaws. The initial bylaws of the
Commission shall be established by Borough Council. The Commission,
from time to time, may amend the bylaws with a majority vote of the
Commission as well as official adoption by Borough Council. The bylaws
shall establish officer positions within the Commission as well as
subcommittees, meeting requirements, and other roles, responsibilities,
and duties of the Commission.
§ 1-376. Annual Report. [Ord. No. 1176, 6/18/2018]
The Community Garden Commission shall annually report in writing to
Borough Council. The report shall contain a statement detailing all activities
conducted during the year, the number of gardeners, estimated pounds of
vegetation donated to charity, and all other relevant information relating to
the garden and the operations of the Commission. In addition, each annual
report shall contain an income/expense statement.
§ 1-375 EMMAUS CODE § 1-376
FWD:66
H.
Interaction Between Commissions.
§ 1-381. Interaction. [Ord. 1088, 10/15/2012, § 4]
While members of each Emmaus Borough Commission are encouraged and
in some cases, are required, to communicate and interact, there shall be no
requirements of any Commission to hold a seat for a member of a separate
Borough of Emmaus Commission.
§ 1-381 FOREWORD § 1-381
FWD:67

Part 4
COMMITTEES, BOARDS
A.
Committees of Council.
§ 1-401. Establishment of Committees. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
1. The President of the Borough Council shall, as soon as may be
conveniently done after the first Monday of each even-numbered year,
appoint the hereinafter named committees, which shall serve as
departmental committees, as follows:
A. General Administration Committee.
B. Public Works Committee.
C. Health, Sanitation, and Codes Enforcement Committee.
D. Parks and Recreation Committee.
E. Public Safety Committee.
F. Community Relations, Planning, and Development Committee.
G. Budget and Finance Committee.
H. Employee Safety Committee.
I. The President shall also appoint such other committees as Council
may designate to perform a certain task, review a certain issue or
constitute a standing committee in another area of responsibility.
2. The President shall appoint Borough Council members to fill vacancies
in the various departmental committees and such other committees as
may be created from time to time by Council. New committees not
specifically set forth hereinabove may be created or dissolved by
motion by Borough Council, but the standing committees hereinabove
established shall remain unless hereafter abolished by revision of this
Part. All such departmental committees shall consist of not more than
three members of the Borough Council, with the President of Council
sitting as ex-officio member without a vote on committees where he is
not a member. The President of Council may also designate the
Chairman of the respective departmental committees. Every such
departmental committee shall make report to Council as may be
requested of it and shall be subject to the express orders of the Council.
Committees shall be authorized to make inquiry, recommendations or
motions, rules, resolutions or ordinances to be presented to the
Borough Council and perform such other duties as may be delegated to
committees which do not require the formal approval of a Borough
Council vote. Committees shall not, however, exercise duties, powers or
§ 1-401 FOREWORD § 1-401
FWD:69
§ 1-402. General Administration Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
§ 1-403. Public Works Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
functions or make or authorize expenditures for which formal Borough
Council action is required.
1. The General Administration Committee shall oversee and provide
guidance to the Borough Manager, his/her activities and functions, and
personnel of the central administrative officers of the Borough of
Emmaus.
2. This Committee shall have further oversight over the assessment of
conditions, care and maintenance of Borough Hall and such other
buildings as need be designated by the Borough Council.
3. This Committee shall have further oversight in interviewing and
recommending for appointment members of the following commissions,
boards, and authorities: Arts Commission, General Authority, Library
Board, Pension Board, Shade Tree Commission, Employee Safety
Committee, and Vacancy Board. This Committee shall act as the liaison
between Borough Council and the commissions, boards, and authorities
listed above.
4. This Committee shall have further oversight in conducting initial
interviews and narrowing the list of eligible candidates for the position
of Borough Manager and Director of Finance/Treasurer. The Committee
shall refer the narrowed list to be interviewed by the entire Borough
Council. The Committee shall have further oversight of hiring all fulltime
clerical staff and Borough Hall employees. The Department
Manager and Borough Manager shall conduct the first-round interview
and shall narrow the list of eligible candidates to the Committee. The
Committee shall conduct final interviews and make formal
recommendations to Borough Council for appointment. In regards to
hiring part-time employees, the Borough Manager and Department
Manager shall conduct all interviews and refer to Council for
appointment all part-time and seasonal employees.
1. The Public Works Committee shall have the responsibility for oversight
of the water service, municipal sewer system, and the roads and
highways, as set forth more specifically in the following paragraphs.
A. Highways.
(1) The Committee shall provide oversight and guidance for the
opening, construction, grading, and paving of all streets,
alleys, pavements, curbs, gutter, and street crossings, the
construction and repairing of all bridges, sewers and culverts
and the regulation of all watercourses and stormwater
detention or retention facilities. The said Committee shall, in
conjunction with the Borough Engineer, have prepared all
§ 1-401 EMMAUS CODE § 1-403
FWD:70
plans and specifications for any of the aforesaid work, as may
be required, and furnish Council with estimates of the cost
thereof. Any such construction or work shall not be undertaken
unless and until it is approved by the Borough Council in
accordance with the appropriate provisions of the Borough
Code.
(2) The Committee shall further have responsibility for the
Borough garages, grounds used for storage of highway
supplies, and all equipment purchased for highway use.
B. Water Service. The Committee shall provide oversight and
guidance of the municipal waterworks and the entire water system,
which responsibility shall extend to the care and maintenance of
such apparatus, and shall be responsible for visitations and
inspections of the said apparatus, fire plugs, and other outlets,
determination of their condition and shall require the same to be in
a state of readiness for service at all times; the Committee shall
require the regular testing of water and water supplies as required
by law and shall recommend to the Council water rates and require
the preparation of and sending of all water bills, the provisions of
said bills as to time. Hearings upon appeal and adjustments shall
likewise be under the original jurisdiction of said Committee as
governed by the Pennsylvania Administrative Procedures Act. The
Committee shall, whenever required, with the assistance of the
Borough Water Engineering Consultant (which shall be designated
and appointed by Council), require the preparation of the plans and
the specifications for any work whatsoever in this department and
shall present the same to Council for any necessary approval.
C. Sewers. The Committee shall provide oversight and guidance of the
municipal sewer system, which responsibility shall extend to the
care and maintenance of such systems, and shall, by visitations and
inspections of said system whenever and wherever possible,
determine their condition and require the same to be in a
reasonable state of repair for fulfillment of their functional purpose
at all times; and shall require a regular testing of the system and
the system's supplies and shall recommend to Council sewerage
rates and require the preparation and sending of all sewerage bills
in conjunction with the water bills as set forth by Borough
ordinance. Hearings and appeals of such bills and adjustments
thereof shall be under the original jurisdiction of the said
Committee, operating under the procedures of the Pennsylvania
Administrative Procedures Act. The Committee shall, whenever
required, with the assistance of the Borough Sewer Engineering
Consultant (which shall be designated by Council), require the
preparation of plans and specifications for any work whatsoever
within this department and shall present the same to Council for
any necessary approvals.
§ 1-403 FOREWORD § 1-403
FWD:71
§ 1-404. Health, Sanitation, and Codes Enforcement Committee.
[Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
D. Buildings. The Committee shall provide oversight and guidance to
direct the Public Works Department to make any and all repairs to
Borough-owned and non-Borough-owned buildings and properties
as identified by the General Administration Committee and by
Borough staff. The Committee shall provide oversight and guidance
to the responsibility of day-to-day maintenance of all Boroughowned
structures and properties.
2. The Public Works Committee shall provide oversight and guidance to
the Director of Public Works over all personnel in the Public Works
Department of the Borough of Emmaus.
3. The Public Works Committee shall have further oversight of conducting
initial interviews for the position of Public Works Director and Assistant
Public Works Director. The Committee shall refer the narrowed list to
be interviewed by the entire Borough Council. The Committee shall
have further oversight of hiring all full-time Public Works employees.
The Department Manager and Borough Manager shall conduct the firstround
interview and shall narrow the list of eligible candidates to the
Committee. The Committee shall conduct final interviews and make
formal recommendations to Borough Council for appointment. In
regards to hiring part-time employees, the Borough Manager and
Department Manager shall conduct all interviews and refer to Council
for appointment all part-time and seasonal employees.
1. The Health, Sanitation, and Codes Enforcement Committee shall
provide oversight and guidance over solid waste collection in the
Borough, although said supervision, in whole or in part, may be
delegated to the Board of Health, the Borough Manager, or another
appointed official of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. This Committee shall also provide oversight and guidance over all
curbside recycling programs and the yard waste site.
3. All liaisons between the Borough Council and the Board of Health shall
be handled by this Committee.
4. This Committee shall provide oversight and guidance of the operations
of the Codes Enforcement and Zoning Department and shall provide
guidance to the Zoning Officer in matters needing Council attention,
including, but not limited to, identifying and remedying derelict
properties, property maintenance, fire inspector, recommendations to
Borough Council for Zoning and Planning Ordinance amendments, and
other matters relating to the department.
5. This Committee shall have further oversight in interviewing and
recommending for appointment members of the following commissions,
boards, and authorities: Building Board of Appeals, Planning
§ 1-403 EMMAUS CODE § 1-404
FWD:72
§ 1-405. Parks and Recreation Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
§ 1-406. Public Safety Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
Commission, Zoning Hearing Board, Board of Health, and the Joint
Environmental Advisory Council. This Committee shall act as the liaison
between Borough Council and the commissions, boards, and authorities
listed above.
6. This Committee shall have further oversight in conducting initial
interviews and narrowing the list of eligible candidates for the position
of Codes Enforcement/Zoning Officer, Fire Inspector, and Weed/Snow
Enforcement Officer. The Committee shall refer the narrowed list to be
interviewed by the entire Borough Council. In regards to hiring parttime
employees, the Borough Manager and Department Manager shall
conduct all interviews and refer to Council for appointment all parttime
and seasonal employees.
1. This Committee shall provide oversight and guidance to the
responsibility of all grounds and buildings used for public recreational
purposes and shall require all apparatus and recreational facilities of
whatever character to be used, managed and maintained in accordance
with the requirements of public safety and recreation. The Borough
recreation program shall be under the jurisdiction of this Committee,
and it shall also coordinate other recreational programs having use of
the Borough facilities. The Emmaus Public Library building shall
remain under supervision of the Board of Directors of the Emmaus
Public Library.
2. The Parks and Recreation Committee shall have oversight and guidance
in conjunction with the Public Works Director of the pool manager and
pool-related personnel, including, but not limited to, lifeguards, clerks,
and other personnel. This Committee shall also provide oversight and
guidance of all concession stand operations.
3. This Committee shall have further oversight in interviewing and
recommending for appointment members of the following commissions,
boards, and authorities: Parks and Recreation Commission, Special
Entertainment Commission. This Committee shall act as the liaison
between Borough Council and the commissions, boards, and authorities
listed above.
1. This Committee shall provide oversight and guidance of all fire
apparatus, emergency care, ambulance, police, and other equipment
placed in charge of said Committee by proper action of Council, owned
by the Borough, as well as advisory supervision of all such apparatus
owned by the respective fire companies operating within the Borough,
as well as the ambulance service and Police Department and
supervision of operations. This Committee shall work in cooperation
with the Mayor of the Borough and shall not contravene the legal
§ 1-404 FOREWORD § 1-406
FWD:73
§ 1-407. Community Relations, Planning, and Development
Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015; as amended by Ord. 1155, 5/15/
2017]
The Community Relations, Planning, and Development Committee shall
have as its general purpose the development of policies and proposals
concerning the preservation and improvement of the vitality and quality
of life of the Borough of Emmaus. The Committee shall be responsible
for developing and maintaining relationships between the Borough and
the business community, nonprofit organizations, school organizations, and
any other entities affecting the Borough. Interfacing with the Emmaus
Planning Commission, the Committee will be responsible for the creation
and implementation of long-range planning for the community as a whole.
The committee shall also serve as the Council liaison to review plans
referred by the Emmaus Planning Commission as well as those from
neighboring communities, in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. The
Committee shall work with the Borough Manager, department heads, and
representatives from the community in order to prioritize special projects
and grants, reporting to the Council those projects which meet its
established criteria. The Committee shall also act as a liaison in assisting
with recruiting, retaining, and assisting Borough businesses and economic
organizations in applying for state and federal funding to assist their
authority of the Mayor as said authority over the Police Department is
delegated in the Borough Code.
2. The Public Safety Committee shall provide oversight and guidance over
the personnel in the Fire Department, Ambulance Corps and the Police
Department.
3. This Committee shall have further oversight in interviewing and
recommending for appointment members of the following commissions,
boards, and authorities: Civil Service Commission, Emergency Disaster
Board. This Committee shall act as the liaison between Borough Council
and the commissions, boards, and authorities listed above.
4. The Public Safety Committee shall have further oversight of conducting
initial interviews for the position of Ambulance Chief, Emergency
Management Coordinator, Fire Chief, and Police Chief. The Committee
shall refer the narrowed list to be interviewed by the entire Borough
Council. The Committee shall have further oversight of hiring all fulltime
ambulance employees, Fire Department employees, and Police
Department employees, pursuant to the requirements of the civil
service process and other applicable statutes. In hiring non-civil-service
employees, the Department Manager and Borough Manager shall
conduct the first-round interview and shall narrow the list of eligible
candidates to the Committee. The Committee shall conduct final
interviews and make formal recommendations to Borough Council for
appointment. In regards to hiring part-time employees, the Borough
Manager and Department Manager shall conduct all interviews and
refer to Council for appointment all part-time and seasonal employees.
§ 1-406 EMMAUS CODE § 1-407
FWD:74
business operations. The committee shall periodically meet with economic
development and business groups throughout the Borough of Emmaus,
as well as members of the Emmaus Planning Commission, to review the
Comprehensive Plan of the Borough of Emmaus and to plan for future
development of the Borough. The committee shall assist and oversee grants
applications and grant management for development projects, including,
but not limited to, tree grants, CDBG grants, third-party grants, facade
grants, streetscape grants, and other development grants. The committee
shall oversee and serve as the Borough Council liaison for events, including,
but not limited to, Flag Day, Memorial Day Parade, Halloween Parade,
races, and any events on Borough properties not otherwise in conflict
with § 1-405 of this part. The committee shall also have oversight of the
Shade Tree Commission as well as the community-wide functions of the
Arts Commission. The Committee shall work with department heads and
businesses, and shall serve as the Council liaison for municipal development
projects as well as large construction and development projects in the
community.
§ 1-408. Budget and Finance Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
The Committee shall provide oversight and guidance for the preparation,
presentation, revisions and completion of the annual budget estimate of
revenues and expenditures for each ensuing year and for compliance with
mandatory submission to the Department of Community and Economic
Development in accordance with procedures established by the Borough
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This Committee shall also
recommend the rate of tax or taxes required to be levied to meet the
proposed expenditures and shall hear all appeals from taxes levied where
jurisdiction is not otherwise assigned by statute and make appropriate
recommendation to Council. The Committee shall also schedule special
Council meetings and workshops to present and amend the proposed
budget to Borough Council, in conjunction with the Borough Manager and
Department Managers. This Committee shall also review all bills on the bill
list submitted to Council for approval and have oversight of spending in
compliance with budgeted categories.
§ 1-409. Employee Safety Committee. [Ord. 1125, 4/6/2015]
As per the adoption of the Employee Safety Committee By-Laws and Mission
Statement in Resolution 2014-21, the Committee shall have oversight of
employee safety programs. The Committee shall work to increase safety and
safety awareness among departments in the Borough. The Committee shall
strive to reduce workers' compensation claims and costs. The Committee
shall include both representatives of management and nonmanagement
employees, representing each department in the Borough. Borough Council
may appoint one Council member to the Employee Safety Committee. The
Borough Council shall appoint all members of the Committee.
§ 1-410. General Regulations Applicable to Committees. [Ord. 1125,
4/6/2015]
§ 1-407 FOREWORD § 1-410
FWD:75
1. All of said committees and such other committees as may be created by
motion of the Borough Council shall perform such other duties as may
be delegated or required of them by Council and shall, beyond such
additional specific duties conferred upon them, make regular advisory
reports to the Council. The Chairperson of the respective committees
may appoint a Secretary, who shall, when requested by Council to do so,
file written reports on any essential matters with Council, and said
reports shall be signed by said respective Committee members or the
Chair on behalf of the Committee.
2. Nothing contained herein shall limit the appointment of other
committees not specified hereinabove as Council may desire, and
Council may also, by motion, change the duties and powers of newly
established committees not specified as departmental committees
herein, or enlarge, decrease, or annul the same as may be deemed
proper.
3. All temporary, ad hoc or special, proposed committees previously
created by Council and in existence on the date of this Part shall
continue in full force and effect upon the passage of this Part.
4. It is not the intention of Borough Council to disrupt, conflict with, or
otherwise interfere with the job descriptions and duties of the Borough
Manager and department heads. In any such case that the description
of a Council committee may interfere with the job description or duties
of the Borough Manager or department heads, it is the intention of
Borough Council that the established Borough Manager or department
head job description shall take precedence.
§ 1-410 EMMAUS CODE § 1-410
FWD:76
B.
Board of Health.
§ 1-421. Health Administration. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The administration of the health laws and ordinances in the Borough of
Emmaus shall be enforced by a Board of Health, a Health Officer and a Code
Enforcement Officer.
§ 1-422. Board of Health. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A Board of Health is hereby established in and for the Borough of Emmaus.
It shall be composed of five members, at least one of whom shall be a
practicing physician for at least two years. The members of the Board shall
be appointed by Borough Council for a term of five years, staggered in such
a way that the term of one member shall expire at the end of each year.
The aforesaid appointments for a specified term notwithstanding, a Board
member may stay in office until a successor qualifies or is appointed, or
the Borough Council may remove any member of the Board, at the pleasure
of the Borough Council. The members of the Board of Health shall serve
without compensation. They shall severally take and subscribe to the oath of
office prescribed by law and shall annually organize by electing a president
who must be, and a secretary who need not be, a member of the Board.
Members of the Board of Health need not give bond in order to assume
office.
§ 1-423. Powers of the Board of Health. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Board of Health shall have the power and its duty shall be to supervise
the enforcement of the health laws of the Commonwealth as well as
regulations of the State Department of Health and all health ordinances in
the Borough of Emmaus in accordance with 53 P.S. § 48106. In addition, the
Board of Health shall function as a Board of Appeals for all appeals of the
decisions of the Health Officer.
The Board of Health shall recommend such rules and regulations not
inconsistent with law and the authority conferred upon boroughs as shall
be deemed necessary for the preservation of the public health. Such rules
and regulations shall not become effective until they have been approved by
Borough Council and enacted as ordinances of the Borough.
§ 1-424. Secretary to Board of Health. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The secretary of the Board of Health shall perform the duties outlined in
53 P.S. § 48104 and shall receive such compensation as may be provided
from time to time by the Board of Health subject to the appropriations of
the Borough Council.
§ 1-421 FOREWORD § 1-425
FWD:77
§ 1-425. Health Officer. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Board of Health with the approval of Borough Council shall appoint
a Health Officer who shall be certified by the State Department of Health
in accordance with the regulations of the Department in accordance with
53 P.S. § 48101 and 28 Pa. Code § 11.1. Such Health Officer shall have
the powers and perform the duties provided by 53 P.S. § 48105. All official
actions shall be performed in the name and under the signature of the
Health Officer.
§ 1-426. Rules and Regulations of the Board of Health. [Ord. 735, 7/
16/1990, § 1]
The Board of Health shall ensure that all establishments serving food and
drink for consumption by the public comply with the provisions of 25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 151 and all sections contained therein, establishing rules and
regulations pertaining to food establishments. 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 151, is
incorporated herein by reference as prescribing the rules and regulations
governing enforcement of this section by the Board of Health or any duly
appointed Health Officer.
§ 1-427. Food Service Sanitation Regulations and Provisions. [Ord.
1076, 3/21/2011]
The Pennsylvania Retail Food Facility Safety Act, 3 Pa.C.S.A., Chapter 57,
Subchapter A, §§ 5701-5714, and Subchapter B, §§ 5721-5737, and Chapter
65, §§ 6502-6504, 6508, 6510, and § 8101 of Title 3, as amended, dealing
with the Food Employee Certification Act, are adopted and approved for
enforcement as part of this chapter of the Codified Ordinances for the
Borough of Emmaus, and that all future amendments, revisions and updates
involving the new Food Code regulations be adopted and made part of
the Codified Ordinances as they become adopted and published by the
Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture.
§ 1-425 EMMAUS CODE § 1-427
FWD:78
Part 5
DEPARTMENTS
A.
Police Department.
§ 1-501. Purpose. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 501]
Whereas the Borough of Emmaus has heretofore established a Police
Department and has also designated one of the members thereof as Chief
of Police and has designated other members thereof to serve as Lieutenant,
Sergeant and Criminal Investigator, and has also appointed part-time
auxiliary police, park police and crossing guards and part-time police; the
Borough of Emmaus desires to continue said department and the positions
therein, and to expand said positions and activities.
§ 1-502. Police Department Established. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 502]
The existing Police Department is here recognized and his hereby
reestablished in and for the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 1-503. Chief of Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 503]
The Borough Council shall appoint one member of the Police Department
to serve as Chief of Police, said appointment to be made as provided under
the Borough Code (Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1656, Act No. 581, as
amended). The Chief of Police shall be the Chief Executive of the Police
Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of
the police force and have supervision of its members in the exercise of
their powers, duties and authority. Such powers, duties and authority are as
specified in Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. 1956, Act 581, 53 P.S. § 46121.
§ 1-504. Other Classifications Within Police Department. [Ord. 856,
10/13/1997, § 504]
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, the following
classifications are hereby established: Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant,
Detective, Corporal and full-time police officer, and part-time auxiliary
police officer, or those of such classification to which Council shall at
any specific time have appointed one or more police officers. The priority
of authority among such subordinate classifications shall be in the order
listed above. The number of persons to serve in each of such subordinate
classifications on a full-time and/or part-time basis shall be as determined
by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 1-501 FOREWORD § 1-505
FWD:79
§ 1-505. Appointment to Police Department. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 505]
Full-time members to the Police Department shall be appointed by Borough
Council in accordance with the manner as set forth in Act of February 1,
1966, P.L. (1965), 53 P.S. § 46184.
§ 1-506. Oath of Office. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 506]
All members of the Police Department of the Borough of Emmaus, all
classifications of part-time police, auxiliary police, and special school police
shall, before they enter upon their duties, be sworn in by the Mayor.
§ 1-507. Compensation. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 507]
The compensation of the Chief of Police shall be as determined by the
Borough Council from time to time with full recognition of the Police Chief
Act. The compensation of other full-time members of the Police Department
of the classifications listed above shall be as determined by Borough
Council, from time to time, subject to collective bargaining procedures as
stipulated by law (Act III of 1968). The compensation of part-time police,
including all categories of part-time police (i.e., part-time auxiliary assigned
to regular police duties, part-time auxiliary assigned to park duties, etc.)
shall be as determined by Borough Council by resolution.
§ 1-508. Part-Time Police Authorized. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 508]
The Borough Council hereby confirms its establishment of the position of
part-time police officers. Such appointments may be made in accordance
with the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1121, 53 P.S. § 46121.
§ 1-509. Appointment of Part-Time Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 509]
Part-time members of the Police Department may be appointed by Borough
Council in accordance with and in full recognition of such rights as may
be conferred upon soldiers in accordance with the Veterans's Preference
Act as interpreted by prevailing case law. A prior condition precedent
and qualification for appointment to the position of part-time police officer
assigned to regular police duties shall be successful completion of a period
of six months of service as a part-time auxiliary police officer assigned to
regular police duties in the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 1-510. Powers of Part-Time Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 510]
Part-time police, while on active duty, shall have the same powers of arrest
and law enforcement as the full-time police officers of the Borough of
Emmaus.
§ 1-505 EMMAUS CODE § 1-511
FWD:80
§ 1-511. Duties of Part-Time Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 511]
Part-time police, when on active duty, shall have the same duties as the fulltime
police officers of the Borough of Emmaus and shall act in accordance
with the policies and procedures in effect at the time.
§ 1-512. Auxiliary Police Authorized. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 512]
The Borough Council hereby declares its intent to create and hereby creates
an auxiliary police force to supplement the regular police force in times of
need.
§ 1-513. Appointment of Auxiliary Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 513]
The Chief of Police shall nominate persons as auxiliary police who have
satisfactorily completed such training as the Chief may prescribe and/or
may be prescribed by law. All such persons so nominated shall, before
they enter upon their duties, be approved by the Mayor and a majority of
Borough Council, and be sworn by the Mayor.
§ 1-514. Term of Service of Auxiliary Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 514]
Auxiliary police shall serve until terminated by the Borough Council. The
Chief of Police may recommend termination of any auxiliary officer for
cause.
§ 1-515. Powers of Auxiliary Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 515]
Auxiliary police, when on active duty, shall have the same powers as the
regular police officers of the Borough of Emmaus, and shall perform such
other duties as may be assigned to them by the Chief of Police. Auxiliary
police officers, when on active duty, are hereby designated as peace officers
of the Borough of Emmaus. The powers herein conferred may be exercised
by auxiliary police officers only after they report for active duty and until
they are relieved from duty.
§ 1-516. Duties of Auxiliary Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997, § 516]
The Chief of Police, under the direction of the Mayor, shall have charge
of all auxiliary police and shall have supervision of auxiliary police in
the exercise of their duties, powers and authorities. Auxiliary police shall
perform such duties as may be assigned to them by the Chief of Police.
These duties include, but are not limited to, aiding and supplementing the
regular police force in routine duties, providing police protection at athletic
events, serving as park police officers or guards, acting as crossing guards
and such other assignments as the Chief of Police may determine.
§ 1-511 FOREWORD § 1-517
FWD:81
§ 1-517. Compensation for Auxiliary Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 517]
The compensation for persons serving as auxiliary police shall be as
determined by Borough Council, from time to time.
§ 1-518. Appointment of Special School Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/
1997, § 518]
The Borough Council may appoint special school police.
§ 1-519. Duties of Special School Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/1997,
§ 519]
Special school police shall have the duty of controlling and directing traffic
at or near schools and shall be in suitable and distinctive uniforms and shall
display a badge or other sign of authority, and while on duty, shall be under
and subject to the direction of the Mayor. Such appointments shall be in
accordance with Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965), 53 P.S. § 46127.
§ 1-520. Term of Service of Special School Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/
1997, § 520]
Special school police shall serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council and
shall not come within the civil service provision of the Borough Code and
shall not be entitled to participate in any police pension plan and plans now
in effect or hereafter effective.
§ 1-521. Compensation of Special School Police. [Ord. 856, 10/13/
1997, § 521]
The compensation for persons serving as special school police shall be fixed
by the Borough Council and shall be jointly paid by the Borough Council and
Board of School Directors.
§ 1-517 EMMAUS CODE § 1-521
FWD:82
B.
Fire Department.
§ 1-541. Establishment of the Fire Department. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999,
§ 541]
The Emmaus Volunteer Fire Department shall be comprised of vehicles,
equipment and volunteers from the pre-existing Fire Department of the
Borough of Emmaus, and any additional equipment or manpower which may
hereafter be specified by Borough Council.
§ 1-542. Purpose. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 542]
The Fire Department of the Borough of Emmaus is established for the
purpose of fighting and extinguishing fires, performing rescue and salvage
activities, protecting the residents of the Borough and performing such
other activities as may be designated by proper Department authorities and
Borough Council.
§ 1-543. Scope of Department. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 543]
In addition to fighting fires, inside or without the Borough, and traveling
to and returning from such fires, the Emmaus Fire Department and its
members are authorized to answer any type of fire alarm or call, inside or
without the Borough of Emmaus and to engage in any type of drill, training,
ceremony, practice, test, parade or other duty when duly authorized by the
Fire Chief, or in his absence, by his duly appointed assistant, deputy or
other authorized officers of the Fire Department.
§ 1-544. Department Officers. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 544]
1. The officers of the Emmaus Fire Department may consist of one Fire
Chief, three Assistant Fire Chiefs, three Deputy Fire Chiefs, three
Captains, three Lieutenants, one Engineer, as established by the
Borough Council. A Selection Committee composed of the General
Administration Committee of the Borough of Emmaus and the current
Fire Chief will meet and recommend candidates for those specifically
enumerated officers positions set forth above, except the Chief's
position, which will be recommended for selection to the Borough
Council by the General Administration Committee of the Borough of
Emmaus.
2. The Borough Council shall appoint officers for one year terms to the
positions of Chief, Assistant Chief(s), Deputy Fire Chief(s), Captain(s),
Lieutenant(s) and Engineer, as they may deem appropriate, who shall
serve as at-will employees and appointees. In the absence of the
confirmation of a successor to a position, the person last designated
shall, unless suspended, continue to serve upon confirmation of
Borough Council, for periods which may be one year or less than one
year as determined by Borough Council. These persons may succeed
themselves in their offices if re-appointed by Council.
§ 1-541 FOREWORD § 1-545
FWD:83
§ 1-545. Duties of Officers. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 545]
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or duly designated officers, to attend
all fires and alarms, and superintend and direct the operation of the Fire
Department. The Chief shall have full control of all firefighters and
apparatus, issue and enforce such orders as in his judgment may be best
calculated for the protection of property, the extinguishment of fires and the
welfare of the Department. The Chief shall enforce all rules and regulations
of the Department and Borough ordinances pertaining thereto. At the end of
each fiscal year, he shall report to Council, a full statement of the condition
of the Department during the year, together with a statement of all fires
occurring during the year, the origin of same, of property destroyed and
insurance thereon, if any. If the Chief shall be absent from the Borough, or
a fire scene, an officer of the Department shall be designated to act during
the absence. The Fire Chief may delegate any of the aforementioned duties
to other officers.
§ 1-546. Membership. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 546]
§ 1-547. Fire Official. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 547]
The Fire Official shall be designated by the appointing authority of the
Borough to aid in the enforcement of the provisions of the Fire Prevention
Code. He shall inspect all structures and premises, except one or two family
dwellings, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and
causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, contribute to the
spread of fire, interfere with fire-fighting operations, endanger life or any
violations of the provisions or intent of the Fire Department Code or any
ordinance affecting fire safety, including the BOCA Code. He shall assist the
Fire Chief in the investigating of all fires in the Borough as to origin and
cause, and the Fire Official shall work with the Building Official insofar as
fire hazards are concerned.
§ 1-548. Preservation of Order at Fires. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 548]
The Mayor, Fire Chief, Police Officers of the Borough and members of the
Special Fire Police or any of them, shall have authority in case of fire
1. The Fire Chief shall annually establish a roster of active fire-fighters
who shall constitute the Firefighting Team of the Emmaus Fire
Department.
2. The Firefighting Team of the Emmaus Fire Department shall be under
the control and jurisdiction of the Fire Chief, who shall be accountable
to the Borough Manager and Council.
3. Persons 14-15 years of age may become Junior Firefighter Trainees,
and persons 16-17 years of age, may become Junior Firefighters. The
qualifications, training, duties and assignments of the Junior Trainees
and Junior Firefighters shall be determined by the Fire Chief, subject to
any restrictions by laws.
§ 1-545 EMMAUS CODE § 1-548
FWD:84
or emergency, to disperse all collections of idle or disorderly persons and
otherwise to preserve order and to prevent the Commission of Offenses
on such occasions; and to halt, divert or reroute traffic, and it shall be a
violation of this Part for any person to fail to obey any order issued by
authority of this section.
§ 1-549. Obedience to Officers. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 549]
Every member on duty at fires shall render direct obedience to the orders
of the officers in charge under penalty of dismissal from membership in the
Firefighting Team of the Emmaus Fire Department.
§ 1-550. Rules and Regulations Authorized. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999,
§ 550]
The Borough may, at any time, by ordinance or resolution, adopt such
rules and regulations and standard operating procedures as it shall deem
expedient for the governing of the Fire Department, and such rules and
regulations shall be binding upon the Fire Department, the companies
constituting the same, and the members thereof. The Fire Chief may also
issue standing orders, orders of the day, and standards operating procedure
manuals for purposes of directing specific firefighting activities and conduct
of members of the Fire Department.
§ 1-551. Oaths of Office. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 551]
The Fire Chief, Assistant Fire Chiefs, Deputy Chiefs, Captains, Lieutenants
and Engineers shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe to the oath
required of Borough Officials.
§ 1-552. Salaries and Stipends. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 552]
The annual salaries of the paid employees, and the stipends and paid-on-call
compensation, shall be designated annually by the Borough Council after
consideration of any recommendation which the Fire Chief may provide.
§ 1-548 FOREWORD § 1-552
FWD:85

C.
Special Fire Police.
§ 1-561. Establishment of Special Fire Police. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983,
§ 1]
The Emmaus Fire Police Unit, comprised of a truck, equipment and
volunteers and any additional equipment or manpower which may hereafter
be specified by Borough Council shall be called "Emmaus Special Fire
Police".
§ 1-562. Purpose. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983, § 2]
The Special Fire Police Unit of the Borough of Emmaus is established for
the purpose of responding to all fire calls, alarms and emergencies to which
any member or equipment of the Emmaus Fire Department responds and
performing such other duties as may be designated by proper Fire or Police
authorities.
§ 1-563. Scope of Department. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983, § 3]
In addition to responding to all fire calls, alarms and emergencies, the
unit may engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test,
parade or other duty authorized by the Captain, or in his absence, by a duly
authorized officer. In areas of special Borough functions, other duties may
be designated by proper Police authorities.
§ 1-564. Department Officers. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983, § 4]
§ 1-565. Membership. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983, § 5]
1. The officers of the Emmaus Special Fire Police shall consist of one
Captain, one Lieutenant, three Sergeants and the same are hereby
created and established.
2. On or before the first Monday of January of even numbered years, the
Mayor, with the approval of Borough Council, shall name, as designated
by Department Standard Operation Procedure, members of the
Emmaus Special Fire Police to act as officers.
3. The officers shall hold their offices for a two-year term, unless removed
by the Mayor for just cause. They may succeed themselves in their
office. In all cases, unless suspended by the Mayor, the officers shall
continue to hold office until Borough Council has duly confirmed their
successors.
1. The Captain shall annually establish a roster of active personnel, who
shall constitute the Special Fire Police.
2. The personnel of the Emmaus Special Fire Police shall be under the
control of the Captain.
§ 1-561 FOREWORD § 1-565
FWD:87
§ 1-566. Preservation of Order When Performing Services. [Ord.
647, 2/7/1983, § 6]
The Mayor, Police Officers of the Borough and members of the Special
Fire Police Unit, Emergency Disaster Personnel or any of them, shall have
authority in case of emergency to disperse all collections of idle or
disorderly persons and otherwise to preserve order and to prevent the
commission of offenses on such occasions; and to halt, divert or re-route
traffic, and it shall be in violation of this Part for any person to fail to obey
any order issued by authority of this section.
§ 1-567. Obedience to Orders of Captain, Fire Chief, Chief of Police.
[Ord. 647, 2/7/1983, § 7]
All Special Fire Police personnel on duty at emergencies shall render
implicit obedience to the Captain, Fire Chief or Chief of Police under the
penalty of dismissal from the active membership in the Emmaus Special
Fire Police Unit, for lack of discipline, lack of obedience to orders or for
conduct unbecoming a Special Fire Police member.
§ 1-568. Appeals of Suspended or Dismissed Members. [Ord. 647, 2/
7/1983, § 8]
Any member suspended or dismissed by the Captain may appeal from such
decision to the Mayor, Fire Chief and Chief of Police; the member may
appeal to a trial committee, which shall be composed of the members of
the appropriate Committee of Council of the Borough of Emmaus, who
after investigating and hearing the appeal, may sustain the action of the
Captain or overrule the same and reinstate the dismissed member to full
membership to the unit.
§ 1-569. Rules and Regulations Authorized. [Ord. 647, 2/7/1983,
§ 9]
Borough Council may, at any time, by Ordinance or Resolution, adopt such
rules and regulations and Standard Operating Procedures as it shall deem
expedient for the government of the Special Fire Police Unit, and such rules
and regulations shall be binding upon the Special Fire Police Unit and the
members thereof.
3. Persons from 18 years of age may become a member. The qualifications,
training, duties and assignments shall be determined by the Standard
Operating Procedure of the unit, subject to the ordinances of the
Borough of Emmaus and the law of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4. Before assuming office, members shall take and submit to the Oath
required of Borough officers.
§ 1-565 EMMAUS CODE § 1-569
FWD:88
Part 6
EMERGENCY SERVICE GROUPS
A.
Ambulance Corps.
§ 1-601. The Establishment and Purpose of the Ambulance Corps.
[Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 601]
The Emmaus Ambulance Corps has been established by Ord. 662 of 1985,
comprised of ambulances, equipment and volunteers then existing, and
any additional equipment or personnel which may be hereafter added, to
provide adequate provisions for the transportation of the sick and injured to
and from hospitals, asylums, medical centers or institutions where proper
treatment may be administered; promoting the public health, safety,
comfort and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Emmaus and
performing such other activities as may be designated by Borough Council;
it shall consist of so many members as are authorized by Borough Council,
including the following specifically enumerated officers: Chief, First
Assistant Chief, Recording Secretary, Assistant Recording Secretary,
Treasurer and three Lieutenants. The Emmaus Ambulance Corps is the
official emergency medical service for the Borough of Emmaus and shall
be dispatched on all medical emergencies in the Borough. The Emmaus
Ambulance Corps shall decide when and if mutual aid is necessary.
§ 1-602. Definitions. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 602]
As used in this Part, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings, unless the content clearly indicates a different
meaning:
AMBULANCE — A vehicle which is designed or intended to be used in
providing transportation of wounded, injured, sick, invalid or incapacitated
human beings, or expectant mothers.
ATTENDANT — A trained and qualified individual responsible for the
operation of an ambulance and the care of the patients whether or not the
attendant also serves as driver.
DISCIPLINE — The suspension or termination of a volunteer or paid
employee of the Borough working under the direction of the Ambulance
Chief.
EMPLOYEE — A person working part-time or full-time in any capacity under
the direction of the Ambulance Chief and receiving pay from the Borough of
Emmaus.
EMPLOYMENT POLICIES — Those policies adopted from time to time by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus applicable to all non-civil
service and non-public bargaining unit employees.
§ 1-603. Corps Officers. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 603]
§ 1-601 FOREWORD § 1-603
FWD:89
§ 1-604. Duties of Chief. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 604; as amended by
Ord. 936, 10/15/2001]
The Ambulance Corps shall be directed and supervised by the Chief whose
duty it shall be to keep all ambulance equipment in order, to establish rules
and regulations for the use and operation of the same for consideration
and amendment or adoption by the Borough Council, and otherwise to
accomplish the aims of this Part. The Chief shall make a report annually
to the Borough Council by August, as to the conditions of the equipment
and needs of the ambulance service. The Chief shall submit monthly reports
and recommendations, including a financial report, and shall report
recommendations for and the reasons for any discipline, including
termination or suspension, to the Borough Council through the Borough
Manager. The Chief shall be responsible for the proper training and
discipline of the members of the ambulance service, and may suspend any
member for refusal or neglect to obey orders pending final action by the
Borough Council on his discharge or retention. The Chief, and in his or
her absence the Assistant Chief, shall have the authority to recommend
the necessary and appropriate purchases as established in the ambulance
section of the annual Emmaus Borough Budget. All such purchases shall
be made in full compliance with Borough ordinance and statutory
requirements for bidding and purchases. The position of Ambulance Chief
shall be one of full-time employment for the Borough of Emmaus and, as
such, the Chief shall be paid a salary commensurate with the position as
determined by the Borough Council.
§ 1-605. Practice Sessions. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 605]
It shall be the duty of the Chief to establish such practice sessions and give
instruction in approved methods of emergency health care as the Chief,
in his or her best judgment, deems appropriate, in compliance with the
1. A Selection Committee composed of the General Administration
Committee of the Borough of Emmaus and the current Ambulance
Corps Chief will meet and recommend candidates to the Borough
Council for those specifically enumerated officers positions set forth in
§ 1-601, except the Chief's position, which will be recommended for
selection to the Borough Council by the General Administration
Committee of the Borough of Emmaus. The appointing authority shall
be the Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. The Borough Council shall appoint officers for one-year terms to the
positions of Chief, Assistant Chief, Recording Secretary, Assistant
Recording Secretary, Treasurer and three Lieutenants. Officers of the
Ambulance Corps serve as at-will employees and appointees. In the
absence of the confirmation of a successor to a position, the person last
designated shall continue to serve upon confirmation of Borough
Council, for periods which may be one year or less than one year as
determined by Borough Council. These persons may succeed
themselves in their offices if reappointed by Council.
§ 1-603 EMMAUS CODE § 1-605
FWD:90
provisions of the Emergency Medical Services Act (35 P.S. § 6931 et seq., or
subsequent amendments) and other applicable laws and Borough policies.
§ 1-606. Assistant Chief. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 606]
In the absence or disability of the Chief, the Assistant Chief shall perform
all the functions and exercise all the authority of the Chief, the Borough
Manger or the Borough Council.
§ 1-607. Qualifications and Appointment. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999,
§ 607]
§ 1-608. Preservation of Order When Performing Services. [Ord.
887, 7/6/1999, § 608]
The Mayor, Police Officers of the Borough and members of the Ambulance
Corps, Civil Defense Personnel or any of them, shall have authority in case
of emergency to disperse all collections of idle or disorderly persons and
otherwise to preserve order and to prevent the commission of offenses on
such occasions; and to halt, divert or re-route traffic, and it shall be a
violation for any person to fail to obey any order issued by authority of this
section. Any person convicted of violating any provision of this section shall
be fined not more than $300 for each offense, and costs of prosecution.
1. The Chief shall annually establish a roster of active personnel, who,
upon confirmation by the Borough Council following necessary
background checks, certification of eligibility under applicable state
statutes and driving record reviews, shall constitute the Ambulance
Corps of the Borough of Emmaus. Members of the Ambulance Corps
shall be governed by all employment policies and volunteer policies of
the Borough governing conduct, duties and qualifications.
2. The personnel of the Ambulance Corps shall be under the direct
supervisory control of the Chief. The Chief shall report to and be subject
to the supervisory control of the Borough Manager, and the Borough
Manager shall report to the Council.
3. Persons having attained the age of 16 years of age may become Corps
personnel, subject to prevailing statutory law regarding age, duties,
certification and qualifications.
4. The qualifications, training, duties and assignments of the Corps
personnel shall be determined by the Constitution of the Corps, subject
to compliance with the laws and codes of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and the policies of the Borough of Emmaus.
5. Upon severance from the Emmaus Ambulance Corps for any reason,
either voluntary or involuntary, volunteers and paid employees shall
return all clothing, coats, badges and insignias of rank or membership,
electronic devices, medical equipment, handbooks, policy books, keys,
pass cards and identification cards to the Ambulance Chief.
§ 1-605 FOREWORD § 1-609
FWD:91
§ 1-609. Obedience to Order of Chief or Corps Officers. [Ord. 887, 7/
6/1999, § 609]
All Corps personnel of the Emmaus Ambulance Corps on duty at
emergencies shall render direct obedience to the orders of the ranking
officer as determined in § 1-601, supra, under the penalty of dismissal
from active membership or termination of any paid position in the Emmaus
Ambulance Corps for breach of discipline, lack of obedience to orders
or for conduct unbecoming a Corps member. Rank to be determined as
enumerated in § 1-601, supra. Actions in violation of mandatory medical
protocols or which endanger the life of a patient may subject the member to
immediate suspension with intent to terminate.
§ 1-610. Interference with Service Duties. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999,
§ 610]
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, or cause to be made a call
for ambulance service without probable cause, or to neglect to obey any
reasonable order of a driver or attendants at an ambulance call, or to
interfere with the ambulance service's discharge of its duties. Any person
convicted of violating any provision of this section shall be fined not more
than $300 for each offense, and costs of prosecution.
§ 1-611. Rules and Regulations Authorized. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999,
§ 611]
The Borough may, at any time, adopt such rules and regulations and
standard operating procedures as it shall deem expedient for the
government of the Ambulance Corps, and such rules and regulations shall
be binding upon the Ambulance Corps and the members thereof.
§ 1-612. Oaths of Office. [Ord. 887, 7/6/1999, § 612]
The Chief, Recording Secretary, Assistant Recording Secretary, Treasurer
and Lieutenants shall, before assuming office, take and subscribe the oath
required of Borough officials.
§ 1-609 EMMAUS CODE § 1-612
FWD:92
B.
Rescue Squad.
§ 1-621. The Establishment of Rescue Squad. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977,
§ 1]
The Emmaus Rescue Unit, comprised of truck, equipment and volunteers
from the Emmaus Fire Department, and any additional equipment or
manpower which may hereafter be recognized and now shall be called the
Emmaus Rescue Squad.
§ 1-622. Purpose. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 2]
The Rescue Squad of the Borough of Emmaus is established for the purpose
of performing rescues, protecting the residents of the Borough, and
performing such other activities as may be designated by proper
Department authorities.
§ 1-623. Scope of Department. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 3]
In addition to performing rescues inside or without the Borough, and
traveling to and returning from such operations, the Rescue Squad and
its members are authorized to answer any type call, inside or without the
Borough of Emmaus, and to engage in any type of drill, training, ceremonial,
practice, test, parade or other duty authorized by the Captain, or in his
absence, by a duly authorized officer.
§ 1-624. Department Officers. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 4]
1. The officers of the Emmaus Rescue Squad shall consist of one Captain,
three Lieutenants and one Head Driver and the same are hereby
created and established.
2. The Captain, Lieutenants and Head Driver shall hold their offices for a
two-year term, unless removed by the Fire Chief for just cause. They
may succeed themselves in their offices, unless suspended by the Fire
Chief.
3. It shall be the duty of the Captain or duly designated officers, to attend
all rescues and alarms and superintend and direct the operation of the
Rescue Squad. The Captain shall have full control of all the men and
apparatus, issue and enforce such orders as in his judgment may be
best calculated for the protection of property, the saving of lives and the
welfare of the Department. He shall enforce all the rules and the
regulations of the Department and the Borough Ordinances pertaining
thereto. He shall at the end of each fiscal year report to Fire Chief a full
statement of all rescues occurring during the year, the origin of same,
property destroyed and insurance thereon, if any. If he shall be absent
from the Borough, he shall designate an officer of the squad to act
during his absence.
§ 1-621 FOREWORD § 1-624
FWD:93
§ 1-625. Membership. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 5]
§ 1-626. Company Officers. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 6]
4. The Captain may delegate to the Lieutenants any of the aforementioned
duties.
5. Lieutenants shall answer all alarms of rescue by proceeding to the
rescue or fire station according to orders of the Captain. The first
officer arriving at a rescue shall have charge until the arrival of the
Captain.
6. The Captain shall have charge of the conduct of the Rescue Squad. In
the absence of the Captain from the Borough, the officer designated by
him to act in his stead shall be recognized as the head of the Squad.
7. The Rescue Squad shall at all times be under the jurisdiction and
authority of the Fire Chief.
1. The Captain shall annually establish a roster of active rescue personnel
who shall constitute the Rescue Squad of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. The rescue personnel of the Rescue Squad shall be under the control
and jurisdiction of the Captain.
3. Persons from 16 to 45 years of age, inclusive, may become rescue
personnel.
The qualifications, training, duties and assignments of the rescue
personnel shall be as determined by the Captain, subject to any
restrictions by laws.
1. The officers of the Rescue Squad shall include:
A. Captain;
B. 1st Lieutenant;
C. 2nd Lieutenant;
D. 3rd Lieutenant;
E. Head Driver;
F. Any other official position that may be established in the future.
2. The officers of the Rescue Squad shall be elected biannually, to take
office on the first Monday in January commencing with the even number
years. All such officers shall be elected subject to the approval of the
Fire Chief, and the approval of the Borough Council.
3. Squad officers must be on the active roster of the Emmaus Rescue
Squad § 1-625(1) of this Part.
§ 1-624 EMMAUS CODE § 1-626
FWD:94
§ 1-627. Preservation of Order at Rescue. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977, § 7]
§ 1-628. Obedience to Orders of Captain or Squad Officers. [Ord.
565, 6/2/1977, § 8]
All rescue personnel of the Emmaus Rescue Squad of Borough of Emmaus
on duty at emergencies shall render implicit obedience to the orders of the
Captain or officers under the penalty of dismissal from active membership
in the Emmaus Rescue Squad for a breach of discipline, lack of obedience
to orders or for conduct unbecoming a Squad member.
§ 1-629. Appeals of Suspended or Dismissed Members. [Ord. 565, 5/
2/1977, § 9]
Any member suspended or dismissed by the Captain may appeal from
such decision to the Fire Chief. If the suspended or dismissed member is
dissatisfied with the decision of the Fire Chief, he may appeal to a trial
committee which shall be composed of the members of the Fire Committee
of Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus, who, after investigating and
hearing the appeal, may sustain the action of the Captain or overrule the
same and reinstate the dismissed member to full membership in the Squad.
§ 1-630. Rules and Regulations Authorized. [Ord. 565, 5/2/1977,
§ 10]
The Borough may, at any time, by ordinance or resolution, adopt such
rules and regulations and standard operating procedures as it shall deem
expedient for the government of the Rescue Squad, and such rules and
regulations shall be binding upon the Rescue Squad and the members
thereof.
4. Voting for Squad Officers shall be confined to active members of the
Emmaus Rescue Squad.
1. The Mayor, Fire Chief, Police Officers of the Borough and Members of
the Fire Police, Captain of Rescue or any of them, shall have authority in
case of emergency to disperse all collections of idle or disorderly
persons and otherwise to preserve order and to prevent the
Commission of offenses on such occasions; and to halt, divert or reroute
traffic, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any person to fail
to obey any order issued by authority of this section.
§ 1-626 FOREWORD § 1-630
FWD:95

Part 7
PENSIONS
A.
Social Security.
§ 1-701. Social Security System. [Ord. 308, 9/2/1952; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It is the considered opinion of this body that the extension of the Social
Security System to employees and officers of the Borough of Emmaus will
be of great benefit, not only to the employees of the Borough by providing
that said employees and officers may participate in the provisions of the Old
Age and Survivors Insurance System, but will also be of great benefit to the
Borough of Emmaus by enabling it to attract and retain in employment the
best of personnel and thus increase the efficiency of its government.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute, known as Act No. 491,
which is the enabling Act provided for in Section 218 of Public Law 734,
61st Congress, which designated the Secretary of Labor and Industry of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to act as the "State Agency" to implement
the coverage of employees and officer under the said Old Age and Survivors
Insurance System. The Borough of Emmaus is hereby authorized to execute
and deliver to the State Agency a plan, or plans, and agreement, required
under Section 6 of said Enabling Act and Social Security Act, to extend
coverage to employees and officers of the Borough of Emmaus and do all
other necessary things to effectuate coverage of employees and officers
under the Old Age and Survivors Insurance System.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deduction to be matched by payments by the Borough of Emmaus to be
made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the State Agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund, or
funds, from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
Borough of Emmaus. Such payments are to be made in accordance with the
provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the State Agency and
the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments which are delinquent
shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as
payments are made.
Appropriation is hereby made from the general fund of the Borough of
Emmaus in the necessary amount to pay into the contribution fund as
provided in Section 4 of the Enabling Act and in accordance with the
plan, or plans, and agreement. Authority is given to the Mayor and the
Borough Manager of Emmaus to enter into an agreement with the State
Agency, which agreement shall be in accordance with Act No. 491 and with
paragraph 213 of the Social Security Act. Such plan and agreement shall
provide that the participation of the Borough of Emmaus shall commence as
of January 1, 1951.
§ 1-701 FOREWORD § 1-701
FWD:97

B.
Employees Pension Plan.
§ 1-721. Establishment of Employees Pension Plan. [Ord. 1050, 2/2/
2009]
The amended and restated plan, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A10
involving the Borough of Emmaus Employees Pension Plan, is enacted.
President of Borough Council, as the agent of the employer, is authorized
and directed to execute the attached amended and restated plan.
10.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the "Borough of Emmaus Employees Pension Plan," as amended,
is on file in the Borough office.
§ 1-721 FOREWORD § 1-721
FWD:99

C.
Police Pension Plan.
§ 1-731. Establishment of Police Pension Plan. [Ord. 1051, 2/2/
2009]
The amended and restated plan, which is attached hereto as Exhibit A11
involving the Borough of Emmaus Police Pension Plan, is enacted. President
of Borough Council, as an agent of the employer, is authorized and directed
to execute the attached amended and restated plan.
§ 1-732. Police Pension Plan Amendments. [Ord. 1065, 1/18/2010]
As authorized by Section 9.2 of the Borough of Emmaus Police Pension Plan
("Plan") as amended and restated effective January 1, 2008, the employer,
Borough of Emmaus, hereby amends the Plan to comply with Act 600 of
1956, as amended by Act 51 of 2009, the Emergency and Law Enforcement
Personnel Death Benefits Act. This amendment shall be effective as
provided herein. This amendment shall supersede the provisions of the Plan
to the extent those provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of this
amendment. The employer hereby amends the Plan in the following manner:
FIRST: Repeal of Killed-in-Service Benefit. Section 4.2(a) and (b) are
amended to remove the killed-in-service benefit. As amended, Section
4.2(a) and (b) shall read as follows:
(a) Killed-in-Service Benefit - Effective with respect to deaths
occurring on or after October 9, 2009, the killed-in-service death
benefit shall no longer be payable under this Plan or by the
employer. A deceased participant's surviving spouse or eligible
child who is eligible to receive such benefit due to the qualifying
death of the participant on or after April 17, 2002, and prior to
October 9, 2009, shall continue to receive the benefit as formerly
awarded.
(b) Survivor Benefit - If a retired or disabled participant who is
receiving a pension benefit dies or if a participant dies after
satisfying the requirements for retirement, whether or not he
had previously terminated employment, the participant's surviving
spouse or eligible child (if any and as further described in Section
4.1(c)) shall receive a benefit equal to 50% of the retirement
benefit that the participant was receiving or would have been
receiving if the participant had been retired on the date of death.
SECOND: Effective Date. This amendment is made effective as of January
4, 2010.
THIRD: Remaining Plan Provisions. All other provisions of the Plan remain
in full force and effect.
11.Editor's Note: Exhibit A, the "Borough of Emmaus Police Pension Plan," as amended, is on
file in the Borough office.
§ 1-731 FOREWORD § 1-732
FWD:101

Part 8
RECREATION AND ENTERTAINMENT COMMISSION
§ 1-801. Members. [Ord. 1137, 4/4/2016]
§ 1-802. Advisory Capacity. [Ord. 1137, 4/4/2016]
The Recreation and Entertainment Commission shall act in an advisory
capacity to the Parks and Recreation Department and Parks and Recreation
Committee of Borough Council in the furtherance of the Department's
mission as set forth in Chapter 1, Administration and Government, Part 4,
Committees, Boards, § 1-405, Parks and Recreation Committee, of the Code
of Ordinances of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 1-803. Goals and Objectives. [Ord. 1137, 4/4/2016]
1. A Recreation and Entertainment Commission is hereby established
which shall be composed of 11 members. Membership shall include no
less than eight Borough residents and no more than three non-Borough
residents.
2. The Recreation and Entertainment Commission shall meet no less than
one time per fiscal quarter and no fewer than four times per fiscal year.
Special meetings may be scheduled as needed as determined by the
Commission or Borough Council.
3. The Recreation and Entertainment Commission members shall serve
three-year, staggered terms.
4. The Recreation and Entertainment Commission shall establish
Commission bylaws which shall establish Commission hierarchy,
elections, subcommittee structure, and operational procedures. The
bylaws shall be subject to Borough Council approval.
1. The Recreation and Entertainment Commission's goals and objectives
are to provide recommendations and assistance to the Department in
the following areas:
A. To systematically and efficiently provide for the park and
recreational needs of all Borough residents by use of both public
and private resources.
B. To sponsor and support a comprehensive program of recreation
and park activities with the opportunity for a variety of experiences
adjusted to meet the physical and psychological needs of all
Borough residents.
C. To work with Borough Council in an advisory capacity for
maintenance of parks, recreation, and open space as a vital cog in
the quality of life for its residents.
§ 1-801 FOREWORD § 1-803
FWD:103
§ 1-804. Authority of Borough Council.
Any expenditure of funds or creation of policy remains within the authority
of Borough Council.
D. To make the citizens of Emmaus aware of the programs and
facilities available to them; to encourage their involvement and
participation in every aspect thereof.
E. To promote and encourage music programs in the Borough of
Emmaus and shall be responsible for coordinating and arranging
for a program of summer concerts at the Emmaus Community Park
Samuel Landis Arts Pavilion.
F. To create, coordinate, and schedule any other musical or
entertainment production, event, or concert anywhere in the
Borough as it sees fit.
G. To raise funds for its activities and make those expenditures, as
approved by Borough Council, necessary for the activities of the
Commission.
H. Shall hold no less than one significant community-wide event
throughout the fiscal year, including but not limited to a season
kick-off event, a year-end event, festivals, or other recreational
events that would be suitable to serve the community at large.
I. Shall annually report in writing to Borough Council. The report
shall contain a statement detailing all activities conducted during
the year. In addition, each annual report shall contain an income/
expense statement.
§ 1-803 EMMAUS CODE § 1-804
FWD:104
Part 9
FIRE INSURANCE PROCEEDS
A.
Escrow Procedures.
§ 1-901. Designated Officer. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 1.1]
The Treasurer or such official's designee (hereinafter, the "municipal
officer") is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is to carry out all
responsibilities and duties of the Borough stated herein.
§ 1-902. "Fire Loss" Defined. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 1.2]
A "fire loss" or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this subpart and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 1-903. Municipal Certificate. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 2.1]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of
a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the Borough
of Emmaus (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless
the insurer is furnished by the municipal officer with a municipal certificate
pursuant to § 1-508(b) and unless there is compliance with § 1-508(c) and
(d), the provisions of this subpart and Part 9B, establishing the procedure
for payment of delinquent taxes from fire insurance proceeds.
§ 1-904. Payment of Claims. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 2.2]
1. After full compliance with the requirements of § 1-508(b)(1)(i), and Part
9B, the insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured; provided,
however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named insured and the
insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limits of liability on all
fire policies covering the building or structure, the following
procedures shall be followed:
A. The insurer shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
municipal officer the aggregate of $2,000 for each $15,000 of a
claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, provided (i)
that this section is to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or
less, the amount transferred to the Borough shall be $2,000; and
(ii) that, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure in an amount
less than the amount calculated under the foregoing transfer
formula, the insurer shall transfer to the Borough from the
insurance proceeds the amount based upon the estimate.
§ 1-901 FOREWORD § 1-904
FWD:105
§ 1-905. Return of Excess Funds. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 2.3]
After the transfer, the named insured may submit a contractor's signed
estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or securing the building or
other structure and the designated officer shall return the amount of the
funds transferred to the Borough in excess of the estimate to the named
insured, if the Borough has not commenced to remove, repair or secure the
building or other structure.
§ 1-906. Receipt of Proceeds. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 2.4]
B. The transfer of proceeds shall be on pro rata basis by all
companies, associations or exchanges insuring the building or
other structure. Policy proceeds remaining after the transfer to the
Borough shall be disbursed in accordance with the policy terms.
1. Upon receipt of proceeds under this section, the Borough shall do the
following:
A. The municipal officer shall place the proceeds in the separate fund
to be used solely against the total costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or structure which are incurred by the
Borough. Such costs shall include, without limitation, any
engineering, legal or administrative costs incurred by the Borough
in connection with such removal, repair or securing of the building
or any proceedings related thereto.
B. It is the obligation of the insurer when transferring the proceeds to
provide the Borough with the name and address of the named
insured. Upon receipt of the transferred funds and the name and
address of the named insured, the municipal officer shall contact
the named insured, certify that the proceeds have been received by
the Borough and notify the named insured that the proceeds under
this subsection shall be followed.
C. When repairs, removal or securing of the building or other
structure have been completed in accordance with applicable
regulations and orders of the Borough, and the required proof of
such completion received by the municipal officer, and if the
Borough has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure, the costs shall be paid
from the fund and, if excess funds remain, the Borough shall
transfer the remaining funds to the named insured.
D. To the extent that interest is earned on proceeds held by the
Borough pursuant to this section and retained by it, such interest
shall belong to the Borough. To the extent that proceeds are
returned to the named insured, interest earned on such proceeds
shall be distributed to the named insured at the time that the
proceeds are returned.
§ 1-904 EMMAUS CODE § 1-907
FWD:106
§ 1-907. Recovery of Deficiencies; Transfer of Funds. [Ord. 821, 11/
20/1995, § 2.5]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
to recovery any deficiency. Furthermore, nothing in this Part shall be
construed to prohibit the Borough and the named insured from entering
into an agreement that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured
if some other reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been
negotiated.
§ 1-908. Procedures and Regulations. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 3.1]
The Borough of Emmaus may, by resolution, adopt procedures and
regulations to implement § 1-508 of this Part and may be resolution fix
reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services provided
pursuant to § 1-508 and this Part including, but not limited to, issuance
of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening separate
accounts.
§ 1-909. Penalty. [Ord. 821, 11/20/1995, § 4.1]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this
subpart shall be subject to a penalty up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 1-907 FOREWORD § 1-909
FWD:107

B.
Delinquent Taxes.
§ 1-921. Designated Officer. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 1.1]
The Treasurer or such official's designee (hereinafter the "municipal
officer") is hereby appointed as the designated officer who is authorized to
carry out all responsibilities and duties of the Borough stated herein.
§ 1-922. "Fire Loss" Defined. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 1.2]
A "fire loss" or claim for fire damage is defined as any loss occurring
after the effective date of this subpart and covered under a policy of fire
insurance, including any endorsements or riders to the policy.
§ 1-923. Compliance with Section 508 and this Subpart. [Ord. 822,
12/4/1995, § 2.1]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insurer")
doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a claim of
a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within the Borough
of Emmaus (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless
the insurer and the named insured comply with the provisions of § 1-508(b)
and the provisions of this subpart and Ord. 821, 11/20/1995 [Part 9A],
establishing escrow procedures for fire insurance proceeds.
§ 1-924. Delinquent Taxes. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 2.2]
1. The municipal officer shall, upon written request of the named insured
specifying the tax description of the property, name and address of the
insurer and the date agreed upon by the insurer and the named insured
as the date of the receipt of a loss report of the claim, furnish the
insurer either of the following within 14 working dates of the request:
A. A certificate, or at the discretion of the Borough, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to
the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
the property and that, as of the date of the municipal officer's
certificate or verbal notification, the Borough has not certified any
amount as total costs incurred by the Borough for the removal,
repair or securing of a building or other structure on the property.
B. A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and use charges against the property as of
the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the
date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the
municipal officer's certificate, the amount of the total cost, if any,
certified to the municipal officer that have been incurred by the
Borough for the removal, repair or securing of a building or other
§ 1-921 FOREWORD § 1-924
FWD:109
§ 1-925. Payment of Claims. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 2.3]
Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 1-924(A) of this subpart, the
insurer shall pay the claim of the named insured in accordance with the
policy terms; provided, however, that if the loss agreed upon by the named
insured and the insurer equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate limit of the
liability on all fire policies covering the building structure, the requirements
under § 1-904 of Ord. 821, 11/20/1995 [Part 9A], must be complied with.
§ 1-926. Payment of Taxes, Assessments, Penalties, Charges and
Costs. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 2.4]
Upon receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 1-924(B) of this subpart,
the insurer shall return the bill to the municipal officer and transfer to the
municipal officer an amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay
the taxes, assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill, or
the full amount of the insurance proceeds, whichever is the lesser amount.
The Borough shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to payment of
the items shown in the bill.
§ 1-927. Recovery of Deficiencies. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 2.5]
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the ability of the Borough
to recovery any deficiency.
§ 1-928. Transfer of Proceeds. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 3.1]
The transfer of proceeds to the municipal officer shall be on a pro rata basis
by all insurers with applicable policies of insurance providing protection for
fire loss.
§ 1-929. Additional Procedures and Regulations.
The Borough of Emmaus may, by resolution, adopt additional procedures
and regulations to implement § 1-508 of this subpart and may, by resolution,
fix reasonable fees to be charged for municipal activities or services
provided pursuant to § 1-508 and this subpart including, but not limited to,
issuance of certificate and bills.
structure on the property. For the purpose of this subsection, the
Borough shall provide to the municipal officer the total amount, if
any, of such costs, if available, or the amount of costs known to the
Borough at the time of the municipal officer's certificate.
2. A tax, assessment, penalty or user charge becomes delinquent at the
time and on the date a lien could otherwise have been filed against the
property by the Borough under applicable law.
§ 1-924 EMMAUS CODE § 1-930
FWD:110
§ 1-930. Penalty. [Ord. 822, 12/4/1995, § 4.1]
Any owner of property, any named insured or any insurer who violates this
subpart shall be subject to a penalty of up to $1,000 per violation.
§ 1-930 FOREWORD § 1-930
FWD:111

Part 10
WARRANTLESS ARREST
§ 1-1001. Short Title. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/2009]
This Part shall be known and cited as the "Emmaus Borough Police
Department Standard Operating Procedure for Warrantless Arrests."
§ 1-1002. Definitions. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/2009]
§ 1-1003. Offenses Covered. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/2009]
§ 1-1004. Requirements for Arrest Without Warrant. [Ord. 1059, 10/
20/2009]
1. The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the
meanings indicated hereinbelow, except where the context clearly
indicates or expressly requires a different meaning:
DEFENDANT — Any person charged with committing any of the
offenses covered by this Part.
POLICE OFFICER — Any person employed by the Emmaus Borough
Police Department as a sworn law enforcement officer.
2. In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and the
neuter.
1. Police officers may only make arrests without warrants under this Part
for the following summary offenses (hereinafter referred to collectively
as the "summary offenses"):
A. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct).
B. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5505 (relating to public drunkenness).
C. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5507 (relating to obstructing highways and other
passages).
D. 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption, possession
or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages).
1. Prior to making an arrest without a warrant pursuant to this Part, the
police officer must, upon view, have probable cause to believe that:
A. The defendant has committed a crime involving one of the four
summary offenses.
B. The defendant's conduct is ongoing.
C. The defendant's conduct imperils the personal security of any
person or endangers public or private property.
§ 1-1001 FOREWORD § 1-1004
FWD:113
§ 1-1005. Making an Arrest Without Warrant. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/
2009]
When making an arrest without a warrant pursuant to this Part, the police
officer shall follow the guidelines of the applicable Emmaus Police Policy
and Procedure Manual and other standard operating procedures.
§ 1-1006. Procedure Following Arrest Without Warrant. [Ord. 1059,
10/20/2009]
2. Probable cause exists where the facts and circumstances within the
knowledge of the arresting officer are reasonably trustworthy and
sufficient to warrant a person of reasonable caution to believe that the
person to be arrested has committed a crime involving one of the four
summary offenses.
1. Where a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, defendant
shall be released from custody pursuant to subsection (A) of this section
or taken before the proper issuing authority pursuant to subsection (B)
of this section.
A. When a defendant has been arrested without a warrant, the
arresting police officer may, when the police officer deems it
appropriate, promptly release the defendant from custody when
the following conditions have been met:
(1) The defendant is a resident of the Commonwealth.
(2) The defendant, after arrest, poses no threat of immediate
physical harm to any other person or to himself or herself.
(3) The arresting police officer has reasonable grounds to believe
that the defendant will appear before a court as required.
(4) The defendant does not demand to be taken before an issuing
authority.
A citation shall be issued to the defendant at the time of
release and thereafter the case shall proceed as if the
proceedings had been instituted by issuing a citation to the
defendant.
B. When a defendant has not been released from custody under
subsection (A), the defendant shall be taken without unnecessary
delay before the issuing authority where a citation shall be filed
against the defendant. The defendant shall be given an immediate
trial unless:
(1) The Commonwealth is not ready to proceed or the defendant
requests a postponement, and in either event the defendant
shall be given the opportunity to deposit collateral for
appearance on the new date and hour fixed for trial.
§ 1-1004 EMMAUS CODE § 1-1006
FWD:114
§ 1-1007. Parental Notification. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/2009]
§ 1-1008. Other Warrantless Arrests. [Ord. 1059, 10/20/2009]
The enumeration in this Part of offenses for which warrantless arrest is
authorized shall not be construed so as to in any way limit an arrest without
a warrant in any other circumstance authorized by law.
(2) Defendant's criminal record must be ascertained before trial as
specifically required by statute for purposes of grading the
offense charged, in which event the defendant shall be given
the opportunity to deposit collateral for appearance on the new
date and hour fixed for trial, which shall be after the issuing
authority's receipt of the required information.
1. In any warrantless arrest of a person under the age of 18, charging a
violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503 (relating to disorderly conduct), § 5505
(relating to public drunkenness) and/or § 5507 (relating to obstructing
the highways and other public passages), the police officer shall notify
the defendant's parents or guardian of the charge(s).
2. In any warrantless arrest of a person under the age of 21 charging a
violation of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 6308 (relating to purchase, consumption,
possession or transportation of liquor or malt or brewed beverages), the
police officer shall notify the defendant's parents or guardian of the
charge(s).
3. The name and address of the parents or guardian and indication that
notification was made shall be listed on any citation issued for any of
the charges listed in this section.
§ 1-1006 FOREWORD § 1-1008
FWD:115

Part 11
ATTORNEY'S FEES AND COURT COSTS
A.
Attorney's Fees.
§ 1-1101. Schedule of Attorney's Fees. [Ord. 1086, 7/16/2012, § 1]
1. Pursuant to the Municipal Claims Act, the Borough of Emmaus hereby
adopts the following schedule of attorney's fees in connection with the
collection of municipal claims including both tax liens and municipal
liens as follows:
A. Tax Liens.
(1) For payments made after a claim is turned over to counsel but
prior to the issuance of the collection letter, the sum of $25 for
each payment received.
(2) For payments made after the issuance of the thirty-day
certified mail collection letter, the sum of $100 for each
payment received.
(3) For preparation and filing of the tax lien, the sum of $500.
(4) For preparation and filing of the Praecipe and Writ of Scire
Facias, the sum of $500.
(5) For any additional work required on a contested tax lien, an
hourly rate of $250.
(6) For a Sheriff's Sale proceeding, the sum of $500 minimum for
work and document preparation on each lien plus an hourly
rate of $250 for any additional work required.
(7) For any additional work required, the sum of $250 per hour.
(8) All above sums shall be additive.
B. Municipal Liens.
(1) For issuance of the thirty-day certified mail notice letter, the
sum of $100.
(2) For preparation and filing of the municipal lien, the sum of
$250.
(3) For preparation and filing of the Praecipe and Writ of Scire
Facias, the sum of $500.
(4) For any additional work required on a contested tax lien, an
hourly rate of $250.
§ 1-1101 FOREWORD § 1-1101
FWD:117
§ 1-1102. Interest Rate. [Ord. 1086, 7/16/2012, § 2]
Pursuant to the Municipal Claims Act, the Borough of Emmaus hereby sets
the interest rate applicable to all municipal claims including tax liens and
municipal liens at a rate of 10%.
§ 1-1103. Court Costs, Filing Fees and Charges. [Ord. 1086, 7/16/
2012, § 3]
Court costs, filing fees and charges applicable to all municipal claims
including tax liens and municipal liens shall be additional expenses to be
collected from the debtor.
§ 1-1104. Installment Payment Plan. [Ord. 1086, 7/16/2012, § 4]
To establish an installment payment plan for delinquent real estate taxes,
an additional fee of $50 shall be collected from the debtor.
§ 1-1105. Fees for Liens Previously Filed. [Ord. 1086, 7/16/2012,
§ 5]
The current fees for liens previously filed (which fees are set forth in
the repealed ordinances and resolutions) are hereby reaffirmed and shall
remain in effect for those liens filed prior to the effective date of this
Subpart.
(5) For a Sheriff's Sale proceeding, the sum of $500 minimum for
work and document preparation on each lien plus an hourly
rate of $250 for any additional work required.
(6) For any additional work required, the sum of $250 per hour.
(7) All above sums shall be additive.
§ 1-1101 EMMAUS CODE § 1-1105
FWD:118
B.
Court Costs.
§ 1-1121. Enforcement Provision. [Ord. 1096, 4/1/2013, § 1]
All existing and future Borough ordinances are hereby amended to include
the following enforcement provision: "Any person found guilty of violating
an ordinance shall be assessed court costs and reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings."
§ 1-1122. Modification. [Ord. 1096, 4/1/2013, § 2]
Nothing contained in this ordinance shall in any way modify the Municipal
claims and liens procedures and enforcement actions for zoning under the
Municipalities Planning Code including collections and fees as set forth in
those ordinances.
§ 1-1123. Reasonable Fees and Charges. [Ord. 1096, 4/1/2013, § 3]
It shall be presumed that the attorney's fee hourly rate is reasonable as
long as it is equal to the rate that the Borough pays its municipal solicitor.
Additional charges may be reasonable depending on the complexity and
difficulty of the matter and, thus, the presumption of reasonableness at the
approved current rate for the Borough Solicitor for litigation shall be a floor
and not a ceiling on said rates.
§ 1-1124. Municipal Solicitor's Rate. [Ord. 1096, 4/1/2013, § 4]
The municipal solicitor's rate shall be the rate that is then in effect for
the Borough as concerns municipal litigation and shall automatically
correspond in the future to whatever rate is approved by the Borough.
§ 1-1125. Mandatory Payment of Court Costs and Reasonable
Attorney's Fees. [Ord. 1096, 4/1/2013, § 5]
In order to protect the law abiding taxpayers of the Borough, this ordinance
requires a mandatory payment of court costs and reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceedings where a person is
found guilty of violating a Borough ordinance.
§ 1-1121 FOREWORD § 1-1125
FWD:119
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 1-1125 EMMAUS CODE § 1-1125
FWD:120
Part 1
DOGS AT LARGE
§ 2-101. Definitions. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
As used in this Part, the following terms have the meaning indicated, unless
a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OWNER — Any person having a right of property in any dog or having
custody of any dog, or any person who harbors or permits a dog to remain
on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park,
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by or under the control of the owner or
any other person having custody of said dog.
§ 2-102. Unlawful to Allow Dogs to Run at Large. [Ord. 480, 12/30/
1971; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog or dogs to allow or permit such
dog or dogs to run at large in the Borough.
§ 2-103. Seizing of Dogs. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any police officer or dog warden may seize any dog found at large in
Borough. Such dogs are to be impounded in a licensed kennel.
§ 2-104. Licensed Dogs. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Owners of licensed dogs are to be notified by registered or certified mail,
with return receipt, that the dog is impounded and will be disposed of in five
days if not claimed. Five days after the return receipt has been received,
and the dog has not been claimed, the dog may be sold or destroyed in
accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 2-105. Unlicensed Dogs. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Unlicensed dogs that are seized are to be held in such kennel for 48 hours
and if not claimed may be destroyed in accordance with the 1982 Dog Law.
§ 2-106. Threatening Dogs. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Dogs that, in the opinion of any police officer or dog warden, constitutes
a threat to public health and welfare may be killed by the police or dog
warden.
§ 2-101 FOREWORD § 2-107
FWD:121
§ 2-107. Penalty. [Ord. 480, 12/30/1971; as amended by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The first two times a dog is seized, the owner shall pay a fine of $15 to the
Borough as well as reasonable fees for keeping the animal in a kennel.
Any person allowing an animal to run at large a third time in violation of
this Part 1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 2-107 EMMAUS CODE § 2-107
FWD:122
Part 2
DEFECATION OF ANIMALS
§ 2-201. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. 614, 4/7/1980, §§ 1, 2]
§ 2-202. Penalties. [Ord. 614, 4/7/1980, § 3; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 2 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
1. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any animal or any person having
the care, custody and control of any animal to permit the same to
discharge or deposit any fecal matter upon the property of another
without immediately removing said matter and disposing of it in a
sanitary manner. The term "property of another" shall be interpreted to
include property of the Borough of Emmaus or of any other political
subdivision.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner or possessor of real property to
permit animal fecal matter to accumulate on said property and it shall
be the said owner's or possessor's responsibility to remove such matter
to prevent any such accumulation from becoming a danger to the public
health.
§ 2-201 FOREWORD § 2-202
FWD:123

Part 3
NOISE NUISANCES
§ 2-301. Intent and Purpose. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus, finding that excessive
levels of sound are detrimental to the physical, mental and social well-being
of the people as well as to their comfort, living conditions, general welfare
and safety and being therefor a public health and welfare hazard, hereby
declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control and more
effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of excessive sound
within the Borough.
§ 2-302. Noise Disturbance. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It shall be illegal within the Borough of Emmaus for any person or persons
to own, possess, harbor or control any animal or bird which makes any noise
continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or makes such
noise intermittently for 1/2 hour or more to the disturbance of any person
any time of the day or night regardless of whether the animal or bird is
physically situated in or upon private property, said noise being a nuisance;
provided, that at the time the animal or bird is making such noise no person
is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon
which the animal or bird is situated nor is there any other legitimate cause
which justifiably provoked the animal or bird.
§ 2-303. Exceptions. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
This Part shall not be deemed to prohibit or otherwise declare unlawful
any agricultural operations protected from the nuisance suits by Act No.
1982-133.
§ 2-304. Penalties. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 2-301 FOREWORD § 2-304
FWD:125

Part 4
CATS
§ 2-401. Definitions. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 1]
As used in this Part:
ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICER — That person or persons designated by the
Borough Council to enforce certain provisions of this Part, including all
police officers.
AT LARGE — Off the premises of the owner, and not under the control of the
owner, or a member of his immediate family, either by leash, cord, chain or
otherwise.
CAT — A carnivorous mammal scientifically known as Felis catus, long
domesticated and kept persons as pets.
OWNER — Any person, firm or corporation having a right of property in
any animal which is kept or harbored within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Emmaus, as well as any person, firm or corporation occupying
any premises within the corporate limits of the Borough of Emmaus which
permits any animal to remain, in, on or about its premises.
§ 2-402. Licenses. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 2]
All cats, owned, kept or harbored within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Emmaus shall be licensed annually by the first of July after such cat shall
attain the age of three months at the Emmaus Borough Office and shall
wear a collar and license tag. This provision does not apply to cats whose
owners are non-residents and are temporarily within the Borough, nor to
cats brought into the Borough for breeding, trial or show purposes. The
license fee shall be established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council. In order to obtain the license it shall be necessary for the owner to
complete an application form and produce evidence of a current vaccination
against rabies.
§ 2-403. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 3]
It is unlawful for any owner of any cat to allow or permit such cat to run at
large in the Borough.
§ 2-404. Inspections and Seizures. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 4]
An Animal Control Officer or a member of the police department may go
upon any public premises or enter any public building and go upon any
private premises or enter any private building with the consent of the
owner of such premises, to make inspections for the purpose of determining
compliance with this Part. The Animal Control Officer or member of the
police department may seize and impound any cat, licensed or unlicensed,
found running at large, in violation of this Part, upon the public streets or
highways of the Borough and or private property appurtenant to private
§ 2-401 FOREWORD § 2-404
FWD:127
buildings and structures with the consent of the owner of such property.
Any dangerous, fierce, or vicious cat which can not be safely seized or
impounded may be slain by the Animal Control Officer. A member of the
police department may similarly slay a dangerous, fierce, or vicious cat
which can not be safely seized or impounded only with the approval of the
Police Chief, or his designee.
§ 2-405. Impoundment. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 5]
Cats and injured cats shall be impounded by the Animal Control Officer and
handled by, under regulations procedures and policies established by the
Animal Control Officer.
§ 2-406. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 744, 3/18/1991, § 6]
Any owner of any cat who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part,
upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of no less than $25
nor in excess of $300, and cost of prosecution for such offense.
§ 2-404 EMMAUS CODE § 2-406
FWD:128
Part 5
WATERFOWL
§ 2-501. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. 1037, 8/20/2012]
It shall be unlawful for any person to feed waterfowl on any Borough owned
property.
§ 2-502. Penalties. [Ord. 1037, 8/20/2012]
Any person violating the provisions of this Part 5, § 2-501 shall be fined in
an amount not less than $100 and not more than $300 for each offense.
§ 2-501 FOREWORD § 2-502
FWD:129
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
[See Chapter 15, Part 9]
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 2-502 EMMAUS CODE § 2-502
FWD:130
Part 1
BUILDING CODE
§ 5-101. Election to Administer Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act. [Ord. 981, 5/17/2004, § 1]
The Borough of Emmaus hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999,
35 P.S. §§ 7210.101-7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 5-102. Adoption of Uniform Construction Code. [Ord. 981, 5/17/
2004, § 2]
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 35 Pa.Code, Chapters
401-405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of the Borough of
Emmaus.
§ 5-103. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 981, 5/17/2004,
§ 3]
§ 5-104. Board of Appeals. [Ord. 981, 5/17/2004, § 4]
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Emmaus
Borough Council in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
1. Administration and enforcement of the Code within the Borough of
Emmaus shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as
determined by the Emmaus Borough Council from time to time by
resolution:
A. By the designation of an employee or agent of the Borough of
Emmaus to serve as the municipal code official to act on behalf of
the Borough of Emmaus.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Emmaus.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an
intermunicipal agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of the Act on behalf of the Borough
of Emmaus.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement
of structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and
utility and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 5-101 FOREWORD § 5-104
FWD:131
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 5-105. Savings Clause. [Ord. 981, 5/17/2004, § 5]
§ 5-106. Fees. [Ord. 981, 5/17/2004, § 6]
Fees assessable by the Borough of Emmaus for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this Part and the Code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
1. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Emmaus on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time
to time.
2. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this Part and whose requirements are
less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby amended
to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
3. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Emmaus not governed by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 5-104 EMMAUS CODE § 5-106
FWD:132
Part 2
(RESERVED)
§ 5-201. (Reserved)
§ 5-201 FOREWORD § 5-201
FWD:133

Part 3
(RESERVED)
§ 5-301. (Reserved)
§ 5-301 FOREWORD § 5-301
FWD:135

Part 4
Quality Of Life Ticketing
§ 5-401. General Provisions. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
This part shall be known and may be cited as the "Quality of Life Ticketing
Ordinance of the Borough of Emmaus."
§ 5-402. Purpose. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
The purpose of this part is to provide for a mechanism by means of issuance
of tickets rather than citation to permit a citizen who believes they may
have been in violation to pay the ticket rather than cause the issuance of
a citation and a costly and protracted legal hearing before a judge and
unnecessary appeals. The resolution in this manner is beneficial from a
twofold perspective in that it permits the Borough to maintain and enforce
its laws and permits a citizen so accused to resolve the dispute in a manner
that does not unduly burden the resident by requiring the issuance of a
citation and a court hearing. It also does not deprive the citizen the right to
dispute the ticket and receive the full benefit of procedural and substantive
due process of law.
§ 5-403. Definitions. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal
or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records
of the state, county, or municipality as holding title to the property; or
otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the
estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate
of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Any individuals, corporation, partnership, or any other group
acting as a unit.
§ 5-404. Enforcement. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
1. The provisions of any part so enumerated shall be enforced by Police
Officers and Code Enforcement Officers who are sworn to uphold and
enforce the law of the municipality.
2. The following existing chapters and sections of the Emmaus Borough
Code and Property Maintenance Ordinance are hereby deemed and
ordained to be under the jurisdiction of this process:
A. Chapter 20: Solid Waste, Parts 1 and 2.
B. Chapter 5: Part 6 regarding garbage and rubbish.
C. 2015 International Property Maintenance Code Section 308 and
any succeeding International Property Maintenance Code
regarding rubbish and garbage.
§ 5-401 FOREWORD § 5-404
FWD:137
§ 5-405. Violation Ticket Disposition. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
D. Chapter 5: Part 6 - 2015 regarding property maintenance.
E. 2015 International Property Maintenance Code Chapter 3 and any
succeeding International Property Maintenance Code regarding
property maintenance.
F. Chapter 10: Part 3 regarding grass and weeds.
G. International Property Maintenance Code and any succeeding
International Property Maintenance Code Chapter 3 regarding
grass and weeds.
H. Chapter 10: Part 2 regarding vermin as well as International
Property Maintenance Code Chapter 3.
I. Chapter 5: Part 6, motor vehicles.
J. International Property Maintenance Code Section 302.8 regarding
motor vehicles and any successors amending the section.
K. Chapter 21: Part 3, snow and ice.
3. The Council may change those sections to be covered under this Quality
of Life Ticketing part from time to time through ordinance.
4. Any violation of the provisions of any part as enumerated in this chapter
may be cause for a violation ticket to be issued to the violator.
5. A violation ticket shall be served upon the violator in the following
manner:
A. By handing the ticket or notice of violation to the violator.
B. By handing it to an adult resident of the subject property.
C. By leaving or affixing the notice or violation ticket to the property
where the violation exists.
D. By mailing the notice or violation ticket to the violator's address of
record first-class mail with a certificate of mailing.
6. Each day after the issuance of a ticket that a violation continues or is
permitted to continue constitutes a separate offense for which a
separate fine may be imposed.
7. If the Borough has corrected a violation, the cost thereof shall be
charged to the owner of the property by whatever means is available to
the municipality.
1. A person in receipt of a violation ticket shall have 10 days within which
time to pay the amount of the ticket. In the event the ticket is not paid
within 10 days, such failure to pay shall result in the issuance of a
nontraffic citation for the offense as enumerated on the ticket.
§ 5-404 EMMAUS CODE § 5-405
FWD:138
§ 5-406. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 1159, 9/18/2017]
2. If an individual feels aggrieved and disputes to pay the ticket, and is
unable to resolve the matter with the Enforcement Officer, the
individual shall be issued a nontraffic citation. The individual shall have
the right to appeal the citation to the District Magisterial Justice in
accordance with Pennsylvania law and legal proceedings.
1. For the first offense of the violation of this part within a twelve-month
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $25.
2. For the second offense of the violation of this part within a twelvemonth
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $50.
3. For the third offense of the violation of this part within a twelve-month
period, the tickets shall be issued in the amount of $100.
4. For the fourth offense and all subsequent offenses of the violation of this
part within a twelve-month period, the tickets shall be issued in the
amount of $300.
5. Nonpayment of a ticket shall result in a nontraffic citation in the
amount of up to $1,000 per day.
§ 5-405 FOREWORD § 5-406
FWD:139

Part 5
(RESERVED)
§ 5-501. (Reserved)
§ 5-501 FOREWORD § 5-501
FWD:141

Part 6
INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
§ 5-601. Adoption of the International Property Maintenance Code,
2018 Edition. [Ord. 948, 8/5/2002; as amended by Ord. No. 1177, 6/
18/201812]
The International Property Maintenance Code, 2018 Edition, as the same
may be amended through the effective date of this ordinance,13 is hereby
adopted as the property maintenance code in effect in the Borough of
Emmaus.
§ 5-602. Amendments. [Ord. 948, 8/5/2002, as amended by Ord.
1160, 9/18/2017]
The following amendments shall be made and chapter shall be added to the
code:
A. Chapter 3, § 304, "Exterior Structure":
PM-304.14. Insect Screens. During the period from April to
September, every door, window, or other outside opening required for
ventilation of habitable rooms, food preparation areas, food service
areas, or any areas where products to be included or utilized in food
for human consumption are processed, manufactured, packaged or
stored, shall be supplied with approved tightly fitting screens of not
less than 16 mesh per inch (16 mesh per 25 mm), and every screen
door used for insect control shall have a self-closing device in good
working condition.
Exception: Screen shall not be required where other approved means,
such as air curtains or insect repellent fans, are employed.
B. Chapter 6, § 602, "Heating Facilities":
PM-602.2. Residential Occupancies. Dwellings shall be provided
with heating facilities capable of maintaining a room temperature of
68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms
based on the winter outdoor design temperature for the locality
indicated in Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code. Cooking
appliances shall not be used to provide space heating to meet the
requirements of this section.
Exception: In areas where the average monthly temperature is above
30° F. (negative 1° C.), a minimum temperature of 68° F. (18° C.) shall
be maintained.
12.Editor's Note: This ordinance repeals Ordinance 1025, dated March 19, 2007, but only to
the extent that it adopts the 2006 Edition of the IPMC and all future amendments,
revisions and updates thereto, and accordingly all other parts of Ordinance 1025,
including any amendments thereto, shall remain in force and effect.
13.Editor's Note: "This ordinance" refers to Ord. No. 1177, adopted 6/18/2018.
§ 5-601 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:143
PM-602.3. Heat Supply. Every owner and operator of any building
who rents, leases or lets one or more dwelling units or sleeping units
on terms, either expressed or implied, to furnish heat to the occupants
thereof shall supply heat during the period from September to April to
maintain a temperature of not less than 68° F. (20° C.) in all habitable
rooms, bathrooms and toilet rooms.
Exceptions:
1) When the outdoor temperature is below the winter outdoor design
temperature for the locality, maintenance of the minimum room
temperature shall not be required providing that the heating
system is operating at its full design capacity. The winter outdoor
design temperature for the locality shall be as indicated in
Appendix D of the International Plumbing Code.
2) In areas where the average monthly temperature is above 30° F.
(negative 1° C.) a minimum temperature of 65° F. (18° C.) shall be
maintained.
PM-602.4. Occupiable Work Spaces. Indoor occupiable work
spaces shall be supplied with heat during the period from September
to April to maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.)
during the period spaces are occupied.
Exceptions:
1) Processing, storage and operation areas that require cooling
or special temperature conditions.
2) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
C. Chapter 9, "Inspections and Certificates of Occupancy-Existing
Structures."
PM-901. General. Prior to any change in ownership or tenancy of
any dwelling unit or structure used for rent or lease as a single family
attached, detached, semi-detached or multi-family residential dwelling
unit or structure, or of any non-residential structure, including
individual lease areas thereof, (collectively referred to hereinafter as
the "premises"), the Borough of Emmaus shall inspect the premises
for compliance with safety and fire hazard provisions of the applicable
Borough building, plumbing, property maintenance and fire inspection
codes, (hereafter referred to collectively as the "Borough Codes").
PM-901.1 The inspections required hereby shall be conducted after a
request therefor has been submitted in writing, on forms provided, to
the Borough of Emmaus Zoning Department.
PM-901.2 Inspections shall be conducted under the direction of the
Borough of Emmaus Code Enforcement Officer, a representative of the
Fire Department or those designated by Borough Council.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:144
PM-901.3 The cost of conducting the inspection shall be paid in
advance and shall be the sole responsibility of the current owner
or landlord. The inspection charges shall be consistent with the fee
schedule as set forth in the Fee Schedule of the Borough of Emmaus
as amended from time to time.
PM-902. Points of Inspection.
PM-902.1 Single Family Residences. The following items, in
addition to the provisions of the applicable Borough Codes, will be
checked when inspecting an existing single family residential
structure offered for rent or lease:
a. Smoke detectors must exist on every floor level, including
basement, one in each bedroom, and must be operational.
Where required, detectors must be interconnected and
battery backup, if constructed after 1993.
b. Stair railings must exist on all stairways; this includes both
sides if a stairway is an open stairway.
c. Visible structural damage of any type on chimneys, windows
or any other areas must be corrected.
d. Proper firewalls must exist on attached units between the
units, these one hour rated fire walls must extend from the
ground to the roof, and all through penetrations must be
sealed.
e. If the garage is attached to the house, both the wall and the
ceiling next to living areas must be a minimum 1/2 inch thick
gypsum wall board; also the door leading from the garage to
the living area must be a minimum 1 3/8 inch solid core or
steel, including the doors from the garage to a basement area.
f. There must be a minimum of two wall outlets per room,
preferably located on opposite walls. Floor receptacles are not
permitted.
g. The bathroom must have one receptacle which is not part of
a fixture. If a receptacle exists and is not part of a fixture, it
does not have to be made into a G.F.I. receptacle. However, if
a new receptacle is required, it must be G.F.I.
h. Visible electrical violations will be noted in codes adopted
by the Borough of Emmaus and must be corrected, such as
missing wall cover plates, open junction boxes and open
splices. The status of the service line to the meter will be
checked and must be in acceptable condition.
i. Outside electrical service must not have worn or damaged
service cable. Inside electrical panel will be checked for
proper grounding, visible electrical violations, and have all
circuits labeled, which must be corrected.
j. Dryer venting must be to the exterior of the unit or structure
or by some other approved method.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:145
k. Any visible structural damage or suspected structural damage
will result in the recommendation to consult with a structural
engineer for professional review.
l. Outhouse/cistern - in good condition and sealed.
m. Closet lights which are less than 12 inches from an overhead
shelf must either be disconnected or replaced with a surface
mounted or recessed incandescent fixture with a completely
enclosed lamp, or a fluorescent fixture or bulb.
n. An oil burner shut-off switch will be required at the top of the
basement steps or, on single level dwellings, outside the room
containing the oil burner unit.
o. A minimum 60 amp electrical service will be required.
p. Chimney venting must be provided for high efficiency heaters
in unlined chimneys.
q. Street address must be properly displayed, and legible, on
exterior of house and be visible from the street, with a
minimum of four-inch high letters.
r. Windows in sleeping areas must be operational.
PM-902.2 Multi-Family Units.
PM-902.2.1 The following items, in addition to the provisions of
the applicable Borough Codes, will be checked when inspecting an
existing multi-family unit for lease:
a. Smoke detectors will be required on all levels and one in each
bedroom. All smoke detectors will be checked for operation,
and where required, must be interconnected and battery
backup if built after 1993.
b. Stair railings must exist on all stairways; this includes both
sides if stairway is an open stairway.
c. Visible structural damage on chimneys, windows, or any other
areas must be corrected; this includes replacement of broken
or cracked windows.
d. Proper firewalls must exist on attached units between the
units, extending from the ground to the roof. All through
penetrations must be sealed.
e. There must be a minimum of two wall outlets per room,
preferably located on opposite walls. Floor receptacles are not
permitted.
f. Any bathroom receptacles that are part of a fixture must
be disconnected, and at least one GFI receptacle must be
provided.
g. Visible electrical violations will be required to be corrected,
such as missing wall cover plates, open junction boxes, open
splices, open breaker slots, and open splices.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:146
h. There must be tenant access to the electrical panel box. All
boxes must be labeled.
i. Dryer venting must be to the exterior of the structure or other
approved method.
j. Windows in sleeping areas must be operational.
k. A minimum sixty-watt incandescent light bulb must be
provided in hallways and stairs for each 200 square feet of
floor area in the egress portion of the structure.
l.. Street address or unit address must be properly displayed
and legible, on exterior of unit with a minimum four-inch high
numerals or letters.
Bathrooms must have an operational window and/or a
mechanical exhaust fan that is vented to the outside of the
structure.
n. Hallways and stairs must be free of all obstructions.
o. All emergency lights and exits must be operable.
p. All fire rated doors and assemblies must be maintained as per
Borough Codes. This includes the doorframes, door locks, selfclosing
devices, and panic hardware.
q. Fire extinguishers must be charged and accessible.
r. If the garage is attached to the structure, both the wall and
the ceiling next to living areas must be a minimum of 1/
2 inch thick gypsum wallboard; also the door leading from
the garage to the living area must be a minimum 1 3/8 inch
solid core or steel, including the doors from the garage to a
basement area.
PM-902.2 In addition to those items listed in PM-902.2.1, the
following items, in addition to the provisions of the applicable Borough
Codes, will be required to be corrected when a multi-family structure
is offered for sale.
a. Proper firewalls must extend from the ground to the roof,
including attic areas.
b. Exterior of building must be free of rubbish, and there may be
no obstruction of exterior stairs.
c. Door locks must be per codes, and operational.
d. All doors must swing in the direction of egress when serving
an occupant load of more than 50 persons. Doors must open
easily and may not be wedged opened.
e. Doors must have proper hardware, and passageways must be
free of obstructions.
f. All emergency lights and exits must be operable. All Fire
alarm devices and associated equipment must be operable.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:147
g. All sprinkler systems must be up to date on the required
inspections for fire suppression systems.
h. Where required by code, doors must have operational selfclosures,
and there may not be any openings in ceilings and
walls.
i. Elevator doors must be tight and operational and must have a
Pennsylvania certificate of operation on file.
j. All storage areas must be neat, and any storage area of
flammable liquid must be per code.
k. All boiler, heating and mechanical rooms must be clean with
proper fire separation and adequate ventilation.
l. Fire extinguishers must be properly inspected, there must be
the proper amount, size and number of extinguishers. They
must be accessible.
PM-902.3 Commercial and/or Industrial Space. For all
commercial and/or industrial establishments offered for sale or lease,
an inspection is required by the Building and/or Fire Inspector, or
Fire Chief. This inspection will require modifications if there are code
violations or particular items that need to be addressed pertaining to
the specific use proposed for the structure. No such structure or space
may be used or occupied for business unless and until a certificate of
occupancy has been issued.
PM-903. Abatement of Violations.
1. In the event that violations of the Borough Code exist in or upon
the premises, such violations shall be addressed by either:
a. The current owner or landowner abating the violations prior
to the transfer of ownership of the premises or prior to the
tenant occupying the premises; or
b. The new owner or new tenant executing, and notarizing, a
statement to the effect that (1) the extent of the violations
have been made known to such new owner or tenant; and
(2) that such new owner or tenant shall begin to abate the
violations within 30 days of taking possession.
2. The form of statement shall be prescribed by the Borough of
Emmaus and shall have attached thereto the violations noted
during the Borough's inspection.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:148
PM-904. Certificate of Occupancy. Prior to the new owner or tenant
occupying the premises, or contemporaneously therewith, such new
owner or tenant shall secure from the Borough a certificate of use
and occupancy. A certificate of use and occupancy shall not be issued
unless the inspection required by this section has been completed
and all violations are abated pursuant to the provision of § PM-903.
A temporary certificate of use and occupancy may be issued in the
discretion of the Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Department
representative, or the Borough Council's designee, when a tenant or
new owner takes possession of the premises; so long as corrections or
modifications are commenced and pursued with reasonable diligence
and within the time limits specified on the face of the temporary
certificate of use and occupancy.
PM-905. No Warranty. By conducting the inspection pursuant to
this section, the Borough of Emmaus does not warrant or guarantee
the complete safety or suitability of the dwelling, unit or structure,
purchased or leased. In no event shall the Borough be liable for any
damages, either direct, indirect, incidental or consequential as a result
of any inspection or failure to inspect or other matter related to the
implementation or enforcement of this Code or any part thereof. The
Borough of Emmaus specifically makes no guarantees or warranties of
any kind, express or implied, including the warranty of habitability or
suitability for a particular purpose.
PM-906. Prohibited Furniture and Appliances for Outdoor Use.
1. Prohibited Furniture and Appliances. Interior-type furniture and
appliances which would be adversely affected by the elements
and/or susceptible to infestation by insects, rats, or other vermin
are prohibited from being placed outside a structure. Such
prohibited furniture and appliances shall include, but shall not be
limited to, upholstered couches and chairs or other fabric-covered
articles not designed or intended for exterior use, as well as any
refrigerator, stove, freezer, or other appliance not manufactured
to be utilized outdoors.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:149
2. Removal of Abandoned or Prohibited Furniture or Appliances.
When the Code Official or his designee determines that prohibited
or abandoned furniture or appliances are located in an exterior
property area, the Code Official or his designee shall cause the
landowner, the owner of the furniture, or other reasonable person
to be notified. If the prohibited or abandoned furniture or
appliance is not removed within the time period set forth in
such notice, the Borough may cause the abandoned or prohibited
furniture or appliance to be removed and the owner of the
furniture or appliance or the landowner to be billed for the cost
thereof in accordance with the provisions of this Code. If the
cost of removal is not paid within 15 days, the Borough may
impose a lien for the costs of said removal in accordance with
applicable provisions of this Code. Further, the Code Official or
his designee is hereby empowered and authorized to collect the
costs of removal by filing a civil action against the owner of
the real estate or the owner of the furniture or appliance or a
reasonable person. Any violation of this section shall be subject
to the penalties in Chapter 5, Part 7, § 5-701, Violations and
Penalties, of the Emmaus Borough Code.
D. Chapter 10, "Abandoned Real Property and Blighted Property
Registration." [Added by Ord. 1152, 1/16/2017]
PM-1001. Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and intent of the
Borough to establish a process to address the deterioration and blight
of Borough neighborhoods caused by an increasing amount of
abandoned, blighted, foreclosed or distressed real property located
within the Borough, and to identify, regulate, limit, and reduce the
number of abandoned or blighted properties located within the
Borough. It is the Borough's intent to establish a registration and
inspection program as a mechanism to protect neighborhoods from
becoming blighted due to the lack of adequate maintenance and
security of abandoned and foreclosed properties.
PM-1002. Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases,
when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them
in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
ABANDONED REAL PROPERTY — Any real property located in the
Borough, whether vacant or occupied, for which the owner is in
default on a mortgage encumbering the property, has had a pending
legal action or formal notice filed against it by the lender holding the
mortgage on the property, is subject to an ongoing foreclosure action
by the lender, is subject to an application for a tax deed or pending
tax assessors lien sale, and/or has been transferred to the lender
under a deed in lieu of foreclosure. The designation of a property as
"abandoned" shall remain in place until such time as:
(1) The foreclosure action has been dismissed; or
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:150
(2) Any default on the mortgage has been cured.
ACCESSIBLE PROPERTY/STRUCTURE — A property that is accessible
through a compromised/breached gate, fence, wall, etc., or a structure
that is unsecured and/or breached in such a way as to allow access to
the interior space by unauthorized persons.
ADOPTED CODES — Means, but is not limited to, the Borough's
Zoning Ordinance, Property Maintenance Code, Uniform Construction
Code ("UCC"), and/or any other applicable Borough ordinance,
regulation or resolution regulating the maintenance and upkeep of
properties, and including, with respect to all, any amendments or
successor ordinances, editions or resolutions thereto.
BLIGHTED PROPERTY —
1. A property that has broken, severely damaged or
unmaintained windows, doors, gutters, downspouts, walls,
roofs, accessory structures, pools, sheds, or garages which
create hazardous conditions and encourage trespassing,
including accessible properties/structures; or
2. Properties whose maintenance, including but not limited to
maintenance/compliance with the maintenance/compliance
with the International Property Maintenance Code or any
successor codes or editions, is not in conformance with the
maintenance of other neighboring properties, causing a
decrease in value of the neighboring properties; or
3. Properties that endanger the public's health, safety, or welfare
because the properties or improvements therein are
dilapidated, deteriorated, or violate minimum health and
safety standards or lack maintenance as required by the
adopted codes.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — Any law enforcement official, Zoning
Officer, Code Enforcement Officer, Fire Inspector, Building Inspector,
Health Officer, or other person authorized by the Borough or
applicable law to enforce the adopted codes.
OWNER — Any person, legal entity or other party having any
ownership interest, whether legal or equitable, in real property. This
term shall also apply to any person, legal entity or agent responsible
for the construction, maintenance or operation of the property
involved.
PROPERTY MANAGEMENT COMPANY — A local property manager,
local property maintenance company or similar local entity
responsible for the maintenance of abandoned real property, including
but not limited to an adult individual designated by the owner of a
regulated rental unit under this section.
VACANT — Any building or structure that is not legally occupied.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:151
PM-1003. Applicability. The provision of this section shall be
considered cumulative and shall not supersede or be limited by any
other law or provision for same, but rather be an additional remedy
available to the Borough and beyond any other state, county, or local
provisions for same.
PM-1004. Establishment of a Registry. The Borough or its designee
shall establish a registry cataloging each abandoned real property
and blighted property within the Borough, containing the information
required by this section.
PM-1005. Registration of Abandoned Real Property and
Blighted Property.
a) Upon default by the mortgagor of any mortgage encumbering real
property located within the Borough, the mortgagee who holds a
mortgage on the real property shall perform an inspection of the
property to determine vacancy or occupancy. The mortgagee shall,
within 10 days of the inspection, register the property with the
Borough, or its designee, on forms provided by the Borough, and
indicate whether the property is vacant or occupied. A separate
registration is required for each property, whether it is found to be
vacant or occupied.
b) If the property is occupied but the owner remains in default of the
mortgage, the property shall be inspected by the mortgagee or its
designee on a monthly basis until the earlier of (1) the mortgagor
or other party remedies the default, or (2) the property is found to
be vacant or shows evidence of vacancy, at which time the property
shall be deemed to be abandoned, and the mortgagee shall, within
10 days of the inspection revealing the property to be vacant,
update the property registration provided by the Borough to note
a vacant status of the property. Such update shall be on forms
provided by the Borough.
c) Real property that was vacated prior to the enactment of this
section shall be registered with the Borough within 30 days after
enactment of this section as a vacant property and be subject to
the provisions of this section.
d) Registration pursuant to this section shall contain the name of
the owner and mortgagee, the direct mailing address (post office
boxes are not permitted) of the owner (if known) and mortgagee,
a direct contact name and telephone number for both parties,
facsimile number and e-mail address for both parties, the Lehigh
County tax identification number of the property, and the name
and twenty-four-hour contact phone number of the property
management company responsible for the security and
maintenance of the property.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:152
e) If the owner or mortgagee is not a full-time resident of the Borough
or does not live or maintain an office within a thirty-mile radius
of Borough Hall, then the owner or mortgagee shall designate a
property maintenance company to serve as manager. The property
management company shall be located within a thirty-mile radius
of the Borough Hall. If the owner or mortgagee is a corporation,
limited liability company or other entity that is not a partnership,
an independent property management company shall be appointed
unless an officer of the corporation, limited liability company or
other nonpartnership entity is appointed to manage the property
and such officer lives within a thirty-mile radius of the Borough
Hall. If the owner or mortgagee is a partnership of any type, a
property maintenance company shall be required if a partner that
is an adult individual does not reside within a thirty-mile radius of
the Borough Hall. Said partner shall perform the same function as
a property management company. If the owner or mortgagee is a
trust or an estate, an independent property management company
shall be appointed unless a fiduciary of the trust or estate is
appointed to manage the property and such fiduciary lives within a
thirty-mile radius of the Borough Hall. The property management
company shall be the agent of the owner and shall be authorized
to accept service of process and receiving of notices and demands
on behalf of the owner or mortgagee, as well as for performing the
obligations of the owner or mortgagee, as applicable, under this
section.
f) In addition to the required designated agent of a property
management company under PM-1005(e) above, an owner may
designate a property management company to serve all of the
same purposes of the owner by registering the name of the
property management company with the Borough. If a property
management company is designated by the owner, then the
Borough is not required to provide separate notice to the owner.
g) A nonrefundable annual registration fee, as enumerated in the
Borough Fee Schedule, shall accompany the registration form.
h) All registration fees must be paid directly from the mortgagee,
servicer, trustee, or owner. Third-party registration fees are not
allowed without the consent of the Borough of Emmaus and/or its
authorized designee.
i) This section shall also apply to properties that have been the
subject of a foreclosure sale where the title was transferred to the
beneficiary/holder of a mortgage involved in the foreclosure and
any properties transferred under a deed in lieu of foreclosure/sale.
j) Properties subject to this section shall remain under the annual
registration requirement, and the inspection, security and
maintenance standards of this section, as long as they remain
classified as abandoned real property and/or blighted property
pursuant to the terms of this section.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:153
k) Any person or legal entity that has registered a property under this
section must report any change of information contained in the
registration within 10 days of the change.
l) Failure of the mortgagee and/or owner to properly register or to
modify the registration form from time to time to reflect a change
of circumstances as required by this section is a violation of the
section and shall be subject to enforcement.
m) Pursuant to any administrative or judicial finding and
determination that any property is in violation of this section,
the Borough is authorized to take the necessary action to ensure
compliance with the adopted codes and place a lien on the
property for the cost of the work performed to benefit the property
and bring it into compliance.
n) The legal name, mailing address, e-mail address, daytime physical
address (not a post office box), and daytime and evening telephone
number(s) of a property management company who is designated
as the manager shall be provided in writing by the owner or
mortgagee, as applicable, to the Borough of Emmaus, and such
information shall be kept current and updated within 10 business
days after it changes.
o) If a mortgagee on a property is in default or the property has been
declared and/or certified blighted, and the property has become
vacant, a property management company shall be designated by
the owner or mortgagee to perform the work necessary to bring
the property into compliance with the adopted codes, and the
property manager must perform regular inspections to verify
compliance with the requirements of this section, and any other
applicable laws.
p) Blighted property shall be subject to the registration and other
requirements of this section.
PM-1006. Maintenance Requirements.
a) Abandoned real properties and blighted properties shall be
maintained in a condition compliant with the adopted codes.
b) Abandoned real properties and blighted properties shall be kept
free of weeds, snow, ice, overgrown brush, dead vegetables, trash,
junk, debris, building materials, any accumulation of newspapers,
circulars, flyers, notices, except those required by federal, state
or local law, discarded personal items, including, but not limited
to, furniture, clothing, large and small appliances, inoperable
vehicles, printed material or any other items that give the
appearance that the property is vacated.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:154
c) Abandoned real properties and blighted properties shall be kept
free of (i) chipped or peeling paint and (ii) deteriorated/broken
windows, walls, foundations and roofs, and shall comply with the
regulations set forth in the adopted codes. No property shall be
permitted to be in a condition that would make such property an
accessible property/structure under this section.
d) The exterior of abandoned real properties and blighted properties
shall be maintained free of graffiti or similar markings by removal
or painting over with an exterior grade paint that matches the
color of the balance of the exterior of the structure constructed
on the property. All properties shall meet the requirements of
Ordinance No. 1121.
e) Front, side, and rear yards, including landscaping and fencing,
shall be maintained in accordance with the adopted codes.
f) Yard maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, regular
maintenance of grass, trees, ground covers, brush, shrubs, hedges
or similar plantings, decorative rock or bark or artificial turf/
sod designed specifically for residential installation. Acceptable
maintenance of yards and/or landscape shall not include allowance
of weeds, gravel, and/or broken concrete, asphalt or similar
material.
g) Required maintenance shall include, but not be limited to, regular
watering, irrigation, cutting and mowing of required ground cover
or landscape and lawful removal of all trimmings, as well as snow
removal from public sidewalks.
h) Pools and spas shall be maintained so that the water remains free
and clear of pollutants and debris. The pools and spas shall comply
with the regulations set forth in the adopted codes.
i) Sheds, garages, outbuildings and other nonprimary structures
shall be maintained in accordance with the adopted codes, and
such maintenance obligation shall include, but not be limited to,
keeping the structure free of pollutants, debris, clutter and
hazards to the public health and safety, keeping the structure
secure, free from peeling or chipping paint and/or deteriorated
windows, doors, walls, foundations and roofs.
j) In addition to the above, the property and all structures thereon
are required to be maintained in accordance with all adopted
codes of the Borough.
PM-1007. Security Requirements.
a) Abandoned real properties and blighted properties shall be
maintained in a secure manner so as not to be accessible
properties/structures pursuant to this section.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:155
b) A "secure manner" shall include, but not be limited to, the closure
and locking of windows, doors, gates and other openings of such
size that may allow human children or adults, felines, rodents,
canines or other animals to access the interior of the property
or structure. Broken windows, doors, gates and other openings
of such size that may allow human children or adults, felines,
rodents, canines or other animals to access the interior of the
property or structure must be repaired. Broken windows shall be
secured by reglazing of the window.
c) In addition to the above, the property is required to be secured in
accordance with all adopted codes of the Borough.
PM-1008. Inspections for Violations. Nothing in this section shall
preclude the Borough from independently ordering any person
causing a public nuisance to abate the public nuisance, including
nuisances relating to abandoned real property or blighted property.
In the event that the person fails to abate the public nuisance, the
Borough shall have the authority to enter upon the property and abate
the public nuisance or to institute a suit or suits in law or in equity to
restrain or prevent violation of this section, including but not limited
to seeking a preliminary injunction, or by seeking other legal relief
from a court of competent jurisdiction. The Borough shall be entitled
to recover the expenses of abatement and all reasonable attorney's
and expert witness fees.
PM-1009. Inspections for Violations. Adherence to this section
does not relieve any person, legal entity or agent from any other
obligations set forth in any adopted codes which may apply to the
property. Properties that remain abandoned and/or blighted for one
year or more may be inspected annually by the Borough. Inspections
may occur more frequently depending on complaints, necessity, and/or
violations of the adopted codes. Inspection fees shall be in accordance
to the fee schedule.
PM-1010. Additional Authority.
a) If the Enforcement Officer has reason to believe that an abandoned
real property or a blighted property is posing a threat to the public
health, safety and welfare, the Borough may secure the property
at the expense of the mortgagee and/or owner, and a municipal
claim or lien for costs associated with the security activity shall
be filed and a municipal citation filed for the violations, as soon as
practicable, to address the conditions of the property.
b) The Borough or Magisterial District Judge shall have the authority
to require the mortgagee and/or owner of record of any property
affected by this section to implement additional maintenance and/
or security measures, including, but not limited to, securing any
and all doors, windows or other openings, employment of an onsite
security guard or other measures as may be reasonably
required to help prevent further decline of the property.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:156
c) If there is a finding that the condition of the property is posing a
threat to the public health, safety and welfare, then the Borough
may abate the violations. The owner and/or mortgagee shall be
charged with the cost of the abatement.
d) If the mortgagee or owner does not reimburse the Borough for
the cost of securing the property, or of any abatement directed
by the Borough or Magisterial District Judge, within 30 days of
the Borough sending the mortgagee or owner the invoice, then
the Borough may lien the property with such cost, along with an
administrative fee of up to 20% of the expenses incurred by the
Borough.
PM-1011. Opposing, Obstructing Enforcement Officer; Penalty.
It shall be unlawful to oppose, obstruct, fail to follow the instructions
of or resist any enforcement officer or any person authorized by the
enforcement officer in the discharge of duties as provided in this
section. Each such offense shall be punishable as provided in the
adopted codes or by a court of competent jurisdiction.
PM-1012. Immunity of Enforcement Officer. Any enforcement
officer or any person authorized by the Borough to enforce this section
shall be immune from prosecution, civil or criminal, for reasonable,
good faith entry upon real property while in the discharge of duties
imposed by this section.
PM-1013. Penalties.
a) Any person who shall violate the provisions of this section may
be cited and fined as provided in the applicable sections of the
Pennsylvania Borough Code, as amended, including without
limitation Sections 32A04 and 3321,14 relating to enforcement
of the Property Maintenance Code and fines and penalties,
respectively.
b) After the owner or mortgagee is given notice of the amount of the
registration fee due, and the owner or mortgagee fails to pay the
amount due, said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing the
Borough, and the Borough may commence a civil action to collect
unpaid debt.
c) After the owner or mortgagee is given notice of the amount of the
registration fee due, and the owner or mortgagee fails to pay the
amount due, said amount shall constitute a debt due and owing to
the Borough, and shall constitute a lien.
14.Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 32A04 and 3321, respectively.
§ 5-602 FOREWORD § 5-602
FWD:157
d) The failure or refusal for any reason of any owner or mortgagee,
or agent of an owner or mortgagee acting on behalf of the owner
or mortgagee, to register an abandoned property and/or blighted
property or to pay any fees required to be paid pursuant to the
provisions of this section, within 30 days after they become due,
shall constitute a summary criminal violation punishable upon
conviction thereof by a fine in an amount not to exceed the sum
of $1,000 for each violation hereof. Fines shall not be subject to
suspension or reduction for any reason. Each day or any portion
thereof in which a violation is found to exist shall be considered
a separate offense under this section. Likewise, each subsection
of this section which is found to be violated shall be considered a
separate offense.
e) In addition to or in lieu of an enforcement action before a
Magisterial District Judge or imposition of penalties, the Borough
may enforce this section as an equity action in the Lehigh County
Court of Common Pleas, and nothing contained herein shall be
construed to limit the Borough's remedies as authorized by law for
the enforcement of this section.
§ 5-602 EMMAUS CODE § 5-602
FWD:158
Part 7
VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES
§ 5-701. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 980, 4/5/2004]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
fails to comply with any of the requirements of any of the codes adopted
under this Part, or who shall erect, construct, alter, or repair a building
or structure in violation of the approved plan or directive of the Code
Enforcement Officer or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 or suffer imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both.
Each day that violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 5-701 FOREWORD § 5-701
FWD:159
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 5-701 EMMAUS CODE § 5-701
FWD:160
Part 1
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 6-101. Disorderly Conduct Prohibited. [Ord. 234, 11/16/1936; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Disorderly conduct, as defined in the Pa. Crime Code of 1972 [18 CP S.A.
§ 5503], is hereby prohibited within the Borough. A person is guilty of
disorderly conduct if they:
§ 6-102. Penalty for Disorderly Conduct. [Ord. 234, 11/16/1936; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and/or to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
1. Engage in fighting or in threatening, violent or tumultuous behavior;
2. Make unreasonable noise;
3. Use obscene language, or makes an obscene gesture; or
4. Create a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act which
serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
Provided: as used in this section, the word public means affecting or
likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial
group has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys and
sidewalks, transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses,
places of business or amusement, any neighborhood, or any premises
which are open to the public.
§ 6-101 FOREWORD § 6-102
FWD:161

Part 2
CROSSING OF POLICE LINES
§ 6-201. Definition. [Ord. 503, 12/26/1973, § 1]
A "police line" is defined as the boundary of an area which has been
temporarily isolated or set apart by ropes, barricades, or other reasonable
methods in the pursuance of official duties by the Mayor, Chief of Police,
Fire Chief, Fire Police Captain, Building Official, or such other official as
Borough Council may designate, and which boundary or line is plainly
marked by a sign bearing the inscription "Police Line" - "Do Not Cross."
§ 6-202. Unlawful to Cross "Police Line". [Ord. 503, 12/26/1973, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to cross a "police line" without the
express permission of the designated authority of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 6-203. Penalties. [Ord. 503, 12/26/1973, § 3; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 6-201 FOREWORD § 6-203
FWD:163

Part 3
ALARMS AND AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICES
§ 6-301. Definitions. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 1; as amended by Ord.
947, 7/1/2002]
As herein used, the following terms shall have the following meanings:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any bell, horn, siren or other device which is attached
to the interior or exterior of a building and emits a warning signal audible
outside the building which is designed to attract attention when activated
by a criminal act, fire or other emergency requiring police or fire
department to respond.
AUTOMATIC PROTECTION DEVICE — An electronically operated
instrument composed of sensory apparatus and related hardware which
automatically transmits a prerecorded voice alarm or other signal over
regular telephone lines, cellular connections, radio or other communication
medium by direct or indirect connection to the Lehigh County
Communication Center upon receipt of a stimulus from a sensory apparatus
that has detected a physical force or condition inherently characteristic of
an intrusion, fire or other emergency.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
FALSE ALARM/FALSE DISPATCH — Any alarm or other signal activated
by an automatic protection device and given to the Lehigh County
Communication Center, or any audible alarm, to which police and/or fire
department respond and which is not the result of a burglary, robbery, fire
or similar type of emergency.
§ 6-302. Registration of Existing Alarm. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 947, 7/1/2002]
Within 90 days from the date of passage of this Part, every owner and
lessee of an alarm in the Borough shall register the existence of said alarm
with the Borough. Burglar alarms shall be registered with the Borough of
Emmaus Police Department and fire alarms shall be registered with the
Borough of Emmaus Fire Department, and the following information shall
be furnished:
1. The name, residence address, and telephone number of the property
owner, and, if different from the owner, the lessee of the alarm.
2. The address in the Borough where the alarm is installed.
3. The name, address and telephone number of at least one other person
other than the owner or lessee of the alarm who is authorized to
respond to and have authority and means to enter the building in which
the alarm is installed.
4. The name, address and telephone number of anyone who monitors the
alarm.
§ 6-301 FOREWORD § 6-302
FWD:165
§ 6-303. Registration of New Alarm. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 3]
Within 10 days of any new installation of an audible alarm in the Borough,
the owner and lessee of said audible alarm shall register the same with the
Borough. The Police Department and Fire Department shall be furnished
with such information as that required by § 6-302 of this Part.
§ 6-304. Alarm Operation Requirements. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 947, 7/1/2002]
The following requirements shall be placed on all alarms:
§ 6-305. Alarm Service. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 5]
Each installer who sells or leases an automatic protection device in the
Borough after the effective date of this Part, shall furnish the owner or
lessee: operating instructions, a circuit diagram, maintenance manual, and
written information as to how service may be obtained, including the
telephone number of the installer or agent responsible for service.
§ 6-306. Disconnection of Alarms. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 6]
Messages evidencing failure to comply with the operational requirements
set forth in any section of this Part are received through the Lehigh County
Communication Center. These automatic protection devices place burdens
on the Borough of Emmaus Fire Department and Police Department. In as
All information furnished pursuant to these sections shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the sole use of the Borough of Emmaus
Police Department and Borough of Emmaus Fire Department.
1. No more than three calls shall be made to the Lehigh County
Communication Center as a result of a single activation of an automatic
protection device.
2. The sensory mechanism used in conjunction with an automatic
protection device must be adjusted to suppress false indications of
intrusion or other emergencies, so that the device will not be actuated
by impulses due to fleeting pressure changes in water pipes, short
flashes of light, the rattling or vibrating of doors and windows,
vibrations to the premises caused by the passing of vehicles, cigarette
or non-fire emergency related smoke, certain whether extremes, or any
other similar force not related to emergencies requiring protection.
3. All components comprising an automatic protection devise must be
maintained by the owner or lessee in good repair to assure maximum
reliability of operation.
4. All existing audible alarms, within 90 days after the passage of this Part,
as well as all future audible alarm installations, shall be equipped with a
timing mechanism that will automatically disengage the audible alarm
or signal given off thereby after 15 minutes.
§ 6-302 EMMAUS CODE § 6-306
FWD:166
much as all fire alarms are tied into the Borough system, any automatic
protection devices not in compliance with the requirements of this Part may
not be disconnected. However, the Chief of Police is hereby granted the
authorization to demand that the owner or lessee, or his representative, of
any burglar alarm not in compliance with this Part disconnect said device
until such time as the device has been made to comply with the operational
requirements of this Part.
The Chief of Police and the Fire Chief of the Borough shall each possess
the power to disconnect false alarms within the scope of their jurisdiction.
These waivers shall be limited to incidences of extreme weather conditions
or malfunctions in the operation of the electric system of the Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company or other isolated events which, in the opinion of
the Chief of Police or the Fire Chief warrant an exemption.
§ 6-307. Penalties for False Alarm. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988, § 7]
Response to alarms given off by audible alarms and automatic protection
devices involve the time of and danger to members of the Borough Police
Department and Fire Department, and false alarms are therefore to be
discouraged. If more than three false alarms are given from any such alarms
in a given twelve-month period, the property owner, upon conviction, shall
be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine in
accordance with the following:
§ 6-308. Penalty for Failure to Register Alarm. [Ord. 698, 7/5/1988;
as added by Ord. 947, 7/1/2002]
Every owner and/or lessee of an audible alarm who fails to register said
alarm pursuant to § 6-302, as hereinabove mandated, shall be subject to a
$25 fine.
1. For the 1st offense: $50.
2. For the 2nd offense: $100.
3. For the 3rd offense: $200.
4. For the 4th offense and thereafter: $300.
§ 6-306 FOREWORD § 6-308
FWD:167

Part 4
LOITERING
§ 6-401. Definitions. [Ord. 733, 4/2/1990, § 1]
As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially
one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing,
or walking about aimlessly, and shall also include the colloquial expression
"hanging around."
§ 6-402. Certain Types of Loitering Prohibited. [Ord. 733, 4/2/1990,
§ 2]
§ 6-403. Request to Leave. [Ord. 733, 4/2/1990, § 3]
Whenever the presence of any person in any public place is causing any
of the conditions enumerated in § 6-402, any police officer may order that
person to leave that place. Any person who shall refuse to leave after being
ordered to do so by a police officer shall be guilty of a violation of this
section.
§ 6-404. Penalty. [Ord. 733, 4/2/1990, § 4]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this Part shall be
fined not less than $5 or more than $200 for each offense, and a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which a
violation occurs or continues.
1. No person shall loiter in a public place in such manner as to:
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
B. Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the
comfort and repose of any person;
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles;
D. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
place.
2. This section shall include the making of unsolicited remarks of an
offensive, disgusting, or insulting nature or which are calculated to
annoy or disturb the person to, or in whose hearing, they are made.
§ 6-401 FOREWORD § 6-404
FWD:169

Part 5
GRAFFITI
§ 6-501. Title; Scope. [Ord. 1121, 3/16/2015]
This Part 5 shall be known as the "Graffiti Ordinance of the Borough of
Emmaus" and shall apply to all graffiti occurring within the jurisdictional
limits of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 6-502. Definitions. [Ord. 1121, 3/16/2015]
1. The following words, terms or phrases, when used in Part 5 of this
chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section.
2. Words and phrases, when used in Part 5, except for sections or chapters
to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A., as
amended.
AGENT — Any person, persons, agency, or organization that shall serve
as a representative and/or acts on behalf of any property owner or
occupant of a premises.
AUTHORIZED PERSON — A police officer, community service officer,
or Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Emmaus.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus.
BROAD-TIPPED INDELIBLE MARKER — Any felt-tipped marker or
similar implement which contains fluid which is not water-soluble and
which has a flat or angled writing surface 1/2 inch or greater.
CONSENT — Voluntary agreement by a person.
GRAFFITI —
Any inscription, work, symbol, figure, marking or design, including,
but not limited to, tags, throw-ups and pieces, that is marked,
etched, scrawled, stained, drawn or painted and stuck on or
adhered to any surface on public or private property without the
express permission of the owner or owner's agent of such property,
including, but not limited to, any wall, underpass, overpass, trestle,
tree, sign, pole, playground apparatus, utility box, building,
structure, fixture, or other improvements, whether permanent or
temporary, regardless of the content or nature of the material that
has been applied, and which is visible from any public property or
the public right-of-way, or from any private property rather than
the property on which the graffiti exists.
A.
Graffiti shall not be construed to apply to easily removable chalk
markings on the public sidewalks and streets used in connection
with traditional children's play.
B.
§ 6-501 FOREWORD § 6-502
FWD:171
§ 6-503. Prohibitions. [Ord. 1121, 3/16/2015]
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Any implement capable of marking a surface
to create graffiti, including, but not limited to, aerosol or pressurized
paint containers, markers, gum labels, paint brushes or etching tools,
capable of scarring glass, metal, concrete, or wood.
GUM LABELS — Any material such as, but not limited to, decals,
stickers, posters or labels which contain a substance commonly known
as "adhesive" or "glue," which cannot be removed from the surface in
an intact condition and with minimal effort.
MARKER — Any indelible or permanent marker or similar implement
with a point, brush, applicator or other writing surface which contains
ink that is not water-soluble.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
NOTICE — A letter delivered to the owner of the property or placed
securely on the front door or other highly visible area of a property
which is defaced with graffiti. Said letter or sticker shall contain a
statement that the graffiti must be removed within 30 days after the
letter has been posted on the property or received by the owner of the
property.
OCCUPANT — Any person or persons who occupy, rent, or own a
property and conduct business or reside at that property for any
amount of time.
OWNER — Any and all persons with legal and/or equitable title to real
property in the Borough.
PAINT STICK or GRAFFITI STICK — Any device containing a solid form
of paint, chalk, wax, epoxy, or other similar substance capable of being
applied to a surface by pressure and, upon application, leaving a visible
mark and that is not water-soluble.
PERSON — Includes any individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, company, or organization of any kind.
PIECES — Forms of graffiti represented by detailed, multicolored
murals, ranging in size.
PROPERTY — Includes any real estate, including improvements
thereon; and tangible personal property, including, but not limited to,
newsboxes, newsstands, utility poles, public telephones, tree planters,
and other items of street furniture, and vehicles located thereon.
TAGS — A form of graffiti represented by stylized signatures of a
writer's chosen name.
THROW-UPS — A form of graffiti represented by large names or figures
written in a bubble style, often with an outline written in a different
color than the interior of the letters.
§ 6-502 EMMAUS CODE § 6-503
FWD:172
1. No person owning or occupying any property within the Borough of
Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, shall permit any graffiti to
accumulate or otherwise remain on any property so as to be visible to
the public.
2. Upon discovery of graffiti, any authorized person shall issue written
notice to the owner, occupant, or other responsible agent of any
premises whereon graffiti is present in violation of the provisions of this
Part, directing and requiring such person to remove such graffiti. In the
event that graffiti is not removed within 30 days from the date of the
mailing of this first notice, a second notice shall be issued. The second
notice shall again require and direct the responsible party to remove
such graffiti. The second notice shall also request consent to allow the
Borough to enter upon the property for purposes of graffiti removal at
the owner's expense, if the owner fails to remove the graffiti. Failure to
remove graffiti within 30 days of mailing of the second notice shall
constitute a violation of this Part.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to commit any overt act resulting in
or attempting to result in application of graffiti.
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to intentionally, maliciously, or
wantonly expose or tend to expose another to risk of violence, contempt
or hatred on the basis of race, color, creed, religion, or sexual
orientation by the use of what is commonly known as "graffiti."
5. It shall be unlawful for any parent, legal guardian, or other person
having custody and care of any minor child under the age of 18 years to
knowingly assist, aid, abet, allow, permit, or encourage said minor to
violate the provisions of this Part, as herein defined, either by words,
overt act, or by failing to act.
6. All persons directly or indirectly involved in acts of graffiti vandalism
may be found to be equally responsible and guilty of the act, in addition
to any individual who may personally deface the object or area, such as
others in the group who knowingly make available the tools, writing
materials, ladders, lookouts, materials or assistance, or who knowingly
supply funds to acquire such materials for such purposes.
7. No minor shall have in his or her possession any aerosol container of
spray paint while on any public property, highway, street, alley,
sidewalk, or park, or while on any private property, unless the owner or
person in possession of the property knows of the minor's possession of
the aerosol container and has consented to the minor's possession while
on his or her property.
8. No person, partnership, or corporation in the Borough of Emmaus shall
sell, cause to be sold, furnish, or convey to any person under the age of
18 any aerosol container of spray paint.
9. Every person, partnership, or corporation who owns, conducts,
operates, or manages a retail commercial establishment within the
§ 6-503 FOREWORD § 6-503
FWD:173
§ 6-504. Violations and Penalties; Removal of Graffiti by the
Borough. [Ord. 1121, 3/16/2015]
Borough of Emmaus selling aerosol containers of spray paints shall
place a sign in the direct view of such persons responsible for accepting
customer payment for aerosol containers of spray paint or broad-tipped
indelible markers substantially in the following form:
"IT IS A VIOLATION OF THE LAW TO SELL AEROSOL CONTAINERS
OF SPRAY PAINT TO PERSONS UNDER 18 YEARS OF AGE. THIS
OFFENSE IS PUNISHABLE BY A FINE OR IMPRISONMENT.
PUNISHMENT MAY BE IN THE FORM OF COMMUNITY SERVICE OR
CLEANUP AT THE DISCRETION OF THE MAGISTERIAL DISTRICT
JUDGE."
10. Every person, partnership or corporation within the Borough of
Emmaus who owns, conducts, operates or manages a retail commercial
establishment within the Borough selling aerosol containers of spray
paints shall store or cause such aerosol containers to be stored either:
A. In the direct line of sight from the cash register work area or any
work area that is normally continuously occupied while the store is
open;
B. Under continuous electronic or mechanical surveillance or control;
or
C. In a place not accessible to the public in the regular course of
business without employee assistance, pending legal sale of such
paint containers.
1. Any person who shall violate, fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with
§ 6-503, Subsection 1 or 2, or § 6-504 of this Part shall, upon summary
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the Lehigh County jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days.
2. Any person who shall violate § 6-503, Subsections 3 through 10, of this
Part shall, upon summary conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and the costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the
Lehigh County jail for a period not exceeding 30 days.
3. If the owner, occupant or other responsible agent of the property fails to
remove graffiti or give consent for removal within 30 days after the
second notice of violation has been issued, the Borough may proceed to
remove graffiti, itself or by contract.
4. Except where the legal fees, administrative and filing costs exceed the
cost of removal, a bill for costs of removal shall be delivered to the
property owner, occupant or other responsible agent; and in the event
§ 6-503 EMMAUS CODE § 6-504
FWD:174
of nonpayment, the Borough may file a lien against the property in the
amount of such costs. Liability for costs of removal shall be in addition
to liability for any fine imposed.
§ 6-504 FOREWORD § 6-504
FWD:175
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 6-504 EMMAUS CODE § 6-504
FWD:176
Part 1
OUTDOOR FIRES
§ 7-101. Definitions. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-102. Outdoor Fires and Cooking Prohibited. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/
2016]
No person or persons shall cook outside, or set or maintain any fire upon
any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys, or public grounds in the Borough
of Emmaus, or burn or cause to be burned thereon any paper, boxes,
rubbish, leaves or other material or substance of any kind; nor shall any
person or persons set or maintain any fire, or burn or cause to be burned
any substance or material of any kind, out of doors, anywhere within the
Borough of Emmaus.
1. As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPROVED — Acceptable to the Fire Code Official or Fire Inspector.
BUILDING — Any structure used or intended for supporting or
sheltering any occupancy.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — The Borough of Emmaus officer or other
designated authority charged with the administration and enforcement
of the Borough Building Code.
OUTDOOR FIREPLACE — An approved outdoor fireplace, with an
Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) listing, constructed of steel, concrete,
stone, metal or other noncombustible material that is fueled with the
recommended combustible substance such as wood, charcoal, propane
or natural gas. An outdoor fireplace shall be constructed to meet the
International Residential Code with a properly secured permit.
PORTABLE OUTDOOR FIREPLACE — A portable, outdoor, solid-fuel- or
gas-burning fireplace with an Underwriters' Laboratories (UL) listing,
or with another nationally recognized testing organization's listing, that
may be constructed of steel, concrete, clay or other noncombustible
material. A portable outdoor fireplace may be open in design, or may be
equipped with a small hearth opening and a short chimney or chimney
opening at the top. A portable outdoor fireplace shall be constructed
to meet the International Residential Code with a properly secured
permit.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire burning materials other than
rubbish where the fuel being burned is not contained in an outdoor
fireplace, portable outdoor fireplace, or cooking appliance for pleasure,
religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth, or similar purposes.
2. Definitions not listed here shall be taken from the International Fire
Code, 2009 edition. If not listed there, the definition shall be taken from
the Merriam Webster's Collegiate Dictionary, 11th Edition.
§ 7-101 FOREWORD § 7-103
FWD:177
§ 7-103. Exceptions. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. Approved outdoor cooking grills used solely for cooking, used with the
manufacturer's recommended fuel and operating instructions, and
located at least five feet from combustible construction and building
openings and/or according to the manufacturer's instructions and its
listings. Grade-level decks associated with detached single-family
dwellings shall not be considered combustible construction. In any
circumstance, cooking shall not be permitted on decks or porches of
multiple-occupancy dwellings.
2. Listed electric-powered cooking appliances used in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions.
3. Portable outdoor fireplaces shall be permitted when used in accordance
with the manufacturer's instructions and shall not be operated within
10 feet of a lot line. Only seasoned, untreated wood may be used for
fuel. However, portable outdoor fireplaces shall be no less than 15 feet
from any structure or combustible material, including but not limited to
houses, sheds, outbuildings, and garages. Portable outdoor gas-fired
fireplaces shall be operated in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions and listing.
4. Permanent outdoor fireplaces shall only be installed after a permit has
been issued by the Building Code Official. Existing outdoor fireplaces
may continue if covered by an approved burn screen as required by
Subsection 5 and if operated in a manner not endangering adjacent
property as determined by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief. Newly
established permanent outdoor fireplaces shall meet the requirements
of Subsection 3 above. An existing permanent outdoor fireplace shall be
permitted only per the following requirements:
A. It meets manufacturer's instructions and its listing; or
B. The requirements of the Borough permit that was originally
obtained to construct the fireplace are satisfied.
5. Portable outdoor fireplaces and outdoor fireplaces shall only be used
when fitted with an approved metal burn screen. The screen shall cover
all openings designed for the exhausting of fire gases. The burn screen
shall have openings no larger than 1/2 inch in any direction and be
maintained in good condition so as to prevent the issuance of larger
burn particles. Gas-fired outdoor fireplaces shall not require a burn
screen unless the appliance is required to have one by its listing.
6. Other exceptions may be made by the Borough Council or the Borough
Manager upon approval by the Fire Inspector or Fire Chief, and the
issuance of a permit when Council considers the situation falls within
the intent of this Part and will not create a nuisance or fire hazard.
Permits shall be issued at a fee to be established by resolution of
Council. The Fire Inspector, Fire Chief, or his authorized designee may
issue a citation for any violation. The Borough Fire Department must
§ 7-103 EMMAUS CODE § 7-103
FWD:178
§ 7-104. Attendance. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Burning in compliance with this Part shall be attended at all times by an
individual 14 years of age or older until such time as the fire is extinguished.
Unattended burning shall be in direct violation of this Part, and all persons
or corporations shall be prosecuted under the guidelines of this Part. The
attendant shall have on hand an approved means of extinguishment, such
as a garden hose, bucket of water, sand, dirt, or a rated fire extinguisher.
§ 7-105. Applicability. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to the firemen's training area
located in the Borough of Emmaus; nor shall this Part apply to official
business of the Borough Highway Department.
§ 7-106. Penalties. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300 and/or to imprisonment for term not to exceed 90 days.
stand by during any special burning, and persons requesting a permit
shall also be responsible for any expenses incurred by the Fire
Department in excess of the fee set forth hereinabove.
§ 7-103 FOREWORD § 7-106
FWD:179

Part 2
FIRE CONTROL MEASURES
§ 7-201. Adoption of Fire Control Measures and Regulations. [Ord.
589, 10/9/1978, § 1]
The Borough of Emmaus hereby adopts the fire control measures and
regulations as herein set forth for the purposes of controlling conditions
which could impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
§ 7-202. Authority at Fires and Other Emergencies. [Ord. 589, 10/9/
1978, § 2; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Fire Chief or his duly authorized representatives, as may be in charge
at the scene of a fire or other emergency involving the protection of life and/
or property, is empowered to direct such operations as may be necessary
to extinguish or control any suspected or reported fires, gas leaks, or other
hazardous conditions or situations, or of taking any other action necessary
in the reasonable performance of their duties. The Fire Chief may prohibit
any person, vehicle, or object from approaching the scene and may remove
or cause to be removed any person, vehicle, or object from hazardous areas.
All persons ordered to leave a hazardous area shall do so immediately and
shall not re-enter the area until authorized to do so by the Fire Chief.
§ 7-203. Interference with Fire Department Operations. [Ord. 589,
10/9/1978, § 3]
It shall be unlawful to interfere with, attempt to interfere with, conspire
to interfere with, obstruct, or restrict the mobility of, or block the path of
travel of any fire department emergency vehicle in any way, or to interfere
with, attempt to interfere with, obstruct or hamper any fire department
operation.
§ 7-204. Compliance with Orders. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A person shall not willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order
to direction of the Fire Chief, nor shall be interfere with the compliance
attempts of another individual.
§ 7-205. Unauthorized Driving Over Fire Hose. [Ord. 589, 10/9/
1978, § 5]
No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
when laid down on any highway, private road or driveway, for use at any fire
or alarm of fire, without the consent of a fire department officer, a police
officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct, control or
regulate traffic at the scene.
§ 7-201 FOREWORD § 7-206
FWD:181
§ 7-206. Definition of Authorized Emergency Vehicle. [Ord. 589, 10/
9/1978, § 6]
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which are
defined and authorized under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 7-207. Operation of Vehicles on Approach of Authorized
Emergency Vehicles. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 7; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Upon the approach of any authorized emergency vehicle, giving audible and
visual signal, the operator of every other vehicle shall immediately move the
same to a position as near as possible and parallel to the right hand edge of
curb of the street or roadway, clear of any intersection, and shall stop and
remain in such position until the authorized emergency vehicle or vehicles
shall have passed, unless otherwise directed by the Fire Chief or a police
officer.
§ 7-208. Driving or Stopping Close to Fire Apparatus. [Ord. 589, 10/
9/1978, § 8]
The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow
any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet
or stop the vehicle within 500 feet of any fire apparatus stopped in answer
to a fire alarm.
§ 7-209. Pedestrians to Yield to Authorized Emergency Vehicles.
[Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 9]
§ 7-210. Unlawful Boarding or Tampering With Fire Department
Emergency Equipment. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 10; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A person shall not without proper authorization from the Fire Chief in
charge of said fire department emergency equipment, cling to, attach
himself to, climb upon or into, board, or swing upon any fire department
emergency vehicle, whether the same is in motion or at rest, nor shall be
sound the siren, horn, bell or other sound-producing device thereon, or
manipulate or tamper with, or attempt to manipulate or tamper with any
1. General Rule. Upon the immediate approach of an authorized
emergency vehicle making use of audible and visual signals meeting the
requirements of this Part, or of a police vehicle properly and lawfully
making use of an audible signal only, every pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to the authorized emergency vehicle.
2. Exercise of Care by Driver. This section does not relieve the driver of an
authorized emergency vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons using the highway not from the duty to
exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
§ 7-206 EMMAUS CODE § 7-210
FWD:182
levers, valves, switches, starting devices, brakes, pumps, or any equipment
or protective clothing on, or a part of, any fire department emergency
vehicle.
§ 7-211. Damage, Injury - Fire Department - Equipment Personnel.
[Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage or deface, or attempt, or
conspire to damage or deface any fire department emergency vehicle at any
time, or to injure, or attempt to injure or conspire to injure fire department
personnel while performing departmental duties.
§ 7-212. Emergency Vehicle Operation. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 12]
The driver of any emergency vehicle, as defined in § 7-206 of this Part,
shall not sound the siren thereon or have the front red lights on or disobey
any existing traffic regulation, except when said vehicle is responding to
an emergency call or when responding to, but not upon returning from a
fire. Tactical strategies, such as, but not restricted to, "move-ups" do not
constitute an emergency call. The driver of an emergency vehicle may:
§ 7-213. Blocking Fire Hydrants and Fire Department Connections.
[Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 13; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It shall be unlawful to obscure from view, deface, obstruct or restrict
the access to any fire hydrant or any fire department connection for the
pressurization of fire suppression systems, including fire hydrants and fire
department connections that are located on public or private streets and
access lanes, or on private property.
1. Park or stand irrespective of the provisions of existing traffic
regulations;
2. Proceed past a red or stop signal or other sign, but only after slowing
down as may be necessary for safe operation;
3. Exceed the prima facie speed limit so long as he does not endanger life
or property;
4. Disregard regulations governing direction of movement or turning in
specified directions;
5. The exemptions herein granted to an emergency vehicle shall apply
only when the driver of any such vehicle while in motion sounds audible
signal by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle as may be reasonably necessary,
and when the vehicle is equipped with at least one lighted lamp
displaying a red light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from
a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle.
6. This does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle from the duty
to drive with disregard for the safety of all persons.
§ 7-210 FOREWORD § 7-213
FWD:183
If upon the expiration of the time mentioned in a notice of violation,
obstructions or encroachments are not removed, the Fire Chief shall
proceed to remove the same. Cost incurred in the performance of necessary
work shall be paid from the municipal treasury on certificate of the Fire
Chief and with the approval of the chief administrative official; and the
legal authority of the municipality shall institute appropriate action for the
recovery of such costs.
§ 7-214. Hydrant Use Approval. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 14]
A person shall not use or operate any fire hydrant intended for use of
the fire department for fire suppression purposes unless such person first
secures a permit for such use from the fire chief and the Manager.
§ 7-215. Public Water Supply. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 15; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Fire Chief shall recommend to the chief administrative official of the
municipality the location or relocation of new or existing fire hydrants and
the placement or replacement of inadequate water mains located upon
public property and deemed necessary to provide an adequate fire flow and
distribution pattern. A fire hydrant shall not be placed into or removed from
service until approved by the Fire Chief.
§ 7-216. Yard Systems. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 16; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All new and existing oil storage plants, lumber yards, amusement or
exhibition parks, and educational or institutional complexes and similar
occupancies and uses involving high fire, or life hazards, and which are
located more than 150 feet from a public street, or which require quantities
of water beyond the capabilities of the public water distribution system,
shall be provided with properly placed fire hydrants. Such fire hydrants
shall be capable of supplying fire flows as required by the Fire Chief
and shall be connected to a water system in accordance with accepted
engineering practices. The Fire Chief shall designate and approve the
number and location of fire hydrants. The Fire Chief may require the
installation of sufficient fire hose and equipment housed in accordance with
the approved rules and may require the establishment of a trained fire
brigade when the hazard involved requires such measures. Private hydrants
shall not be placed into or removed from service until approved by the Fire
Chief.
§ 7-217. Maintenance of Fire Suppression Equipment. [Ord. 589,
10/9/1978, § 17; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A person shall not obstruct, remove, tamper with or otherwise disturb
any fire hydrant or fire appliance required to be installed or maintained
under the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code except for the purpose
of extinguishing fire, training or testing purposes, recharging, or making
§ 7-213 EMMAUS CODE § 7-217
FWD:184
necessary repairs, or when permitted by the Fire Chief. Whenever a fire
appliance is removed as herein permitted, it shall be replaced or reinstalled
as soon as the purpose for which it was removed has been accomplished.
Defective and non-approved fire appliances or equipment shall be replaced
or repaired as directed by the Fire Chief.
§ 7-218. Sale of Defective Fire Extinguishers. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978,
§ 18; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A person shall not sell, trade, loan or give away any form, type or kind
of fire extinguisher which is not approved by the Fire Chief, or which is
not in proper working order or the contents of which do not meet the
requirements of the Fire Chief. The requirements of this section shall not
apply to the sale, trade or exchange of obsolete or damaged equipment for
junk. Said units must be permanently disfigured or marked with permanent
signs identifying the unit as junk.
§ 7-219. Street Obstructions. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 19]
A person or persons shall not erect, construct, place or maintain any bumps,
fences, gates, chains, bars, pipes, wood or metal horses, or any other type
of obstruction in or on any street within the boundaries of the municipality.
The word street as used in this Part, shall mean any roadway accessible
to the public for vehicular traffic, including, but not limited to, private
streets or access lanes, as well as all public streets and highways within the
boundaries of the municipality.
§ 7-220. Penalties. [Ord. 589, 10/9/1978, § 20; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 7-217 FOREWORD § 7-220
FWD:185

Part 3
FIRE PREVENTION AND LIFE SAFETY PROGRAM
§ 7-301. Title. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
This Part may be cited and shall be known as the "Borough of Emmaus Fire
Prevention and Life Safety Program," hereinafter referred to as the "Fire
Prevention Program."
§ 7-302. Purpose; Applicability. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The Fire Prevention Program is designed to reduce conditions which would
pose a threat to life, property and the environment through a regular
inspection and enforcement program.
§ 7-303. Designated Official; Inspections. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. The Borough of Emmaus Council designates the Fire Inspector as the
official who shall inspect all commercial, industrial, institutional and
multifamily residential facilities/buildings according to an established
schedule. The designated official may, upon reasonable belief or
suspicion of hazard, inspect such facility as necessary to ensure
compliance with applicable codes. The designated official shall be an
employee under the supervision and control of the Borough of Emmaus
Manager. The designated official, the Fire Inspector, will be the
authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) pertaining to the violations and
repairs of properties within the scope of the Fire Safety Inspection
Program.
2. Educational uses, child day-cares, assembly uses with a fifty-person
occupancy load or higher, institutional uses, factories, buildings over
three stories in height above grade plane, buildings of greater than
20,000 square feet, and high-hazard uses shall be inspected annually.
3. Other occupancies shall be inspected at two-year intervals.
Example: Three-year inspection intervals shall be permitted for lowhazard
occupancies with a low fire load and an occupancy load of
fewer than 25 persons.
4. In buildings or structures containing more than one business, a
separate inspection shall be required for each business or commercial
area. Any areas under the control of the owner shall also require an
inspection.
5. Inspections shall be based on the fire, safety, and health code
requirements within the 2006 edition of the International Property
Maintenance Code, as amended, and all later versions adopted by the
Borough of Emmaus. The person(s) designated under this Part may,
during hours of operation or by agreement of the building owner/agent,
§ 7-301 FOREWORD § 7-303
FWD:187
§ 7-304. Inspection Fees. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-305. Inspection Certificate Required. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
enter any public or private building for the purpose of inspection under
the Fire Prevention Program.
6. Initial fire inspections shall be based on the same requirements as the
periodic Fire Safety Inspection Program. Initial fire inspections will be
conducted when a change in the business owner or the occupancy
within a commercial, industrial, or multifamily dwelling or building
occurs. A business owner or property owner must contact the Borough
of Emmaus Fire Inspector for notification and scheduling of an initial
inspection before an occupancy shall be allowed to open and operate.
7. The Fire Inspector shall provide the owner/agent with a written list of
code violations, if any, and a date by which all violations must be
corrected. In cases where an owner/agent does not agree with a
violation(s) or the required corrective measures ordered by the Fire
Inspector and believes he/she does meet the intent of the Code by other
means, the owner/agent may file an appeal with the Building Board of
Appeals.
8. Failure to allow access for the Fire Inspector to perform the scheduled
inspection(s) may result in violation of this Part. The Fire Inspector may
obtain an administrative search warrant to enter any property or
structure when an owner/agent denies access.
1. The fees for the Fire Prevention Program shall be established by the
Borough of Emmaus Council and shall be set forth in the Borough of
Emmaus schedule of fees. Fees may be amended by resolution.
A. The inspection fee shall cover the initial inspection and one
reinspection for each inspection cycle.
B. Any additional reinspections shall be subject to an additional fee
until code compliance is achieved.
C. Permit fees shall be assessed and collected along with the
inspection fee.
D. All fees shall be collected after the completion of any Fire
Prevention Program inspection. Failure to submit payment by the
specified date will prevent the inspection and shall constitute a
violation of this Part.
1. Upon approval by the designated official, the business or property
owner will be issued a certificate of compliance.
A. The certificate of compliance shall indicate the following:
(1) Owner/occupant name and address.
§ 7-303 EMMAUS CODE § 7-305
FWD:188
§ 7-306. Keeping of Records. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
All official records of inspections and certificates of compliance shall be
kept by the Borough of Emmaus Fire Code Official in the offices of the
Borough of Emmaus.
§ 7-307. Immediate Fire or Other Safety Hazard. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/
2016]
If upon inspection it is the opinion of the designated official that an
immediate fire hazard or condition dangerous to human life or property
exists, the official is hereby authorized to order an immediate evacuation
of the premises and to secure the same until such hazard or condition has
been corrected.
§ 7-308. Responsibility of Owner/Occupant. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Scheduling of the Fire Prevention Program inspections shall be made by
the Fire Inspector. It is the responsibility of the owner/occupant to maintain
all systems and premises in accordance with applicable codes. If violations
occur, then the owner, agent or occupant is responsible to correct such
violation as to be in compliance with said codes. This will include vacant/not
in use commercial, industrial, institutional and multiresidential properties,
in which case the property manager or building owner will be responsible
for all repairs and fees.
§ 7-309. Failure to Comply. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The failure or neglect of any person designated by this Part to comply with
any order or directive issued by the designated official under this Part,
within the specified period of time and pursuant to the provisions of this
Part or applicable codes, shall be deemed to be in violation of this Part.
§ 7-310. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
(2) Applicable codes of compliance.
(3) Date of inspection.
(4) Time for which the certificate is valid.
(5) Permits required by the Borough of Emmaus.
(6) Any other information as the designated official deems
necessary.
B. The certificate shall be posted in a conspicuous place, as to be
visible to any employee, customer, or Borough official entering the
facility.
1. Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity who or which
in any way violates any of the provisions of this Part or the Code or who
§ 7-305 FOREWORD § 7-310
FWD:189
§ 7-311. Appeals. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Any person, partnership, corporation, trust or other entity aggrieved or
affected by any provision of this Part or any code issued thereunder may
appeal the same to the Borough of Emmaus Building Board of Appeals.
or which refuses to obey any lawful order issued thereunder shall
be liable, upon conviction in a summary jurisdiction, to pay a fine or
penalty to the Borough of Emmaus in an amount not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 and/or be sentenced to imprisonment in the county
prison for a period not exceeding 30 days, as provided by law.
2. Prosecution of Violations. If the notice of violation is not complied with
promptly, the Fire Safety Inspector is authorized to institute the
appropriate legal proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or
abate such violation or to require removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
3. Each day of violation of this Part or applicable code shall be considered
a separate offense, for which the fines and penalties stated herein may
be imposed on a daily basis.
§ 7-310 EMMAUS CODE § 7-311
FWD:190
Part 4
REGULATION OF FIRE PREVENTION SYSTEMS
§ 7-401. General. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The following points of inspection shall be the basis for initial and periodic
fire safety inspections.
§ 7-402. Points of Inspection. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-403. Fire Protection Systems. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-404. Records. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Records of all system inspections, tests and maintenance required by the
referenced standards shall be maintained on the premises for a minimum of
three years and shall be copied to the Fire Code Official upon request.
1. Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by
this code or a previous regulation or code under which the structure or
premises was constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this
section to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any
occupied premises, except for such temporary interruption as
necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The
requirements of this code are not intended to provide the basis for
removal or abrogation of fire protection and safety systems and devices
in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner
or the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the
maintenance of buildings, structures and premises.
1. Standards. Fire protection systems shall be inspected, tested and
maintained in accordance with the referenced standards listed in Table
403.1.
Table 403.1. Fire Protection System Maintenance Standards
System Standard
Portable fire extinguishers NFPA 10
Carbon dioxide fire-extinguishing systems NFPA 12
Halon 1301 fire-extinguishing systems NFPA 12A
Dry-chemical extinguishing systems NFPA 17
Wet-chemical extinguishing systems NFPA 17A
Water-based fire protection systems NFPA 25
Fire alarm systems NFPA 72
Water-mist systems NFPA 750
Clean-agent extinguishing systems NFPA 2001
§ 7-401 FOREWORD § 7-405
FWD:191
§ 7-405. Appearance of Equipment. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Any device that has the physical appearance of life safety or fire protection
equipment but that does not perform that life safety or fire protection
function shall be prohibited.
§ 7-406. Means of Egress. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
A safe, continuous and unobstructed path of travel shall be provided from
any point in a building or structure to the public way. Means of egress shall
comply with the International Fire Code.
§ 7-407. Exit Lighting. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Exit signs shall be kept illuminated at all times of occupancy. Emergency
lighting shall be kept operable at all times.
§ 7-408. Exit Access. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Required exit accesses, exits or exit discharges shall be continuously
maintained free from obstructions or impediments to full instant use in the
case of fire or other emergency when the areas served by such exits are
occupied. Security devices affecting means of egress shall be subject to
approval of the Fire Code Official.
§ 7-409. Fire Escapes. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Fire escapes shall be kept in working order and free from obstructions to
immediate use at all times.
§ 7-410. Fire Escape Maintenance. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Fire escapes shall be kept free of corrosion, rust and scale, and shall be kept
coated with paint or other approved surface coating.
§ 7-411. Fire Escape Testing. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
An approved load test shall be completed at five-year intervals. The load test
shall be designed to prove that the fire escape can support the dead load
plus a minimum of 100 pounds per square foot.
§ 7-412. Fire-Resistance Ratings. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. Fire-Resistance-Rated Assemblies. The required fire-resistance rating
of fire-resistance-rated walls, fire stops, shaft enclosures, partitions and
floors shall be maintained.
2. Opening Protectives. Required opening protectives shall be maintained
in an operative condition. All fire and smoke-stop doors shall be
maintained in operable condition. Fire doors and smoke barrier doors
shall not be blocked or obstructed or otherwise made inoperable.
§ 7-405 EMMAUS CODE § 7-413
FWD:192
§ 7-413. Electrical Hazards. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-414. Labeling. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Doors into electrical control panel rooms shall be marked with a plainly
visible and legible sign stating "electrical room" or similar approved
wording. The disconnecting means for each service, feeder or branch circuit
originating on a switchboard or panelboard shall be legibly and durably
marked to indicate its purpose unless such purpose is clearly evident.
§ 7-415. Multiplug Adapters. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-416. Extension Cords. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. Electrical facilities, panelboards, cabinets, wiring, and other such
components shall meet the code guidelines set forth below:
A. Abatement of Electrical Hazards. Identified electrical hazards shall
be abated. Identified hazardous electrical conditions in permanent
wiring shall be brought to the attention of the responsible code
official. Electrical wiring, devices, appliances and other equipment
that is modified or damaged and constitutes an electrical shock or
fire hazard shall not be used.
B. Illumination. Illumination shall be provided for service equipment
areas, motor control centers and electrical panelboards.
C. Working Space and Clearance. A working space of not less than 30
inches (762 mm) in width, 36 inches (914 mm) in depth and 78
inches (1,981 mm) in height shall be provided in front of electrical
service equipment. Where the electrical service equipment is wider
than 30 inches (762 mm), the working space shall not be less than
the width of the equipment. No storage of any materials shall be
located within the designated working space.
Exception: where other dimensions are required or allowed by
NFPA 70.
1. Multiplug adapters and power taps, such as cube adapters, unfused
plug strips or any other device not complying with NFPA 70 shall be
prohibited.
A. Power Tap Design. Relocatable power taps shall be of the polarized
or grounded type, equipped with overcurrent protection, and shall
be listed in accordance with UL1363.
B. Power Supply. Relocatable power taps shall be directly connected
to a permanently installed receptacle.
C. Installation. Relocatable power tap cords shall not extend through
walls, ceilings, floors, or under doors or floor coverings, or be
subject to environmental or physical damage.
§ 7-413 FOREWORD § 7-416
FWD:193
§ 7-417. Unapproved Conditions. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Open junction boxes and open-wiring splices shall be prohibited. Approved
covers shall be provided for all switch and electrical outlet boxes.
Panelboards shall have all openings closed in an approved manner per the
NEC.
§ 7-418. Electrical Motors. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Electrical motors shall be maintained free from excessive accumulations of
oil, dirt, waste and debris.
§ 7-419. Temporary Wiring. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Temporary wiring for electrical power and lighting installations is allowed
for a period not to exceed 90 days. Temporary wiring methods shall meet
the applicable provisions of NFPA 70.
Exception: Temporary wiring for electrical power and lighting installations
is allowed during periods of construction, remodeling, repair or demolition
of buildings, structures, equipment or similar activities.
§ 7-420. Smoking. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Where smoking is permitted, suitable noncombustible ashtrays or match
receivers shall be provided on each table and at other appropriate locations.
§ 7-421. Storage. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be a substitute for
permanent wiring. Extension cords and flexible cords shall not be
affixed to structures, extended through walls, ceilings or floors, or
under doors or floor coverings, nor shall such cords be subject to
environmental damage or physical impact. Extension cords shall be
used only with portable appliances. Extension cords shall not be longer
than 12 feet unless in use as a temporary power supply.
A. Power Supply. Extension cords shall be plugged directly into an
approved receptacle, power tap or multiplug adapter and, except
for approved multiplug extension cords, shall serve only one
portable appliance.
B. Ampacity. The ampacity of the extension cords shall not be less
than the rated capacity of the portable appliance supplied by the
cord.
C. Maintenance. Extension cords shall be maintained in good
condition without splices, deterioration or damage.
D. Grounding. Extension cords shall be grounded when serving
grounded portable appliances.
§ 7-416 EMMAUS CODE § 7-421
FWD:194
§ 7-422. Commercial Cooking Systems. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. Storage shall be in accordance with § 7-421, Subsection 1A through F,
below.
A. General Storage. Storage of material in buildings shall be orderly
and stacks shall be stable. Storage of combustible materials shall
be separated from heaters or heating devices by distance or
shielding so that ignition cannot occur. Allowing storage next to or
on top of furnaces, boilers, water heaters, chimneys and vents,
generators, or other heat-producing appliances is prohibited.
B. Ceiling Clearance. Storage shall be maintained two feet or more
below the ceiling in nonsprinklered areas or a minimum of 18
inches below sprinkler head deflectors in sprinklered areas of
buildings.
Exception: Storage against walls may be permitted to exceed the
height requirement if approved by the Code Official.
Exception: Sprinkler systems requiring a larger clearance from
storage to sprinkler head deflectors.
C. Means of Egress. Combustible materials shall not be stored in exits
or enclosures for stairways or ramps.
D. Equipment Rooms. Combustible materials shall not be stored in
boiler rooms, mechanical rooms, or electrical equipment rooms
unless specifically authorized by the Fire Code Official.
E. Outside Storage. Storage in the open shall not exceed 20 feet in
height and shall not be located where a fire in the storage will
cause an immediate hazard to a structure, or where the storage is
in a location that will increase the risk of fire spread between
buildings.
F. Inside Storage. Storage shall be confined to approved storage
rooms or areas.
Exception: Incidental storage for use in that room or space.
Exception: Storage that is acceptable to the Fire Code Official.
1. Commercial cooking systems shall be operated and maintained in
accordance with this Part, § 7-422, Subsection 1A through G, below.
A. Ventilation System. The ventilation system in connection with
hoods shall be operated at the required rate of air movement, and
classified grease filters shall be in place when equipment under a
kitchen grease hood is used.
B. Grease Extractors. Where grease extractors are installed, they
shall be operated when the commercial-type cooking equipment is
used.
§ 7-421 FOREWORD § 7-422
FWD:195
§ 7-423. Emergency Planning and Preparedness. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/
2016]
Chapter 4 of the 2012 International Fire Code is adopted.
§ 7-424. Deliberate or Negligent Burning. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
It shall be unlawful to deliberately or through negligence set fire to or cause
the burning of combustible material in such a manner as to endanger the
safety of persons or property.
C. Cleaning. Hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, ducts and other
appurtenances shall be cleaned at intervals as required by § 7-422,
Subsection 1D through F, in this Part.
D. Inspection. Hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, ducts and other
appurtenances shall be inspected at intervals specified in Table
422.1.D. or as approved by the Fire Code. Official Inspections shall
be completed by qualified individuals.
Table 422.1.D. Commercial Cooking System Inspection
Frequency
Type of Cooking Operations Frequency of Inspection
High-volume cooking operations such
as 24-hour cooking, charbroiling or
wok cooking
3 months
Low-volume cooking operations such
as places of religious worship,
seasonal businesses and senior
centers
12 months
Cooking operations utilizing solidfuel-
burning cooking appliances
1 month
All other cooking operations 6 months
E. Grease Accumulation. If during the inspection it is found that
hoods, grease-removal devices, fans, ducts or other appurtenances
have an accumulation of grease, such components shall be cleaned.
F. Records. Records for inspections shall state the individual and
company performing the inspection, a description of the inspection
and when the inspection took place. Records for cleanings shall
state the individual and company performing the cleaning and
when the cleaning took place. Such records shall be completed
after each inspection or cleaning, shall be maintained on the
premises for a minimum of three years and shall be copied to the
Fire Code Official upon request.
G. Extinguishing System Service. Automatic fire-extinguishing
systems protecting commercial cooking systems shall be serviced
as required in this Part, § 7-403, Table 403.1.
§ 7-422 EMMAUS CODE § 7-425
FWD:196
§ 7-425. Overcrowding. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
Overcrowding or admittance of any person beyond the approved capacity
of a building or a portion thereof shall not be allowed. The Fire Code
Official, upon finding any overcrowding conditions or obstructions in aisles,
passageways or other means of egress, or upon finding any condition which
constitutes a life safety hazard, shall be authorized to cause the event to be
stopped until such condition or obstruction is corrected.
§ 7-426. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The Borough Manager shall develop rules and regulations for the
development of the Fire Prevention Program with input from all Borough
departments, including the Fire Department, having direct knowledge of
fire inspections matters. The Fire Inspector shall create an inspection
checklist to assure compliance with this Part.
§ 7-425 FOREWORD § 7-426
FWD:197

Part 5
FIRE SERVICE FEES
§ 7-501. Right to Bill. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The Borough of Emmaus possesses the authority to establish fees for certain
Fire-Department-related expenses to offset the cost of operations in specific
incident-related matters.
§ 7-502. Fees Established. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
The fees for certain fire services shall be established by the Borough of
Emmaus Council and shall be set forth in the Borough of Emmaus schedule
of fees. Fees may be established and amended by resolution.
§ 7-503. Applicability. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
§ 7-504. Collection. [Ord. 1141, 9/19/2016]
1. This Part is applicable to insurance carriers representing renters,
business owners, property owners, vehicle owners, and other
applicable clients of an insurance carrier.
A. The Borough of Emmaus shall bill insurance carriers for costs
incurred during Fire-Department-related incidents, according to
the fee schedule established by Borough Council.
B. Insurance carriers shall be required to pay the fees established by
Borough Council for incident-related activities.
C. Unless an individual intentionally inflicts costs upon the Emmaus
Fire Department through illegal activity or purposeful interference,
individual vehicle operators, property owners, renters, and
business owners shall not be individually billed for costs incurred
by the Fire Department during incident-related activities.
1. Billing for Fire Department expenses shall be conducted by the Billing
Department of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. The Borough of Emmaus exercises the right to utilize third-party billing
services as established by a vote of Borough Council.
3. The Borough of Emmaus exercises the right to utilize third-party
collection agencies in an attempt to collect unpaid fees.
§ 7-501 FOREWORD § 7-504
FWD:199
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAINS
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
(See also: Zoning, Chapter 27, § 27-1109)
Chapter 9
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 7-504 EMMAUS CODE § 7-504
FWD:200
Part 1
NO SMOKING
§ 10-101. Smoking Prohibited in Certain Places. [Ord. 542, 3/1/
1976, § 1; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
From and after the effective date of this Part, the smoking or carrying of
lighted cigars, cigarettes or pipes, and the use of any match, spark, flame,
or fire producing device in any retail store in which in the judgment of the
Fire Chief, or fire official of the Borough of Emmaus the use of any match,
flame, or fire-producing device would be unsafe and create a hazard, is
declared to be a nuisance prejudicial to the public welfare, and to the health
and safety of persons in said retail stores, and each and all of said acts are
hereby prohibited. Provided, that this prohibition shall not include smoking
a cigar, pipe, or cigarette, or using a match, spark, flame, or fire-producing
device in any restaurant room, in any restroom in any beauty parlor, in any
executive room, of any office, particularly designated for smoking in any
such retail store; and provided, further, that the terms "Retail Store" shall
not be construed to include those places where food or drink is sold only for
consumption on the premises.
§ 10-102. Notification of Restricted Places. [Ord. 542, 3/1/1976, § 2;
as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Fire Chief, or fire official shall notify in writing the owner and/or
tenants of retail stores in which the use of any match, flame or fireproducing
device is deemed unsafe and to create a hazard.
§ 10-103. Inspection. [Ord. 542, 3/1/1976, § 3; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any owner and/or tenant of any retail store may contact the Fire Chief, or
fire official to have him inspect a subject premises and determine whether
the use of any match, flame or fire-producing device would be unsafe and
create a hazard on said premises. Such request from the aforementioned
owner and/or tenant shall be in writing.
§ 10-104. Signs. [Ord. 542, 3/1/1976, § 4; as amended by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
After passage hereof, all retail stores to which the provisions of this Part
shall become applicable, forthwith shall post "No Smoking" signs of such
size and character as shall be approved by the Fire Chief and fire official,
setting forth the fines and penalties as provided for in this Part, in not less
than four conspicuous places in each said retail store.
§ 10-101 FOREWORD § 10-105
FWD:201
§ 10-105. Penalties. [Ord. 542, 3/1/1976, § 5; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 10-105 EMMAUS CODE § 10-105
FWD:202
Part 2
VERMIN CONTROL
§ 10-201. Short Title. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 1]
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the Vermin Control
Ordinance of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 10-202. Definitions and Terms. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 2]
ERADICATION — The elimination of rats, mice, cockroaches, and other
types of pests of vermin from any building, lot or premises through the use
of traps, baiting fumigation, or any other method of extermination approved
by the Borough Council and subject to applicable laws relating to poisonous
substances and fumigants.
HARBORAGE — Any condition which provides shelter or protection for rats,
mice, cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin.
PERSON IN CONTROL — The owner or part owner of a building, lot or
premises, whether an individual, partnership or corporation, the agent or
occupant of a building, lot or premises, or any person who has the use or
custody of the same, or any part thereof, whether an individual, partnership
or corporation.
VERMIN — Any various small animals or insects including rats, mice,
cockroaches, lice, flees, or other pests.
VERMIN-PROOFING — The treatment or shielding with material
impervious to gnawing, of all actual or potential openings in the exterior
and interior walls, grounds or first floors, roofs, foundations, basements,
sidewalk gratings and other places that may be reached by rats, mice, or
other similar vermin from the ground or by climbing or burrowing.
§ 10-203. Purpose. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 3]
The purpose of this Part is to protect public health by the control and
eradication of rats, mice, cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin;
to prescribe methods for the extermination of said vermin; to eliminate
harborages for such vermin; and to prohibit conditions conducive to the
existence of such vermin in the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 10-204. Elimination of Harborage. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 1161, 9/18/2017]
1. All buildings, lots or premises within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Emmaus shall be kept free from any condition conducive to
rats, mice, cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin. The person
in control shall not allow the accumulation of automobiles or trucks
without current license plates or a current inspection sticker, garbage,
refuse, or any material which may afford harborage or provide food for
rats, mice, cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin.
§ 10-201 FOREWORD § 10-204
FWD:203
§ 10-205. Prohibiting Harborage Conditions. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972,
§ 5; as amended by Ord. 1161, 9/18/2017]
§ 10-206. Eradication Measures. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 6; as
amended by Ord. 1161, 9/18/2017]
When any building, lot, or premises is subject to infestation by rats, mice,
cockroaches, or other types of pests or vermin, the person in control shall
apply continuous or repeated eradication measures, as required by the
Borough Manager, Animal Control Officer, or Building Official or duly
designated person until there is no evidence of infestation remaining.
§ 10-207. Vermin-Proofing. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 7; as amended
by Ord. 1161, 9/18/2017]
2. Whenever conditions inside or under unoccupied buildings provide
extensive harborage for rats or other vermin, the Borough Manager,
Animal Control Officer, or Building Official or other duly designated
person, is empowered, if said conditions are not corrected in a period of
30 days after written notification to the owner, to institute
condemnation and demolition proceedings. The cost of such
proceedings is to be borne by the owner.
1. Unconsumed food shall not be allowed to remain where it is accessible
to rats, mice, cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin.
2. Garbage and waste materials shall be placed in nonleaking metal or
plastic containers with securely fitted lids, plastic bags tightly bound, or
such other tightly covered nonleaking containers as may be approved
by the Board of Health and Borough Council, and stored in such a
manner as not to create an attraction or harborage for rats, mice,
cockroaches, and other types of pests or vermin.
3. When the Borough Manager, Animal Control Officer, or Code Official
notifies the person or persons in control of a building in writing that
there is evidence of rat or other vermin infestation on the premises, the
said person or persons shall immediately institute eradication measures
and shall continuously maintain such measures in a satisfactory manner
until the premises is declared by the Borough Manager, Animal Control
Officer, or Building Official or duly designated person to be free of such
infestation. Unless said measures are undertaken within five days after
receipt of notice, it shall be construed as a violation of the provisions of
this part and the person or persons shall be held responsible thereof.
1. Whenever conditions inside, outside, or under a building, or on any lot
or premises, provide harborage for rats, mice, cockroaches, and other
types of pests or vermin, the Borough Manager, Animal Control Officer,
or Building Official or other duly designated person may require any
one, or more, buildings to be vermin-proofed.
§ 10-204 EMMAUS CODE § 10-208
FWD:204
§ 10-208. Penalties. [Ord. 489, 11/6/1972, § 8; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 2 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-208 FOREWORD § 10-208
FWD:205

Part 3
VEGETATIVE GROWTH
§ 10-301. Vegetative Height Restricted. [Ord. 635, 5/3/1982, § 1]
No person, firm, partnership or corporation owning, leasing, occupying or
having an interest in any real estate within the Borough of Emmaus shall
permit any grass, weeds or vegetation whatsoever, not edible or planted for
some useful or ornamental purpose, to grow or remain on such premises,
including any portion of the premises occupied by a street or alley, and also,
including the sidewalk, curb and gutter area of any street adjacent to the
premises, so as to go to seed, or to emit any unpleasant or noxious odor,
or to offer concealment to any filthy deposit, or to produce pollen, or to
exceed a height of six inches. All such vegetation is hereby declared to be
a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort to
the inhabitants of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 10-302. Removal of Nuisances. [Ord. 635, 5/3/1982, §§ 2, 3]
§ 10-303. Notice; Borough May Do Work. [Ord. 635, 5/3/1982, § 4]
In addition to the penalties as hereinafter imposed in this Part, the Mayor, or
any officer or employee of the Borough designated thereby for the purpose,
is hereby authorized to give written notice, by personal service or by the
United States Mail to the owner or the occupant, or either of them, of a
violation of the terms of this Part, directing and requiring such occupant
or owner or both of them to remove, trim, spray, or cut such grass, weeds
or vegetation, so as to conform to the requirements of this Part, within
five days after issuance of such notice. If any such owner or occupant
shall neglect to comply with such notice within the period of time stated
therein, the Borough authorities may remove, spray, trim or cut such grass,
weeds, or vegetation so as to comply with the provisions of this Part, and
the reasonable cost thereof, plus an additional charge of 20% of the cost,
together with any additional penalty authorized by law, may be collected by
the Borough from such owner or occupant as a penalty under the provisions
of this Part, or in any other manner provided by law. This right as herein
1. The owner of any such premises, whether occupied by the owner or not,
and the occupant thereof in case of premises occupied by other than the
owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all such vegetation growing or
remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions of the first
section of this Part. Both the owner and occupant in the case of
premises occupied by other than the owner, shall be responsible for the
compliance with this Part.
2. Provided, however, that the following limitations shall apply with
reference to the enforcement of this Part: No such grass, weeds or
similar vegetation as heretofore defined shall come within the terms of
this Part if such grass, weeds, or vegetation shall be intermingled with
growing cultivated crops.
§ 10-301 FOREWORD § 10-303
FWD:207
vested in the Borough shall be in addition to penalties prescribed by the
provisions of this Part for the failure of the owner or occupant as aforesaid
to comply with the terms of this Part.
§ 10-304. Penalties. [Ord. 635, 5/3/1982, § 5; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
3 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 3 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 10-303 EMMAUS CODE § 10-304
FWD:208
Part 4
HAZARDOUS MATERIALS
§ 10-401. Title. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § I]
This Part shall be known as the Transportation of Hazardous Material
Ordinance.
§ 10-402. Definitions. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § II]
The following words or phrases when used in this Part shall have the
meaning ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly
indicates differently.
CFR — The code of federal regulations. The numbers immediately
preceding and immediately following the initials CFR shall refer to the
volume, divisions and sections used to identify parts of the Code of Federal
Regulations.
COMPRESSED GAS — Any substance regulated as a compressed gas by the
United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR
173.300.
EXPLOSIVE — Any substance regulated as a class A explosive or as a
class B explosive by the United States Department of Transportation, by
regulations found in 49 CFR 173.53 and 49 CFR 173.88.
FLAMMABLE LIQUID — Any substance regulated as a flammable liquid by
the United States Department of Transportation, by regulations found in 49
CFR 173.115.
FLAMMABLE SOLID — Any substance regulated as a flammable solid by
the United States Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49
CFR 173.150.
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any substance defined in this section as a
compressed gas, explosive, flammable liquid, flammable solid, oxidizer,
poisonous or radioactive material and biological waste.
OXIDIZER — Any substance regulated as an oxidiser by the United States
Department of Transportation by regulations found in 49 CFR 173.151.
POISON — Any liquid or gas that is life threatening when mixed with air
in small amounts, and shall also include all those substances regulated as
poison A by the United States Department Transportation by regulations
found in 49 CFR 173.326.
RADIOACTIVE MATERIAL — Any substance required by the United States
Department of Transportation to have type A packaging or type B
packaging, under regulations found in 49 CFR 173.426.
TRANSPORT CARRIER — Any mode or conveyance moving on land upon
wheels.
§ 10-401 FOREWORD § 10-403
FWD:209
§ 10-403. Exemption. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § III]
The regulations set out in this Part shall not apply to any transport carrier
carrying no hazardous material except flammable liquid in a container
or containers having a total capacity of not over 110 gallons or 41.635
dekaliters by volume.
§ 10-404. Routes to be Followed. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § IV]
No person, firm or corporation shall transport any hazardous material
through the Borough except over routes indicated as permitted routes
identified below. Deliveries to destinations in the Borough shall be made by
following permitted routes to the point where the least amount to travel
off a permitted route will be needed to reach the destination, and by going
to the destination and returning to the permitted route or routes by the
method requiring the shortest travel distance off permitted routes.
SURFACE TRANSPORT - HIGHWAYS
1. State Road, Legislative Route 2005 from Borough Line west to Main
Street.
2. Main Street, Legislative Route 2005 from State Road west to
Chestnut Street.
3. Chestnut Street, Legislative Route 2005 from Main Street west to
Borough Line.
4. Cedar Crest Boulevard, Legislative Route 1019 from Chestnut Street
north to Borough Line.
5. Dalton Street, Legislative Route 2002 from Borough Line west to East
Main Street.
6. East Main Street, Legislative Route 2002 from Dalton Street west to
Main Street.
7. Fourth Street, Legislative Route 2037 from Chestnut Street south to
Broad Street.
8. Broad Street, Legislative Route 2037 from Fourth Street west to
Pennsylvania Avenue.
9. Pennsylvania Avenue, Legislative Route 2027 from Broad Street west
to Borough Line.
10. Tenth Street, Legislative Route 2027 from Chestnut Street south to
Pennsylvania Avenue.
11. Fifty Street, Legislative Route 2037 from Broad Street south to
Borough Line.
SURFACE TRANSPORT - RAILROADS
1. Conrail Main Line from Borough Line to Borough Line and adjacent
sidings.
2. Anthracite Line from Borough Line to Borough Line and adjacent
sidings.
§ 10-403 EMMAUS CODE § 10-405
FWD:210
§ 10-405. Equipment. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § V]
No hazardous material will be carrier on any permitted route for delivery in
any transport carrier larger than a tractor with one trailer upon streets and
roads, nor larger than a railroad tank car upon railroad lines.
§ 10-406. Condition of Transport Carriers. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987,
§ VI]
Any transport carrier used to transport hazardous materials anywhere in
the Borough shall comply with all federal and state laws and regulations. All
transport carriers shall be maintained in a safe condition.
§ 10-407. Spills, Containments, Clean-up. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987,
§ VII]
In the event breakdown of a transport carrier containing hazardous
materials within the Borough resulting in spill or escape of such material
onto Borough streets or private property, the person, firm, or corporation
transporting such material as well as the owners and consignee of the
material shall be jointly and severally responsible for its physical
containment, recovery and removal and for any costs incurred by the
Borough or other responsible persons or agencies acting with the same
purpose of containment recovery and removal from the environment.
§ 10-408. Signs and Maps. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § VIII]
Signs shall be posted to inform the public of the permitted routes for
hazardous materials. The Emmaus Police Department shall keep on hand
copies of maps showing permitted routes for hazardous materials, and these
maps shall be distributed free upon requests.
§ 10-409. Severability. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § IX]
The provisions of this Part are severable, and, should any part be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the rest of the Part.
§ 10-410. Penalty. [Ord. 685, 10/5/1987, § X]
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any provision of this Part shall
be fined not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000 for each offense, and
a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day on which a
violation occurs or continues.
§ 10-405 FOREWORD § 10-410
FWD:211

Part 5
LITTERING
§ 10-501. Littering Prohibited. [Ord. 692, 3/21/1988, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation or any agent thereof
to place, throw, store, accumulate or maintain, or cause to be placed,
thrown, stored, accumulated or maintained any used cans, papers, paper
boxes, used lumber, rubbish, debris, animal matter, garbage, empty bottles
or other containers upon any property within the Borough of Emmaus or on
or near any alley, highway or stream located in said Borough of Emmaus,
except in accordance with any Borough of Emmaus Ordinance dealing with
the collection of garbage, refuse, trash, or solid waste.
§ 10-502. Penalties. [Ord. 692, 3/21/1988, § 2]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300 and/or, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 10-501 FOREWORD § 10-502
FWD:213

Part 6
REIMBURSEMENT OF DIRECT AND INDIRECT COSTS OF
EMERGENCY INCIDENTS
§ 10-601. Declaration of Purpose. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996, § 1]
The foregoing recital clauses are declared to be a declaration of purpose of
this Part and are hereby incorporated by reference.15
§ 10-602. Definitions. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996, § 2]
Terms used in this Part which are defined in the Pennsylvania Hazardous
Materials Emergency Planning and Response Act, 35 P.S. § 6022.101 et seq.,
or any subsequent amendments thereto, shall have the same meaning as in
the said Act unless defined differently herein.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus.
COUNCIL — Borough Council of Emmaus.
EMERGENCY INCIDENT — An occurrence involving a risk of harm and/or
imminent threat to private or public property, life or potential threat to the
environment or public health or safety.
EMERGENCY RESPONSE AGENCIES —
EMERGENCY SERVICE COSTS — All direct and indirect costs and expenses
incurred/expended by the Borough and/or any emergency service agency in
connection with any emergency incident including, but not limited to, the
following:
A. Borough of Emmaus Fire Department;
B. Borough of Emmaus Ambulance Corps;
Borough of Emmaus Police Department; and similar emergency
response agencies from other municipalities responding to a request
for assistance/aid under a mutual aid agreement and Borough
employees responding to an emergency incident at the request of an
emergency response agency.
C.
The cost of labor calculated by determining the actual hourly wage
rate plus the hourly cost of fringe benefits (and including overtime
rates, if applicable) normally paid by the Borough to Borough personnel
involved in responding to any emergency incident or, in the case of
emergency response agency volunteer personnel, as determined by the
Borough Manager, taking into account the funds expended to train and
properly equip each such volunteer, times the number of hours worked
by each such volunteer, less one hour, in response to any emergency
incident.
A.
15.Editor's Note: The recitals are included in the original of Ord. 833 and are on file in the
Borough office.
§ 10-601 FOREWORD § 10-602
FWD:215
RESPONSIBLE PARTY/PARTIES — The following person(s) or business
entities shall, for the purpose of this Part, be deemed responsible parties:
§ 10-603. Emergency Incident. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996, § 3]
The occurrence of unfriendly fires, hazardous material, petroleum and
chemical type spills, releases, fires and the unexpected collapse of wells,
trenches, buildings and sinkholes requiring rescues or otherwise
threatening life, property or the environment are all declared to be an
emergency incident.
§ 10-604. Responsible Parties. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996, § 4]
The responsible party/parties shall be liable for and shall reimburse the
Borough for all of the direct and indirect emergency service costs incurred/
expended by any Borough emergency service agency for labor, materials,
equipment used in connection with any emergency incident.
The cost of all nonreusable materials and all contaminated or consumed
materials utilized in connection with any emergency incident.
B.
The cost of all equipment, calculated by estimating the number of hours
of the useful life of such equipment and dividing the same into the
replacement cost plus the maintenance cost of said equipment and then
multiplying the result by the number of hours such equipment was "in
service" in response to any emergency incident.
C.
The administrative cost of record keeping, information processing and
assembly/compilation of a bill of cost.
D.
The reasonable attorney's fees and costs (including witness fees) of
pursuing enforcement/collection action for emergency service cost
against responsible parties.
E.
The owner of any petroleum, petroleum distillate or by-product,
hazardous material or chemical and the common carrier, including
pipeline owner, of any such material.
A.
The owner of the real property on which any petroleum, petroleum
distillate or by-product, hazardous material or chemical is spilled,
released, dumped, deposited or stored.
B.
The owner of real property on or in which there occurs an unfriendly
fire and/or a building, well, trench or sinkhole collapse requiring rescue
efforts or otherwise threatening life, property or the environment and
to which there is a response by an emergency response agency.
C.
Any person(s) and/or legal entity or entities found to be legally
responsible in any court of competent jurisdiction for the causation of
any emergency incident.
D.
§ 10-602 EMMAUS CODE § 10-605
FWD:216
§ 10-605. Civil Action. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996, § 5]
The Borough may enforce this Part by having its Solicitor file civil action
against any responsible parties in any court of competent jurisdiction for
the recovery of emergency service costs.
§ 10-606. Cost Billing and Collection Procedures. [Ord. 833, 6/3/
1996, § 6]
§ 10-607. Disbursement of Recovered Costs. [Ord. 833, 6/3/1996,
§ 7]
1. The Borough Manager shall assemble/compile a bill of costs for each
emergency incident as follows:
A. Within 30 days after rendering services in connection with an
emergency incident, or as soon thereafter as possible, the chief
operating officer for each involved emergency response agency
shall submit to the Borough Manager an itemized bill of costs
calculated in accordance with the provisions of this Part.
B. The Borough Manager shall review all such bills of cost, correct any
errors or duplications and compile a final documented total bill of
cost.
2. Upon compilation of a complete bill of costs, the Borough Manager
shall, within 45 days of the emergency incident, or as soon thereafter as
possible, render an itemized billing statement to the responsible party/
parties for the total amount of all submitted bills of cost plus 15% for
administrative expense.
3. If the responsible party/parties have not paid the Borough bill of costs
within 45 days from the date same was billed, the Borough Manager
shall take appropriate enforcement/collection action against the
responsible party/parties.
4. As an alternative to the foregoing procedure, the chief executive officer
of any Borough emergency response agency which responded to an
emergency incident may prepare, or cause to be prepared, an itemized
bill of costs compiled in accordance with this Part for his or her
emergency response agency only and submit the same directly to any
responsible party for payment or submission for third party payment.
However, any Borough emergency response agency which latter elects
to submit a direct cost billing to a responsible party shall not, without
the consent of the Borough Manager of the Borough, thereafter be
entitled to submit such cost billing to the Borough for collection efforts
in the event of nonpayment, partial payment or dispute concerning
responsibility for payment or the amount of the cost billing.
1. All monies received/recovered by the Borough under the provisions of
this Part in connection with an emergency incident shall be deposited in
a special Borough emergency services cost recovery account and, upon
§ 10-605 FOREWORD § 10-607
FWD:217
completion of cost recovery efforts, the Borough Manager shall
disburse the funds recovered as follows:
A. Fifteen percent of the total refunds shall be allocated to the
Borough general fund to reimburse the Borough for the
administrative costs incurred in effectuating and administering the
cost recovery, except that if the Borough refers a bill of costs to its
Solicitor for collection litigation, the Borough shall be reimbursed,
in addition to the aforesaid 15% of the total funds recovered, the
full amount of all legal services, costs and fees incurred in
connection with the legal services performed by its Solicitor.
B. The balance of the funds recovered shall be disbursed, with
explanation, to the emergency response agencies which submitted
bills of costs in proportion to the amounts of each such bill of costs
which was recoverable and recovered, and if the total amount
recovered was less than the full amount of the total of the bills of
costs, the disbursement to each emergency response agency shall
be as determined appropriate by the Borough Manager with
explanation to each emergency response agency.
§ 10-607 EMMAUS CODE § 10-607
FWD:218
Chapter 11
HOUSING
§ 10-607 FOREWORD § 10-607
FWD:219

Part 1
HOUSE NUMBERS
§ 11-101. General Regulations. [Ord. 584, 7/10/1978, § 1]
§ 11-102. Penalties. [Ord. 584, 7/10/1978, § 4; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
1. The number of any given property is available to the occupant or
property owner of any house or property upon any street in the Borough
of Emmaus upon request made to the Borough Manager.
2. All house numbers must be posted in a conspicuous place upon such
property in a permanent and durable manner, viewable from the street
at any time of year.
3. The Chief of Police, or his assigns, is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this Part.
§ 11-101 FOREWORD § 11-102
FWD:221

Part 2
LEASING OF PROPERTY
§ 11-201. Tenant Registration. [Ord. 502, 11/19/1973, § 1]
On or before January 1, 1974, any person, firm or corporation owning or
managing property located in the Borough of Emmaus which property at
the present time is rented or leased, shall furnish to the Borough Manager
the name and address of the tenant or tenants.
§ 11-202. Notification of Tenant Moving. [Ord. 502, 11/19/1973, § 2;
as amended by Ord. 544, 4/5/1976, § 1]
§ 11-203. Penalties. [Ord. 502, 11/19/1973, § 3; as amended by Ord.
544, 4/5/1976, § 2; and by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 11-204. Posting of Regulations. [Ord. 502, 11/19/1973, § 4]
In addition to normal advertising requirements of law, a copy of this Part
will be posted in the lobby of the Borough Town Hall for a period of 30 days
and the Borough Manager of the Borough shall give written notice of the
contents of this Part to all rental agencies and real estate agencies located
in the Borough of Emmaus and to Allentown Multiple Listing Service.
1. Any person, firm or corporation owning or managing property located
in the Borough of Emmaus, upon leasing or renting such property shall
furnish to the Borough Manager the name and address of the tenant or
tenants within 10 days from the date of occupancy of the said property
by the tenant or tenants.
2. Any person, firm or corporation owning or managing property located
in the Borough of Emmaus shall furnish written notification to the
Borough Manager of the name and forwarding address of vacating
tenant or tenants within 10 days from the date of vacating of said
property by the tenant or tenants.
1. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
Part 2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300; and/to to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days.
2. Any person, and the principal of any firm and the Chief Executive
Officer of any corporation violating § 11-202(2) of this Part shall in
addition to the penalties provided for in § 11-203(1) be liable for all fees
and assessments which otherwise would have been terminated had
proper written notification as required by this Part been given.
§ 11-201 FOREWORD § 11-204
FWD:223

Part 3
MOVING PERMITS
§ 11-301. Permit Required. [Ord. 425, 11/21/1966, § 1; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
No person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation shall move, or cause
to be moved, from any place within the Borough of Emmaus to another
place therein or to a place beyond the limits thereof, or move or cause to
be moved from any place beyond the limits of the Borough of Emmaus to
a place or places within the Borough of Emmaus, any household goods in
bulk, without first securing from the Manager of the Borough of Emmaus a
permit for such moving or transportation.
§ 11-302. Application. [Ord. 425, 11/21/1966, § 2; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring such a permit for
the removal or transportation of household goods in the manner above
described, shall make application to the Manager of the Borough of
Emmaus setting forth his, its, or their name and address, and also setting
forth names of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be moved,
the address and location from which the property is to be moved, and the
new address or location of the place to which the property is to be moved.
§ 11-303. Fee. [Ord. 425, 11/21/1966, § 3; as amended by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The Borough Manager of the Borough of Emmaus shall, upon application
being made as provided for in § 11-302 of this Part, issue a permit the
charge for which shall be established by resolution of Council. Such
application shall set forth the name of the permittee as well as the name or
names of the owners of the goods to be moved and the address from which
the goods are to be moved and the address to which the goods are to be
delivered. No permit shall be issued to remove to a place beyond the limits
of the Borough when any taxes due the Borough, other than real estate
taxes, remain unpaid by the owners of the goods to be moved.
§ 11-304. Enforcement. [Ord. 425, 11/21/1966, § 4]
The provisions of this Part shall be enforced by the Mayor or by such officer
as may be designated by Borough Council.
§ 11-305. Penalties. [Ord. 425, 11/21/1966, § 5; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
3 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 11-301 FOREWORD § 11-305
FWD:225
Chapter 12
LIBRARIES
§ 11-305 EMMAUS CODE § 11-305
FWD:226
Part 1
EMMAUS PUBLIC LIBRARY
§ 12-101. General Regulations. [Ord. 412, 4/19/1965, §§ 1-9; as
amended by Ord. 683, 9/21/1987; by Ord. 790, 5/16/1994, § 1; and
by Ord. 939, 12/3/2001]
1. The Emmaus Public Library is hereby authorized and designated to act
as the legal agent of the Borough of Emmaus to provide public library
service to the residents and taxpayers of the Borough for and on behalf
of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. Borough agrees to maintain or assist in the maintenance of the Emmaus
Public Library in accordance with the provisions of Section 401, of the
Library Code, Act of June 14, 1961, P.L. 324.
3. The Emmaus Public Library shall be operated by a Library Board of
Directors consisting of nine people to be appointed in accordance with
Section 411 et seq., of the Library Code, supra, in the following manner:
A. Six people to be appointed by the Borough Council of Emmaus.
B. One person to be appointed by the Borough of Macungie.
C. Two persons to be appointed by the Township of Upper Milford.
Each representative to serve for a term of three years beginning
on May 1, 1965; provided that of the first appointees two Directors
shall be appointed for terms expiring December 31, 1966, and
three members shall be appointed for terms expiring December 31,
1967. All appointments to fill the places of those Directors whose
terms expire shall be for a term of three years. Vacancies shall be
filled for the unexpired terms and shall be filled by appointment of
the municipality sponsoring the vacated position within two months
of said vacancy occurring. No member of the Board of Directors
shall receive any salary for his service as such.
4. The Board of Library Directors shall organize as soon as may be after
appointment by electing a President, Secretary, and Treasurer from its
membership and such other officers and agents as the Board may deem
necessary. The Treasurer shall give bond to the Borough of Emmaus
with satisfactory surety in such amount as the Board of Directors of the
library may determine in accord with Section 412 of the Library Code
supra.
5. The Council of the Borough of Emmaus shall make an annual
appropriation out of its general budget, or from a special tax levy, if so
desired by it, to maintain or assist in the maintenance of the Emmaus
Public Library.
6. All moneys appropriated for the establishment and/or maintenance of a
local library and all moneys, if any, received from other sources for its
§ 12-101 FOREWORD § 12-101
FWD:227
use, shall be disbursed under the direction of the Board of Library
Directors.
7. The Board of Directors of the library shall make a report annually, to
Council of the Borough of Emmaus, of the moneys received by such
library and the disposition made thereof, and Borough Council shall
arrange to have the accounts of the Treasurer of the Board of Directors
of the library audited annually as in the case of other municipal
expenditures.
8. The Board of Directors of the library shall prepare and present to the
Borough Council and to the State Library in Harrisburg such annual
reports as are required by Section 414 of the Library Code, supra.
9. The Board of Directors of the library shall give free library service to
the residents and taxpayers, subject to such reasonable rules and
regulations as the Board of Library Directors may adopt, and the Board
may exclude from the library any person who wilfully violates such
rules, all as provided in Section 415 of the Library Code, supra.
§ 12-101 EMMAUS CODE § 12-101
FWD:228
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 12-101 FOREWORD § 12-101
FWD:229

Part 1
AMUSEMENTS
§ 13-101. Licensing Certain Amusements. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 1;
as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
From and after the passage of this Part, it shall be unlawful for any person
or persons, firms or corporations, either principal or agent, without first
complying with the terms of this Part and if required, paying the designated
fee:
1. To show, exhibit or conduct a circus or other form of public amusement,
entertainment, exhibition, demonstration or advertisement, in which
any part of a public highway is used for any purpose connected
therewith, unless upon payment of a license fee as set forth by
resolution of Borough Council, hereinafter "Council," except for noncommercial,
fraternal, patriotic or charitable affairs for which the
Borough Manager shall, upon approval by Council, issue a permit
without charge.
2. To parade, show or demonstrate upon any of the public highways of the
Borough without first submitting to the Borough Manager a plan
thereof as to time involved and space covered for which parade, show
or demonstration the Manager shall charge, subject to the same
exceptions named in paragraph 1, a license fee as set by resolution of
Council, unless same person or persons shall have paid a license fee for
a show or circus to be given in connection therewith, in which case no
separate fee for parade shall be charged.
3. To use or permit the use of any building or land, or part thereof, within
the limits of the Borough for any show, exhibition, demonstration, sale
of merchandise in connection therewith, and theatrical performance or
their like to which the public is admitted, either free or upon payment of
admission, and a license fee as set by resolution of Council shall be
charged; no license to be issued to the same person for a longer period
than a week, subject however, also to exceptions contained in
paragraph 1 and those businesses supervised by the Pennsylvania
Liquor Control Board.
4. To conduct dances within the Borough to which the public is admitted, a
license fee as set by resolution of Council shall be charged in cases
where at least one dance shall be held by the same person or persons
once per week, and in cases where public dances are held by the day or
night by the same or different persons, a license fee as set by resolution
of Council shall be charged except where the funds derived from such
dance or dances held shall be for a purely charitable, fraternal or
patriotic cause or the dancing activity is subject to the supervision of
the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
5. To show, exhibit, or conduct operas and moving pictures, and
amusement establishments of a similar nature, without first submitting
§ 13-101 FOREWORD § 13-101
FWD:231
§ 13-102. Application. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 2; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All licenses required by this Part shall be obtained from the Borough
Manager, and all the fees required to be paid shall be paid to the Borough
before any of the aforesaid amusements, entertainments, shows, or other
events herein named shall be held. In addition, it is necessary for all
applications for a license to be submitted in writing to the Borough Manager
prior to the time such license is to take effect. Such application shall
include:
§ 13-103. Requirements. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 3]
No license shall be issued under this Part until:
to the Borough Manager a schedule indicating the days and hours of
operation and complying with Borough safety and health ordinances,
and paying a license fee as set by resolution of Council to the Treasurer
of the Borough on or before the tenth day of January of each and every
year.
6. To use or permit the use of any building or land or part thereof, within
the limits of the Borough for any poolroom, billiard room, shooting
gallery, skating rink, or bowling alley, without first submitting to the
Borough Manager a schedule indicating days and hours of operation
and complying with Borough safety, health and tax ordinances, and
paying a license fee as set by resolution of Council to the Borough on or
before the tenth day of January of each and every year.
1. The name and business address of the person who proposes to conduct
the activity;
2. The type of activity proposed;
3. The date or dates on which the proposed activity is to be conducted;
4. The hours during which the proposed activity is to be conducted on
each date submitted;
5. The site where the activity is to be conducted;
6. The number of people anticipated at the activity.
A separate application must be filed if there are multiple sites, with
one application for each site with such application being acknowledged
and containing a statement that the facts set forth therein are true
and correct under the penalties of perjury. The Borough Manager shall
provide application forms which must be used by the applicant.
1. The application required by this Part has been approved by Borough
Council;
§ 13-101 EMMAUS CODE § 13-103
FWD:232
§ 13-104. Liability. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, §§ 4, 5]
§ 13-105. Issuance. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 6]
When all the requirements of this Part shall have been met and the
application has been approved by the Borough Council, the Borough
Manager shall issue a license hereunder to conduct the activity. The license
shall in every case state:
2. A certified copy of all State and County permits are filed with the
Borough Manager in any instance in which such State and County
permits are required to conduct a proposed activity;
3. The Borough Council or its agents, have inspected the premises where
the activity is to be held to ascertain whether such premises are
suitable for the purpose and free from unsanitary, dangerous, or
hazardous features;
4. Evidence of public liability insurance has been filed with the Borough
Manager;
5. Any other investigation or inspection the Borough Council deems
necessary to secure the facts needed by it to determine if the
application should be approved may be held.
Borough Council may reject the application or refuse to grant the
license if any unsanitary, hazardous or dangerous conditions exist,
or if the location is deemed unsuitable because the conduct of the
proposed activity therein would create a traffic hazard, or because of
the lack of accommodations for the number of persons and/or vehicles
likely to be attracted thereto, or if the proposed activity is likely to
create unreasonable annoyance to the residents or inhabitants of the
locality; in every case, the Borough Council approving the application
and issuing a license shall state in the license the type of activity
authorized and the time for which the license is to remain in effect.
1. Every person or organization applying for a license for an activity
described under this Part shall enter into an agreement whereby he or
they save or saves the Borough of Emmaus harmless from any and all
liabilities and causes of action which might arise by virtue of the
granting of such license in the Borough of Emmaus; and conditioned
further, that no damage will occur to the streets, bridges and other
public or private property in the Borough or adjacent thereto as a result
of the activity, and that the licensee will not permit any dirt, paper,
litter, or other debris from the activity to remain thereon.
2. The amount of the public liability insurance referred to in § 13-103(4)
shall be in such minimum amount as the Borough Council approves.
Such amounts to be set by resolution of Council.
1. The name and business address of the person authorized to conduct the
activity;
§ 13-103 FOREWORD § 13-105
FWD:233
§ 13-106. Inspections. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 7]
After any license has been issued under this Part, Borough Council or
its agents, shall inspect the site designated therein before any program,
show or entertainment is begun, to insure that no dangerous, hazardous or
unsanitary conditions exist. The licensee shall correct any such dangerous,
hazardous and unsanitary conditions which may exist before any activity is
begun. If he does not, his license shall forthwith be revoked and no part of
the license fee shall be refunded.
§ 13-107. Noise. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 8]
No holder of a license under this Part shall make or permit to be made
unnecessary or unreasonable noise by loud speaker, amplifying device or
any other means which would disturb the residents in the vicinity of the
premises wherein such licensed activity is held.
§ 13-108. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 9]
No person or organization granted a license under this Part shall permit
upon the site named therein;
§ 13-109. Council's Duties; Revocation of Permit. [Ord. 586, 9/25/
1978, §§ 10, 11]
2. The type of activity authorized;
3. The date or dates on which the proposed activity is to be conducted;
4. The hours during which the activity is to be conducted on each date or
dates authorized by subsection 3 supra;
5. The site on which the activity is to be conducted. A separate license
must be issued for every site and a separate fee paid for each. A license
shall not be assignable.
1. Any disorderly or immoral conduct;
2. Any gambling;
3. Any sale of obscene literature, pictures, films, or other objects;
4. Any indecent, immoral or lewd act or performance;
5. Any possession, sale or use of intoxicants and/or drugs of any kind.
1. Borough Council shall by resolution:
A. Set the hours of operation permissible for the activities controlled
by this Part;
B. Set the amount of insurance necessary for operation of the various
activities controlled by this Part;
§ 13-105 EMMAUS CODE § 13-109
FWD:234
§ 13-110. Penalties. [Ord. 586, 9/25/1978, § 12; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
C. Alter the fees called for by this Part as may from time to time
appear reasonable;
D. Authorize a representative to perform the necessary inspections
required by this Part.
2. Borough Council shall forthwith revoke any license granted under this
Part at any time dangerous, hazardous or unsanitary conditions develop
on the site designated in the license, or if the license violates, in any
way, any of the provisions of this Part or the conditions of the permit,
and no part of the license fee shall be refunded.
§ 13-109 FOREWORD § 13-110
FWD:235

Part 2
AUCTIONS, GARAGE SALES
§ 13-201. Definitions. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 1]
For the purpose of this Part, the following shall apply:
AUCTIONS — A public sale of land or goods at public outcry to the highest
bidder on the spot.
CASUAL SALE — A sale by an individual of his personal property with no
frequency or regularity.
GARAGE SALE — A public sale of goods conducted in a residentially
associated garage.
HOME SALE — A public sale of goods including by appointment, conducted
in any portion of a residence.
LAWN SALE — An outdoor public sale of goods on residential property.
PERSON — Any person, association, partnership, firm or corporation.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include
the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 13-202. License Required. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 2]
Except as hereinafter described, it shall be unlawful for any person to hold
an auction, garage sale, lawn sale or home sale without first obtaining a
license in compliance with the provisions of this Part.
§ 13-203. Application. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 3]
Applicants for a license under this Part must file with the Borough Manager
an application in writing, on a form to be furnished by said officer, which
shall give the following information:
§ 13-204. Fees. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 4; as amended by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
1. Name and address of applicant;
2. Type of auction or sale;
3. Items to be sold;
4. Dates of sale;
5. A statement affirming that the goods to be sold belong to the applicant
or his household, and that said goods have not been purchased or
obtained solely for this sale, with the exception of charities and service
organizations as exempted by this Part.
1. The license for an auction to settle an estate shall be on a no-fee basis.
§ 13-201 FOREWORD § 13-204
FWD:237
§ 13-205. Issuance of License. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 5]
Upon payment of fees as listed in § 13-204, and upon determination by the
Manager that the application meets all the requirements for a license, the
Manager shall issue a license.
§ 13-206. Duration of License. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 6]
§ 13-207. Display of License. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 7]
The license must be displayed at all times during auctions or sales.
§ 13-208. Limitations on Licenses. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 8; as
amended by Ord. 680, 6/1/1987]
§ 13-209. Hours. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 9]
Garage sales, lawn sales, home sales may be held only between 9:00 a.m.
and 8:00 p.m.
§ 13-210. Encroachment on Right-of-Way. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 10]
A license granted under this Part does not permit encroachment on the
right-of-way (sidewalk or street).
2. The license for any sale governed by this Part sponsored by a charitable
or service organization shall be on a no-fee basis.
3. Other fees shall be as set by resolution of Council from time to time.
1. A license for an auction shall be good for one day only. In the event that
inclement weather causes postponement of the auction, the license will
be valid for a new date provided the Manager is notified prior to the
new date.
2. A license for a garage, lawn or home sale shall be valid for three days.
1. Garage sales, lawn sales, and home sales shall be limited to two
licenses per calendar year, per residence.
2. Auctions in residential areas shall be limited to one per household per
year except that this provision shall not apply when the auction is to
settle an estate.
3. Items to be sold at garage sales, lawn sales, and home sales must
belong solely to the household where the sale is held. It shall be
unlawful to bring in and sell goods belonging to others or to purchase
items specifically to sell in a garage sale, lawn sale or home sale, with
the exception of such sales conducted on behalf of a charitable or
service organization.
§ 13-204 EMMAUS CODE § 13-211
FWD:238
§ 13-211. Casual Sales. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 11]
Nothing in this Part shall be construed to prohibit or regulate casual sales.
§ 13-212. Penalties. [Ord. 493, 5/7/1973, § 12; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 13-211 FOREWORD § 13-212
FWD:239

Part 3
CABLE TELEVISION
§ 13-301. Short Title. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Sammons
Communications, Inc., Franchise Ordinance".
§ 13-302. Definitions. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 2]
For the purpose of this Part the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with
the context, words used in the present tense include the future, words in
the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular
number, include the plural number. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not merely directory.
ACCESS CHANNELS — Those services of cable television systems in major
television market communities as defined in Section 76-251 of 37 FR 13848
(1972) of the FCC Rules.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus in the State of Pennsylvania.
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM OR SYSTEM — A system of antennas, cables,
wires, lines, towers, wave-guides, or other conductors, converters,
equipment or facilities, designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing, audio, video and other
forms of electronic or electrical signals, located in the Borough of Emmaus.
COMPANY — The grantee of rights under this Part awarding a franchise.
COUNCIL — The Borough Council of Emmaus.
FRANCHISE TERRITORY — The entire area within the geographical area of
the Borough of Emmaus.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUES — Only those revenues derived from the
monthly service charges paid by subscribers located within the Borough
for regular cable television reception service, which service includes only
the transmission of broadcast signals and the programming presented on
the required access and originations channels, if any. As required by the
Federal Communications Commission, gross subscriber revenues shall not
include any revenues received (a) as reimbursement of expense in the
operation of any access channels; (b) as advertising payments; (c) from the
leasing of cable channels; (d) from programs for which a per-channel or
per-program charge is made and (e) from furnishing other communications
and non-broadcast services either directly or as a carrier for another party
or any other income derived from the system. Gross subscriber revenues
shall also not include revenues received as installation charges and fees for
reconnections, inspection, repairs or modifications of any installations.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 13-301 FOREWORD § 13-303
FWD:241
§ 13-303. Qualifications of Grantee and Grant of Authority. [Ord.
553, 8/9/1976, § 3]
A public hearing concerning the renewal of the franchise herein granted to
the Company to conform to the new FCC rules and regulations concerning
cable television operations was held on July 12, 1976, at 7:00 p.m., at
Emmaus Borough Hall Council Chambers. Public notice of said hearing was
given in THE FREE PRESS on June 23 & 30, 1976, which notice invited
interested parties to participate in said hearing and comment upon the
legal, character, financial, technical and other qualifications of the Company
to continue to operate a cable television system in the Borough. Said
hearing having been held on the date and place stated hereinabove, and
said hearing having been fully open to the public, and the Borough having
received at said hearing all comments regarding the qualifications of the
Company to receive this franchise renewal, the Borough hereby finds that
the Company possesses the necessary legal, technical, character, financial
and other qualifications and that the Company's construction arrangements
are adequate and feasible, and that therefore the Borough hereby grants
to the Company a non-exclusive franchise, right and privilege to construct,
erect, operate, modify and maintain, in, upon, along, across, above and over
and under the highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, public ways and public
places now laid out or dedicated and all extensions thereof, and additions
thereto, in the Borough, poles, wires, cables, underground conduits,
manholes and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the
maintenance and operation in the Borough of a cable television system for
the purpose of distributing television and radio signals, and other electronic
impulses in order to furnish television and radio programs and various
communications and other electronic services to the public. The right so
granted includes the right to use and occupy said streets, alleys, public
ways and public places and all manner of easements for the purposes herein
set forth.
§ 13-304. Franchise Term. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 4]
The franchise granted the Company herein shall terminate 15 years from
date of grant, subject to renewal for periods of reasonable duration on the
same terms and conditions as contained herein, or on such different or
additional terms and conditions as may be lawfully specified by the Borough
Council and as are consistent with the requirements of Rule 67.31 of the
FCC. It is hereby mutually agreed that Company shall give to Borough
Council written notice of its intention to renew said franchise at least one
year prior to the termination of the instant term. The Company's application
for franchise renewal shall be granted provided: (1) Company shows that its
CATV service during the preceding franchise period has reflected a goodfaith
effort to serve the needs and interests of its service area; (2) Company
has not demonstrated a callous disregard of the law and all pertinent
regulations; and (3) Borough Council, after public hearing, determines
that it is in the best interest of the Borough to continue with Company's
franchise. In the event that Company determines not to renew their lease,
the said Company shall be responsible for removing said system from the
§ 13-303 EMMAUS CODE § 13-304
FWD:242
franchise territory, or in the alternative, the said Company shall sell such
system to the Borough at a value mutually acceptable to the parties. If
agreement as to value cannot be agreed upon, either party may petition the
Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County to have a Board of View appointed
to assign such value.
§ 13-305. Payments to the Borough. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 5; as
amended by Ord. 703, 11/21/1988]
The Company shall, during each year of operation under this franchise pay
to the Borough, 5% of the annual gross subscriber revenues received by the
Company for regular franchise territory. At the time of this annual payment,
the Company shall furnish the Borough with an operating report showing
the Company's annual gross subscriber revenues during the preceding year
and such other information as the Borough shall reasonably require with
respect to properties and expenses related to the Company's services within
the franchise territory for such period.
The Borough reserves the right to collect such other fees as are deemed
collectible by the FCC.
§ 13-306. Records and Reports. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 6]
The Company shall keep full, true, accurate and current books of account,
which books and records shall be made available for inspection and copying
by such Borough Official as Borough Council shall designate.
§ 13-307. Rates. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 7; as amended by Ord. 615,
5/5/1980, § 1]
Attached hereto and made a part of this franchise as Exhibit A is a
description of the Company's installation practices and a complete schedule
of rates. In addition to the monthly service specified in Exhibit A, the
Company may add to that rate taxes or fees imposed upon the Company's
gross subscriber revenue by Borough, State or Federal governmental or
legislative bodies and fees or charges imposed upon the Company for the
use and distribution of copyrighted program material.
No increases in rates charged subscribed in excess of those listed herein
shall be made except as authorized by the Borough after public notice
of such increase is given and interested parties have been afforded an
opportunity to comment thereon, provided, however, the Company shall
have the right to increase its rates up to 5% per annum on a cumulative
basis without Borough approval. In no event, however, shall Company raise
its rate more than 15% at any one time without prior consent from the
Borough.
(NOTE: Ord. 615 also amended portions of Exhibit A, which has not been
codified, but is adopted by reference herein.)
§ 13-304 FOREWORD § 13-308
FWD:243
§ 13-308. Local Office: Complaint Procedures. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976,
§ 8]
§ 13-309. Liability and Indemnification. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 9]
The Company shall pay, and by its acceptance of this franchise the Company
expressly agrees that it will pay, all damages and penalties which the
Borough may legally be required to pay as a result of the Company's
negligence in the installation, operation, or maintenance of the cable
television system authorized herein. The Borough shall notify the
Company's representative within 15 days after the presentation of any claim
or demand to the Borough, either by suit or otherwise, made against the
Borough on account of any negligence or contract as aforesaid on the part
of the Company. The Company further agrees as follows:
1. During the term of this franchise, and any renewal thereof, the
Company shall maintain within the Borough a local business office or
agent for the purpose of receiving and resolving all complaints
regarding the quality of service, equipment malfunctions, and similar
matters. The provisions of this section shall be complied with if
Company maintains a local business headquarters office within seven
airline miles of the principal coordinates of the Borough, which office
may be reached by a local, toll-free telephone call, and provides the
Borough Manager's office with the name, address and phone number of
a person who will act as the Company's agent to receive complaints
regarding quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar
matters. The local office shall be open to receive inquiries or complaints
from subscribers during normal business hours, and in no event less
than 9:00 to 5:00 Monday through Friday. Any complaints from
subscribers shall be investigated and acted upon as soon as possible,
but at least within three business days of their receipt. The Company
shall keep a maintenance service log which will indicate the nature of
each service complaint, the date and time it was received, the
disposition of said complaint and the time and date thereof. This log
shall be made available for periodic inspection by such Borough Official
as Borough Council shall designate.
2. The Company shall by appropriate means, such as a card or brochure,
as subscribers are connected or reconnected to the system furnish
information concerning the procedures for making inquiries and/or
complaints, including the name, address and local telephone number of
the employee or employees or agent to whom such inquiries or
complaints are to be addressed. The Borough appoints its Manager as
responsible for implementation of the complaint procedures and
continuing administration of the franchise.
1. Company shall carry Workmen's Compensation insurance, with
statutory limits, and Employers' Liability insurance with limits of not
less than $100,000, which shall cover all operations to be performed by
Company as a result of this Part.
§ 13-308 EMMAUS CODE § 13-309
FWD:244
§ 13-310. System Construction, Maintenance and Procedures. [Ord.
553, 8/9/1976, § 10]
2. Company shall carry Comprehensive General Liability and
Comprehensive Automobile Liability Insurance with bodily injury limits
of not less than $300,000 per occurrence, and property damage limits
of not less than $300,000.
3. Company's Workmen's Compensation, Comprehensive General Liability
and Comprehensive Automobile Liability insurance shall be written by
an insurance company with a capital and/or surplus of not less than
$3,000,000, and Company agrees to furnish Borough with certified
copies or certificates of insurance of said policies, which shall provide
that insurance shall not be cancelled unless 10 days prior written notice
shall first be given to Borough.
1. Upon grant of this franchise to construct and maintain a community
television system in the Borough, the Company may enter into contracts
with Water, Sewer or Highway Departments of the Borough, any public
utility companies or any other owner or lessee of any poles located
within or without the franchise territory to whatever extent such
contract or contracts may be expedient and of advantage to the
Company for use of poles and posts necessary for proper installation of
the system, obtain right-of-way permits from appropriate Borough
State, County and Federal officials necessary to cross highways or
roads under their respective jurisdictions to supply main trunk lines
from the Company's receiving antennas, obtain permission from the
Federal Aviation Authority to erect and maintain antennas suitable to
the needs of the system and its subscribers and obtain whatever other
permits a Borough, County, State or Federal Agency may require. In the
construction, installation and maintenance of its system, the Company
will use steel, cable and electronic devices, all of specialized and
advanced design and type; in the operation of its system, the Company
will employ personnel with training, skill and experience in electronics
and communications. Neither material nor personnel of this sort may be
available to the Company for its system in the event of a war or other
similar national emergency, in which event Company shall confer with
Borough as to substitute materials to be used.
2. The Company's system, poles, wires and appurtenances shall be
located, erected and maintained so that none of its facilities shall
endanger or interfere with the lives of persons, or interfere with any
improvements the Borough may deem proper to make, or unnecessarily
hinder or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges, easements
or public property.
3. The Company's system presently serves that portion of the Borough as
demonstrated on map annexed hereto and made a part hereof as
Exhibit B. In the event that the Borough shall annex further territory as
authorized by law, the Company shall extend energized trunk cable to
the remaining portions of the Borough so annexed within one year
§ 13-309 FOREWORD § 13-310
FWD:245
thereafter, unless additional time is granted by the Borough Council
upon request of the Company for good cause shown. Extension of
service shall not be required into an area which does not meet the
requirements set forth in § 13-311 of this Part.
4. All transmission and distribution structures, lines and equipment
erected by the Company within the Borough shall be so located as to
cause minimum interference with the proper use of streets, alleys and
other public ways and places, and to cause minimum interference with
the rights or reasonable convenience of property owners who adjoin
any of the said streets, alleys or other public ways and places.
5. In case of any disturbance of pavement, sidewalk, driveway or other
surfacing, the Company shall, at its own cost and expense and in a
manner approved by the Borough, replace and restore all paving,
sidewalk, driveway or surface of any street or alley disturbed, in as
good condition as before said work was commenced.
6. In event that at any time during the period of this franchise the Borough
shall lawfully elect to alter or change the grade of any street, alley or
other public way, the Company upon reasonable notice by the Borough
shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires, cables, underground
conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own expense.
7. The Company shall not place poles or other fixtures where the same will
interfere with any gas, electric or telephone fixture, water hydrant or
main, and all such poles or other fixtures placed in any street shall be
placed at the outer edge of the sidewalk and inside the curb line, and
those placed in alleys shall be placed close to the line of the lot abutting
on said alley, and then in such manner as not to interfere with the usual
travel on said streets, alleys and public ways.
8. The Company shall, on the request of any person holding a building
moving permit, issued by the Borough, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of buildings. The expense of such temporary
removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person
requesting the same, and the Company shall have the authority to
require such payment in advance. The Company shall be given not less
than 48 hours advance notice to arrange for such temporary wire
changes.
9. The Company shall have the authority to trim trees upon and overhanging
streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough so
as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cables of the Company, all trimming to be done under the
supervision and direction of the Borough and at the expense of the
Company.
10. The Company shall provide, upon request and without charge, service
to any municipal buildings owned and operated by the Borough and to
any public or parochial elementary or secondary school. This shall
§ 13-310 EMMAUS CODE § 13-310
FWD:246
§ 13-311. Line Extensions. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 11]
It shall be the obligation of Company to serve all residents of the franchises
territory except to the extent that density of homes, adverse terrain or
other factors render providing service impracticable, technically infeasible
or economically noncompensatory. For purposes of determining compliance
with the provisions of this section, and to provide for a reasonable and
non-discriminatory policy governing extensions of cable service within the
franchise territory, which policy was subject to public review in the public
proceeding leading to the award of this franchise, Company shall extend
service to new subscribers at the formal installation charge and monthly
rate for customers of that classification, under the following terms and
conditions:
§ 13-312. Compliance with Standards. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 12]
All facilities and equipment of Company shall be constructed and
maintained in accordance with the requirements and specifications of the
National Electrical Safety Code and such applicable ordinances and
regulations set forth by the Borough and/or any other local, state or Federal
agencies.
§ 13-313. Company Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976,
§ 13]
The Company shall have the authority to promulgate such rules,
regulations, terms and conditions governing the conduct of its business
as shall be reasonably necessary to enable the Company to exercise its
rights and perform its obligations under this franchise, and to assure an
uninterrupted service to each and all of its customers. Provided, however,
that such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall not be in conflict
with the provisions hereof or of Federal or state laws.
mean only an energized cable to such building. The cost of any internal
wiring shall be borne by the institution.
1. Where the new subscriber, or nearest subscriber of a group of new
subscribers is located within 500 feet of existing truck cable; and
2. Where the number of homes to be passed by such new extension cable
plant bears the same proportional ratio to the total amount of new cable
plant as the average number of homes passed per mile of existing cable
plant.
3. In the event the requirements of subsections 1 and 2 are not met, the
installation cost per subscriber shall be determined as set forth in
Exhibit C attached hereto.
§ 13-310 FOREWORD § 13-314
FWD:247
§ 13-314. Procedures. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 14]
No renewal of this franchise nor increases in rates and charges shall be
effective except pursuant to a public hearing affording due process. The
Company shall be a party to any such hearing and any other hearings in
which its rights, privileges or interests would be affected and shall be fully
entitled to such due process rights as may be available under applicable
laws, ordinances, rules or regulations.
§ 13-315. Approval of Transfer. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 15]
The Company shall not sell or transfer its system to another, nor transfer
any rights under this franchise to another without written approval given
after public hearing by the Borough, provided, that such approval shall not
be unreasonably withheld if the vendee, assignee or lessee has filed with the
appropriate official of the Borough an instrument duly executed, reciting
the intention of such sale, assignment or lease, accepting the terms of this
franchise and agreeing to perform all conditions thereof.
§ 13-316. Compliance with FCC Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 553,
8/9/1976, § 16]
The Company shall, at all times, comply with the rules and regulations
governing CATV operations promulgated by the FCC, specifically those
set out in Section 76.31 of the FCC Rules and Regulations. This shall
include adherence by the Company to FCC rules regarding technical and
engineering specifications involved in the construction of the CATV System
and signal carriage therein.
§ 13-317. Modification of FCC Rules. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 17]
Consistent with the requirement of Rule 76.31 (a)(6) of the FCC, any
modification of Rule 76.31 resulting from amendment thereto by the FCC
shall to the extent applicable be considered as a part of this franchise as
of the effective date of the amendment made by the FCC and shall be
incorporated in this franchise by specific amendments thereto by the lawful
action of the Borough Council within one year from the effective date of
the FCC's amendment or at the time of renewal of this franchise, whichever
occurs first.
§ 13-318. Publication Costs. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 18]
The Company shall assume the costs of the publication of this Part and
franchise renewal as such publication is required by law. A bill for
publication costs shall be presented to the Company by the appropriate
Borough officials upon the Company's filing of its acceptance of this
franchise and the said publication costs shall be paid at that time by the
Company.
§ 13-314 EMMAUS CODE § 13-319
FWD:248
§ 13-319. Legal Fees and Consulting Fees. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 19]
The Company shall assume the payment of legal and consulting fees
occasioned by the preparation of this Part and franchise agreement. A
bill for such costs shall be presented to the Company by the appropriate
Borough official upon the Company's filing of its acceptance of this
franchise and the said costs shall be paid at that time by the Company.
§ 13-320. Activities Prohibited. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 20]
§ 13-321. Theft of Services and Tampering. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976,
§ 21]
§ 13-322. Revocation for Cause. [Ord. 553, 8/9/1976, § 22]
In the event Company shall fail to perform its obligations or shall be in
default under this franchise and shall fail to correct such failure to perform
with 60 days after written notice thereof by the Borough, the franchise may
be revoked by the Borough, provided, however, that the Company shall not
be responsible for any failure to perform due to Federal, State, or Municipal
action, statute, ordinance or regulation, strike or other labor trouble; act of
God, riot or other civil disturbance; inability to secure materials or supplies,
1. The Company shall not allow its cable or other operations to interfere
with television reception of persons not served by the Company, nor
shall the system interfere with, obstruct or hinder in any manner, the
operation of the various utilities serving the residents of the Borough.
2. The Company shall not, as to rates, charges, service facilities, rules,
regulations, or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or
advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage, provided that nothing in this franchise shall be deemed
to prohibit the establishment of a graduated scale of charges and
classified rate schedules to which any customer coming within such
classification would be entitled.
1. No person, whether or not a subscriber to the cable system shall
willfully, maliciously or otherwise damage or cause to be damaged any
wire, cable, conduit, apparatus, appurtenance, or equipment of a
franchisee operating a cable television system within the Borough, or
commit any act with intent to cause such damage, or to tap, tamper
with or otherwise connect any wire or device to a wire, cable, conduit,
apparatus, appurtenance or equipment of such franchisee with the
intent to obtain a signal or impulse from the cable system without
authorization from or compensation to such franchisee, or to obtain
cable television or other communications service with intent to cheat or
defraud said franchisee of any lawful charge to which it is entitled.
2. Whoever shall violate any provision of this section shall be guilty of the
appropriate offenses enumerated under the Crimes Code of
Pennsylvania and shall be liable for punishment thereunder.
§ 13-319 FOREWORD § 13-322
FWD:249
or, without limiting the foregoing, by any other cause, contingency or
circumstance beyond the control of the Company which hinders or prevents
its performance under the franchise. The Borough Council may extend the
period within which the Company shall correct any failure to perform upon
application of the Company for good cause. No revocation of the franchise
shall occur except upon written notice thereof to the Company by the
Borough Council and upon public notice and a public proceeding affording
due process.
§ 13-322 EMMAUS CODE § 13-322
FWD:250
Part 4
TRANSIENT RETAIL MERCHANTS
§ 13-401. Purpose and Scope. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
§ 13-402. Definitions. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
1. This Part 4 establishes a licensing system to regulate the conduct of
persons and individuals falling generally within the classification of
transient merchants, including, without limitation, transient merchants
operating generally from door to door, and to that end, entering upon
private property without the express permission of the owner or
occupant, and merchants operating in and on the streets, sidewalks,
rights-of-way and other public areas of the Borough. By their very
nature, these merchants operate in locations which, as a general
matter, are neither fixed nor established, and they are therefore
movable, transient and temporary. Unless exempt, transient merchants,
as well as persons and individuals soliciting or securing contributions to
various causes and organizations, regardless of profit and nonprofit
status, and conducting regulated activities in the Borough are subject
to the requirements of this Part.
2. The permitting system established hereunder is two-tiered and includes
a licensing program for transient merchants whose activities do not
include door-to-door activities or the entry upon private property and a
permitting system for those who desire to conduct door-to-door
activities or enter upon private property in the furtherance of their
transient business.
1. The following words and phrases are defined as follows;
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
CLASS 1 LICENSE — A license authorizing the conduct of regulated
activities in the Borough by a transient merchant on a door-to-door
basis or on private property without the permission of the property
owner.
CLASS 2 LICENSE — A license authorizing the conduct of regulated
activities in the Borough by a transient merchant operating on the
streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way and other public areas of the Borough.
LICENSEE — A person who submits an application to, and is approved
by, the Borough for either a Class 1 or 2 license pursuant to the
requirements of this Part.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited liability partnership,
firm, company, limited liability company, corporation, association, club,
or any other legal entity, and with respect to each, its agents, servants
and employees. This definition shall include for-profit and not-for-profit
entities.
§ 13-401 FOREWORD § 13-402
FWD:251
§ 13-403. License Required. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
§ 13-404. License Application and Renewal. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
REGULATED ACTIVITY — Except as otherwise exempted by this Part,
any activity conducted by a transient merchant and involving in whole
or in part the conduct of a retail business, including, without limitation,
the selling or offering for sale, canvassing, peddling, soliciting or the
taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise, of any goods, wares,
products, services or merchandise, including, but not limited to:
subscriptions for magazines and other printed material, the obtaining
of contracts for home or building services, repairs or improvements,
and the securing of contributions to various causes or organizations,
upon any of the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way of the Borough or by
house to house or visitation to private residences in the Borough.
TRANSIENT MERCHANT — A person engaged in a transient retail
business for the sale of personal property, whether the business is
conducted from a fixed location within the Borough or by an individual
engaged in peddling, soliciting or the taking of orders from house
to house. Residency within the Borough shall not affect transient
merchant status. A transient merchant shall include a person who
solicits or secures contributions for various causes and organizations
regardless of the profit or nonprofit status of the cause or organization.
2. Construction and interpretation.
A. As used in this Part and unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary, words in the singular include the plural, and vise versa,
and words in one gender include all genders and the neuter.
B. Any headings appearing in connection with sections, subsections or
any parts of this Part 4 are for convenience only, are not intended to
be full or precise descriptions of the text to which they refer and
are not be considered part of this Part.
1. Every person desiring to undertake a regulated activity shall first apply
to, and obtain from, the Borough either a Class 1 or Class 2 license in
accordance with the requirements of this Part.
2. If the regulated activity of the transient merchant involves a door-todoor
activity and/or the entry upon private property without the prior,
express permission of the occupant, then the transient merchant shall
apply for a Class 1 license in accordance with the requirements of this
Part.
3. If the regulated activity of the transient merchant involves other than
door-to-door contact and/or the entry upon private property without the
prior, express permission of the owner or occupant, then the transient
merchant shall apply for a Class 2 license in accordance with the
requirements of this Part.
§ 13-402 EMMAUS CODE § 13-404
FWD:252
1. Unless exempt pursuant to § 13-408, below, any person desiring to
engage in a regulated activity shall complete and file with the Borough
for review and approval an application for an appropriate license on a
form to be provided by the Borough.
2. The application shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
A. If the applicant is an individual, he shall supply his full name; his
business, home and temporary addresses (exclusive of post office
boxes); and all telephone numbers to be used in the course of sales
and solicitations in the Borough;
B. If the applicant is a person other than an individual, the agent
completing the application shall supply the applicant's full name,
business address (exclusive of post office boxes) and telephone
number to be utilized in the course of sales and solicitations in the
Borough, together with the full name and home and business
addresses (exclusive of post office boxes) of each agent, servant or
employee conducting or expected to conduct regulated activities on
behalf of the applicant in the Borough, as required by Subsection
2C, E, F and H below;
C. The applicant's address(es) for service and receipt of notices or
process (exclusive of post office boxes) in connection with the
license application and the performance of subsequent activities in
connection therewith;
D. A detailed description of the nature of the applicant's business, the
regulated activities proposed to be conducted in the Borough and
the specific products, services, solicitations or other activities to be
conducted, together with the requested, effective date of the
license;
E. Proof of compliance with all licensing, permitting, or certification
requirements applicable to the applicant's business or the
proposed activity;
F. A description of each conviction involving a nonsummary offense,
the date of each conviction and the jurisdiction in which the
conviction occurred;
G. A warning that the applicant's responses, statements and
submissions are subject to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904, relating to
"unsworn falsification to authorities;" and
H. A criminal history background check provided by the applicant.
3. The applicant or its authorized agent, servant or employee shall submit
in person to the Borough an application, and at such time he shall
provide for inspection and photocopying by the Borough a lawful
driver's license or other official form of identification, containing his
§ 13-404 FOREWORD § 13-404
FWD:253
§ 13-405. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
picture. In addition, he shall pay the application fee as set forth in
§ 13-409 of this Part.
4. Upon submission of the application and the payment of a fee, the
Borough shall accept the application for review and processing, which
may include an investigation into the history or business of the
applicant, his employer or his principal. Any application deemed
incomplete shall be rejected and returned to the applicant with the fee.
5. Within 10 business days of the date of submission of the application, the
Borough Manager, or his designee, shall either approve the application
and issue the license or permit or deny the application and state the
reasons therefor. Grounds for denial shall include, but are not limited
to, those acts or omissions specified in §§ 13-404 and 13-405 below.
6. The approval of the application and the issuance of the license to
conduct the regulated activity(ies) shall apply only to those activities
expressly described in the application. A Class 1 license shall be for a
period of seven consecutive days, commencing with the effective date
thereof; and a Class 2 license shall be effective for a period of one year,
commencing with the effective date thereof.
7. A license may be renewed, provided that the applicant shall file and
submit for review and approval an application following the procedure
set forth above. The Borough Manager, or his designee, may utilize a
short-form application for renewal. It shall be grounds for denial of any
renewal application that the applicant has violated or is in violation of
the law or any of the requirements of this Part or any other Borough
ordinance. A denial shall be made by the Borough Manager in writing,
which shall set forth the specific reasons for the denial. In determining
whether to deny the application, the Borough Manager shall consider
the past history of the applicant as reflected in the information provided
or obtained in the application process as well as any prior experience
with the applicant as a transient merchant in the Borough.
8. Every license issued hereunder shall be considered personal to the
applicant if an individual or, if other than an individual, personal to the
agents, servants or employees specifically identified in the application.
No license issued hereunder shall be transferable or assignable.
9. At all times while conducting or engaging in a regulated activity, a
licensee shall maintain in his or her possession the original license
issued by the Borough or a true and correct copy thereof and shall
produce the same for inspection together with picture identification,
upon request. The licensee shall display any and all identifications
issued by the Borough in a conspicuous place or manner, so as to be
easily viewed by members of the public.
1. It shall be a violation of this Part for any licensee to:
§ 13-404 EMMAUS CODE § 13-405
FWD:254
§ 13-406. License Suspension, Revocation or Nonrenewal. [Ord.
1123, 4/6/2015]
A. Engage in regulated activities on legal holidays or on Sundays;
B. Engage in regulated activities between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m., prevailing time, on Monday through Saturday, from
November through March, and between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and
8:00 a.m., prevailing time, on Monday through Saturday, from April
through October;
C. Disregard any sign prohibiting soliciting, sales, peddling or the
like;
D. Conduct or engage in any activities beyond the express scope of the
application or license or permit;
E. Fail to have on his person at all times while engaged in regulated
activities the original, or true and correct copy, of the license or
permit and an official form of picture identification;
F. Fail or refuse to produce upon request for inspection the original,
or a true and correct copy, of the license or permit and an official
form of picture identification;
G. Obstruct, be or present a hazard to pedestrian or vehicular traffic
on the public streets, roads, sidewalks or other rights-of-way within
the Borough;
H. Erect or use any structure, whether temporary or permanent, in
connection with any regulated activities;
I. Fail or refuse to leave or exit the premises of another upon request;
J. Engage in any acts or practices prohibited by the laws of this
commonwealth relating to unfair trade practices and consumer
protection;
K. Solicit or attempt to solicit at any property identified on the "Do
Not Solicit" list; and
L. Violate any of the provisions of this Part.
1. The following shall constitute grounds for suspension, revocation or
nonrenewal of a license issued hereunder:
A. The making of any false statement by an applicant in connection
with the application process described in § 13-404 above;
B. The commission of a prohibited act in the Borough by the licensee
or any of its agents, servants or employees;
C. The conviction of the licensee or any of his agents, servants or
employees of any offense involving a violent crime, a crime of
§ 13-405 FOREWORD § 13-406
FWD:255
§ 13-407. "Do Not Solicit" List. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to establish, publicize, and
maintain a list of properties which, at the request of the owner or occupant,
shall not be subject to any regulated activity, and the Borough shall provide
a copy of the list to every person receiving a license under this Part. The list
shall identify only the properties and shall otherwise contain no personal
information regarding the property owners or occupants. The property shall
remain on the list for a period of not more than five years, or until such
time that the Borough is notified to remove the property from the list, or
the property changes ownership. Property owners may request to remain
on the list at the end of the five-year period.
§ 13-408. Exempt Persons. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
crimen falsi or a crime which is punishable by a term of
incarceration of one year or more, regardless of where committed;
D. A judicial determination that the licensee has violated any law or
regulation relating to unfair trade practices, consumer protection
or the solicitation of charitable contributions, regardless of where
committed; and
E. With respect to the licensee's employer or principal, any of the acts
or omissions described in Subsection 1A through D above.
2. The decision to suspend (including length of suspension), revoke or
refuse to renew a license shall in the first instance be made by the
Borough Manager, who shall state with specificity the grounds thereof
to the applicant or licensee, as the case may be, in writing. In making
his decision, the Borough Manager shall consider whether there has
occurred any violations of this Part, the number, type and severity of the
violations and the past history of the applicant/licensee as reflected in
the information provided or obtained in the application process
described in § 13-404, above. The applicant/licensee shall have a right
of appeal as more particularly described in § 13-410 below.
1. The following persons shall be exempt from the requirements of this
Part:
A. Farmers selling their own produce;
B. Persons selling personal property if the proceeds of the sale are to
be applied to a charitable or philanthropic purpose;
C. A manufacturer or producer of bread or bakery products, meat or
meat products and milk or milk products, exclusive of ice cream or
another frozen dessert;
D. Insurance companies and their agents or brokers authorized to
transact business under the insurance laws of this commonwealth;
§ 13-406 EMMAUS CODE § 13-408
FWD:256
§ 13-409. Fees. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
§ 13-410. Appeals. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
Any person who, upon submission of an application to the Borough, is
denied a license (including a renewal thereof) or who has had his license
suspended or revoked may appeal such action to Borough Council within 30
days of the date of such action by the Borough. Upon receipt of an appeal
hereunder, the parties shall proceed in accordance with the Local Agency
Act, 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 102 et seq., and the requirements of all current Borough
ordinances and resolutions or any successor ordinances or resolutions
thereto.
§ 13-411. Penalties for Violation. [Ord. 1123, 4/6/2015]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof before a District Justice, be subject to a penalty or fine in an amount
not less than $100 and not more than $1,000, together with the costs of
prosecution and attorneys' fees; and in default of payment of such penalty,
fine or costs, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days for each such
E. Persons engaged in regulated activities on private property with
the consent of the owner of the property;
F. Persons engaged in protected, speech under the First Amendment
to the Constitution of the United States of America and Article 1,
Section 7, of the Constitution of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
2. The conduct of exempt activities as set forth in Subsection 1 above shall
not relieve a person from obtaining a license hereunder if that person is
also conducting a nonexempt, regulated activity.
1. The application fee for a Class 1 license shall be $30 per individual.
2. The application fee for a Class 2 license shall be $150 per person.
3. The following licensees shall be exempt from the payment of a license
fee:
A. Charitable or nonprofit organizations who are then acting in the
course and scope of fundraising activities for and on behalf of such
organizations; and
B. Persons acting in full compliance with, and subject to, the
Solicitation of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act of 1990, 10 P.S.
§ 162.1 et seq.
4. Council may, by resolution, adopt a separate fee for the issuance of a
transient merchant identification card.
5. Any fee authorized hereunder shall be subject to modification upon
resolution of Council.
§ 13-408 FOREWORD § 13-411
FWD:257
violation. Each day or portion thereof that such violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. The provisions of this Part shall be enforced
in the same manner as provided for the enforcement of summary offenses
under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure.
§ 13-411 EMMAUS CODE § 13-411
FWD:258
Part 5
PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS
§ 13-501. Reports to Chief of Police. [Ord. 949, 5/20/2002, § 501]
All pawnbrokers, jewelers or dealers buying secondhand jewelry, or dealers
of secondhand coins shall make out and deliver to the Chief of Police, or
his designee, at his office every Monday and Thursday before 10:00 a.m., a
legible and accurate report of all articles taken in pawn or purchase during
the preceding business days. Such reports shall be on a form furnished by
the Chief of Police and shall contain an accurate description, as the form
prescribes, of all articles taken in pawn or purchase, of the amount loaned
on or paid for such articles, and of the person pawning or selling the same.
The buyer shall require proof of identity and current address of anyone
selling said items.
§ 13-502. Penalty. [Ord. 949, 5/20/2002, § 502]
Any person violating the provisions of § 13-501 as aforesaid, shall be fined
not more than $300 or imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 13-501 FOREWORD § 13-502
FWD:259
Chapter 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
[See Zoning regulations]
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 13-502 EMMAUS CODE § 13-502
FWD:260
Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 15-101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 15-102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 15-103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
4. Although the streets in the Borough run generally in a northeastsouthwest
and a northwest-southeast direction, for the purpose of this
chapter, Fourth Street and the street running parallel or generally
parallel to Fourth Street shall be deemed to run in a north-south
direction, and Chestnut and Main Streets and the streets parallel or
generally parallel to Chestnut and Main Streets shall be deemed to run
in an east-west direction.
§ 15-101 FOREWORD § 15-104
FWD:261
§ 15-104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986]
The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and parking
temporarily and in time of emergency:
§ 15-105. Experimental Regulations. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough where for a period of not
more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective as is they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the
law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in
case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of
permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and
parking.
§ 15-106. Traffic on Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction,
Maintenance or Special Events. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
1. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
2. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct
of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic
and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter 15 for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
1. Borough Council shall have authority to close any street or specific part
of a street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police
officers at each end of the closed portion, while construction or
§ 15-104 EMMAUS CODE § 15-106
FWD:262
§ 15-107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages. [Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
maintenance work is under way or a special event is being conducted
on the closed portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such closed portion.
2. Borough Council shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic
area upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under
way and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall
be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop, or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other
device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street;
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least one week in advance of
the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall state the place where and the date when the assemblage is
to be held, the hour when the assemblage may convene and the hour by
which it shall have been completely dispersed. It shall be unlawful for
any person to hold or to participate in any assemblage unless the permit
has been granted, or at any time or place other than that authorized by
the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Mayor, which shall be issued without fee.
Application for the permit shall be made at least two weeks in advance
of the day when the procession is proposed to be held, but in any case
where a state-designated highway is proposed to be used, application
shall be made at least three weeks in advance of the proposed date. The
permit shall specify the date on which the procession is to be held, the
§ 15-106 FOREWORD § 15-107
FWD:263
§ 15-108. Authority of Police Officers. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The police officers and public works flagman with proper attire of the
Borough are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways of the
Borough and at intersections thereof.
§ 15-109. Authorization for Use of Speed Timing Devices. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The Borough of Emmaus Police Department is hereby authorized to use
all mechanical, electrical or electronic speed timing devices for the
determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be
approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within the
Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also hereby
elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under the Vehicle
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 P.S. § 1101 et seq. (1977)
as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
route to be followed by the procession, the hour when and place where
participants may commence to assemble and form before the
procession is under way, the time when the procession may commence
to move along its route, and the time by which the end of the procession
shall have reached the end of the route of the procession and the
procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be unlawful for any
person to hold or to participate in any procession unless the permit
shall have been granted, or under any conditions as to time or route or
otherwise than those stated in the permit.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 15-107 EMMAUS CODE § 15-109
FWD:264
Part 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 15-201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 914, 11/20/2000; by Ord.
1060, 11/2/2009; by Ord. 1112, 9/15/2014; and by Ord. 1135, 3/7/
2016]
§ 15-202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges
and Elevated Structures. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where a maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street. The
speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour with the exception of the
highways listed below:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
Cedar Crest
Boulevard
Chestnut Street and
western boundary
Borough line
40
Chestnut Street 12th Street and western
boundary Borough line
40
Dalton Street East Main Street and
eastern boundary
Borough line
35
East Main Street Ridge Street and Dalton
Street
35
Pennsylvania
Avenue
10th Street and
southern boundary
Borough line
35
South 10th Street Chestnut Street and
Broad Street
35
State Avenue Ridge Street and
northern boundary
Borough line
40
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine and costs as determined by the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, or such other code, rule, regulation,
or other government enactment that is applicable.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
§ 15-201 FOREWORD § 15-202
FWD:265
§ 15-203. Maximum Speed Limits Established for Certain Vehicles
on Hazardous Grades. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 15-204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
1. A speed limit of 15 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
Emmaus
Community Park
Miklencic Drive At park 15 mph
§ 15-202 EMMAUS CODE § 15-204
FWD:266
§ 15-205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 1009, 8/19/2013, § 1]
§ 15-206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal. [Ord.
675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 787, 12/20/1993, § 1; and by
Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 2]
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location
Chestnut Street and Cedar Crest Boulevard
Chestnut Street and Fourth Street
Chestnut Street and Macungie Avenue - South Seventh Street
Chestnut Street and Sixth Street
Chestnut Street and Tenth Street
Main Street and Second Street
Main Street and Third Street
State Avenue and Harrison Street
State Avenue - Main Street and Ridge Street - East Main Street
2. A driver who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
on Facing
Main and Fourth Streets Main Street East
Fourth and Main Streets Fourth Street North
Fourth and Main Streets Fourth Street South
Sixth and Chestnut Streets Sixth Street South
Sixth and Chestnut Streets Chestnut Street East & West
Seventh and Chestnut Streets Seventh Street South
§ 15-204 FOREWORD § 15-206
FWD:267
§ 15-207. One-Way Streets Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 697, 6/20/1988, § 1; by Ord. 713, 5/1/1989; by Ord.
719, 12/4/1989, § 1; by Ord. 732, 4/2/1990, § 1; by Ord. 748, 5/20/
1991; by Ord. 815, 6/6/1995, § 1; by Ord. 827, 3/19/1996, § 1; by Ord.
828, 4/2/1996, § 1; by Ord. 999, 11/7/2005; by Ord. 1068, 5/3/2010;
and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 3]
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
on Facing
Seventh and Chestnut Streets Chestnut Street East & West
East Main Street/State
Avenue/Ridge Street
Ridge Street East
Harrison Street and State
Avenue
Harrison Street West
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $300 and costs.
1. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Adrian Fourth Street Third Street East
Bank Street Fourth Street Fifth Street West
Bank Street Seventh Street Eighth Street West
Brunner Street Chestnut Street Green Street North
East George
Street
State Avenue Williams Street West
Green Street Macungie
Avenue
North Eighth
Street
West
Green Street Short Street Keystone
Avenue
East
Green Street Short Street Fourth Street West
Greenleaf Seventh Street Macungie
Avenue
West
Landis Circle
[Added by Ord.
1119, 1/19/
2015]
South 2nd
Street
South 2nd
Street
North
Main Street Fourth Street Chestnut Street East
§ 15-206 EMMAUS CODE § 15-207
FWD:268
§ 15-208. Rotary Traffic Islands Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986;
as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 4]
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Mulberry Street Elm Street Seem Street
(vicinity of
Lincoln
Elementary
School)
South
Mulberry Street Harrison Street Seem Street South
Penn Street North Street Elm Street North
Penn Street Seem Street Elm Street South
Perkiomen
Street
Chestnut Street Ridge Street North
Perkiomen
Street
Elm Street North Street South
Pike Street Harrison Street Seem Street North
Race Street Thirteenth
Street
Minor Street East
Railroad Street Keystone
Avenue
Second Street West
Railroad Street Sixth Street Oak Street West
Railroad Street Oak Street Bank Street North
Railroad Street Bank Street Seventh Street West
Short Street Chestnut Street Ridge Street North
Short Street Railroad Street Main Street North
Thirteenth
Street
Shimerville
Road
Minor Street North
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle
passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of
the island:
Harrison Street, Macungie Avenue, North Street
East Main Street, State Avenue, Main Street
East Harrison Street, Dalton Street
Chestnut Street, Cedar Crest Boulevard
Broad Street between 5th Street and 6th Street.
§ 15-207 FOREWORD § 15-208
FWD:269
§ 15-209. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 909, 10/2/2000; and by
Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 5]
§ 15-210. Right Turns Only Permitted at Certain Intersections.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 827, 3/19/1996, § 2; and
by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 6]
2. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $300 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited in this section:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel
Not to
Make Into
Green Drive
[Added by Ord.
1106, 4/7/2014]
East Left turns Cedar Crest
Boulevard
Main Street East Left turns Chestnut Street
Main Street
(vehicles exceeding
26,001 lbs.)
East and West Left turns From 0 to 100
block of Main
Street
Northerly
crossover of 1245
Chestnut Street
South Left turns Chestnut Street
Southerly
crossover of 1220
Chestnut Street
North Left turns Chestnut Street
Southerly
crossover of 602
Chestnut Street
North Left turns Chestnut Street
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
§ 15-208 EMMAUS CODE § 15-210
FWD:270
§ 15-211. U-Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 7]
§ 15-212. No-Passing Zones Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 8]
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to make left
turn into or
travel straight
across
Chestnut Street West All Cedar Crest
Boulevard
East Main Street West All State Avenue
Exiting from 335
Main Street
North All Brunner Street
North Street East All Macungie Avenue
Pine Street East 7:00 a.m. -
8:00 a.m.,
school days
(Emmaus High
School in
session)
Macungie Avenue
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
§ 15-210 FOREWORD § 15-212
FWD:271
§ 15-213. Through Highways Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 9]
§ 15-214. Stop Intersections Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 701, 12/5/1988; by Ord. 708, 3/6/1989, § I; by Ord.
712, 5/1/1989, § 1; by Ord. 722, 12/4/1989, § 1; by Ord. 743, 2/19/
1991; by Ord. 773, 5/3/1993, §§ 1, 2; by Ord. 782, 7/6/1993, § 1; by
Ord. 788, 12/20/1993, § 1; by Ord. 791, 6/6/1994, § 1; by Ord. 815, 6/
6/1995, § 2; by Ord. 837, 11/18/1996, § 1; by Ord. 844, 4/7/1997; by
Ord. 863, 2/2/1998, § I; by Ord. 884, 5/17/1999; by Ord. 915, 11/20/
2000; by Ord. 922, 3/5/2001; by Ord. 935, 8/6/2001; by Ord. 955, 8/
19/2002; by Ord. 959, 10/7/2002; by Ord. 961, 12/16/2002; by Ord.
987, 12/20/2004; by Ord. 1026, 4/16/2007; by Ord. 1040, 4/7/2008;
and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 10]
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by Section 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as
the case may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through
highway until he has followed all applicable requirements of that
section of the law:
Highway Between
Broad Street Fourth and Fifth Streets
Cedar Crest Boulevard Chestnut and North Borough line
Chestnut Street Main Street and west Borough
line
Dalton Street East Harrison to Borough line
Main Street Chestnut Street and State Avenue
Penna. Avenue South Tenth to west Borough line
State Avenue Ridge Street to East Borough line
East Main Street State Road to Dalton Street
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-213) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
§ 15-212 EMMAUS CODE § 15-214
FWD:272
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Adrain Street Perkiomen Street East
Adrain Street Second Street East
Adrain Street Sixth Street East and west
Adrain Street Third Street East and west
Alpine Circle East Harrison Street South
Alpine Street East Main Street North and south
Alpine Street Dalton Street North
Alpine Street Evergreen Street North
Arch Street South Tenth Street East
Arch Street South Twelfth Street West
Bank Street Eighth Street West
Bank Street Fifth Street East and west
Bank Street Sixth Street West
Bank Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1166, 12/4/
2017]
South Sixth Street West
Bank Street Eighth Street East
Banner Street East Main Street North
Barrett Road Berger Street South
Barrett Road Third Street East
Beechwood Street Harrison Street North and south
Berger Street Keystone Street East and west
Berger Street Macungie Avenue West
Berger Street Third Street East and west
Berger Street Wenner Street East and west
East Berger
Street
East Greenleaf Street Southeast
Broad Street Fourth Street East and west
§ 15-214 FOREWORD § 15-214
FWD:273
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Broad Street Third Street East
Broad Street Sixth Street East and west
Broad Street Seventh Street East and west
Broad Street Short Street North and south
Broom Street Green Street North
Broom Street Minor Street North and south
Brunner Street Short Street East
Buttonwood
Street
Fox Street West
Buttonwood
Street
South West 31st Street East
Calvary Avenue West Minor Street North
Calvary Avenue West Wood Street South
Camp Street Dalton Street North
Camp Street Evergreen Street South
Camp Street Glenwood Street South
Cherokee Street Liberty Street East and west
Cherokee Street Second Street East
Cherokee Street Third Street East and west
Cherry Street Railroad Street South
Chris Drive Frank Drive North
Dell Street Dalton Street North
Dell Street Evergreen Street North and south
Dell Street Glenwood Street South
Delong Avenue Pennsylvania Avenue North
Donald Drive Little Lehigh South West
Donald Drive Little Lehigh Street East
Donald Drive Macungie Avenue West
Eagle Street Dalton Street North
Eagle Street Evergreen Street North and south
Eagle Street Fernwood Street North and south
Eagle Street Glenwood Street South
East Main Street Dalton Street West
East Main Street Mountain Boulevard East
Eighth Street Chestnut Street North and south
§ 15-214 EMMAUS CODE § 15-214
FWD:274
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Eighth Street Walnut Street North and south
Eleventh Street Chestnut Street South
Eleventh Street Pennsylvania Avenue South
Elm Street Fifth Street East and west
Elm Street Keystone Avenue
Elm Street Sixth Street West
Elm Street State Street East
Elm Street Third Street East and west
Evergreen Street Alpine Street East and west
Evergreen Street Dalton Street West
Evergreen Street Fox Street East and west
Evergreen Street Mountain Boulevard East and west
Evergreen Street South West 31st Street East
Fairview Street South Fourth Street East and west
Fairview Street Fifth Street East
Fairview Street Sixth Street West
Fernwood Street Alpine Street West
Fernwood Street Dell Street East and west
Fernwood Street Fox Street East and west
Fernwood Street Mountain Boulevard East and west
Fernwood Street South West 31st Street East
Fifteenth Street Shimersville Road South
Fifth Street Broad Street North and south
Fifth Street Elm Street North and south
Fifth Street Harrison Street North
Fifth Street Jubilee Street North
Fifth Street Ridge Street North and south
First Street Berger Street North and south
First Street Elm Street North and south
First Street Harrison Street North and south
First Street Main Street North
First Street Seem Street North and south
Fourteenth Street Shimersville Road South
Fourth Street Broad Street North
Fourth Street Ridge Street North and south
§ 15-214 FOREWORD § 15-214
FWD:275
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Fox Street Dalton Street North
Fox Street Fernwood Street North and south
Frank Drive Harris Drive West
Frank Drive Macungie Avenue East and west
Franklin Street Berger Street North and south
Franklin Street Harrison Street North and south
Franklin Street North Street South
Franklin Street Sixth Street East
Franklin Street Spruce Street North and south
Furnace Street Broom Street East and west
Furnace Street Fifth Street East and west
Furnace Street Fourth Street East and west
Furnace Street Second Street East
Furnace Street Seventh Street East and west
Furnace Street Sixth Street West
Furnace Street Tenth Street West
George Street State Avenue East
Glenwood Street Fox Street East and west
Glenwood Street South West 31st Street East
Golden Street Perkiomen Street East
Golden Street Moyer Street West
Green Street Eighth Street East and west
Green Street Fifth Street West
Green Street Fourth Street East and west
Green Street Keystone Street East and west
Green Street Macungie Avenue East and west
Green Street Moyer Street East and west
Green Street Ninth Street East and west
Green Street Perkiomen Street East and west
Green Street Route 29 East
Green Street Second Street East
Green Street Sixth Street East and west
Green Street Third Street East
East Greenleaf
Street
Alpine Circle West
§ 15-214 EMMAUS CODE § 15-214
FWD:276
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Greenleaf Street First Street West
Greenleaf Street Keystone Street East
Greenleaf Street Macungie Avenue West
Greenleaf Street Second Street West
Greenleaf Street Wenner Street East and west
Harris Drive Lawrence Street North
Harris Drive Route 29 West
Harrison Street Dalton Street East
Harrison Street Macungie Avenue West
Harrison Street Sixth Street East and west
Harrison Street Third Street East and west
Henry Drive Macungie Avenue West
Iroquois Street Liberty Street East and west
Iroquois Street Macungie Avenue West
Iroquois Street Seventh Street West
Iroquois Street Third Street East
Jefferson Street State Avenue East
Jefferson Street Wenner Street West
Jubilee Street Fourth Street East
Jubilee Street Sixth Street West
Keystone Avenue Elm Street North and south
Keystone Avenue Harrison Street North and south
Keystone Avenue Main Street North and south
Keystone Avenue Minor Street South
Keystone Avenue Pine Street 4-way
Keystone Avenue Railroad Street South
Keystone Avenue Ridge Street North and south
Keystone Avenue Spruce Street North and south
Kline's Lane Main Street North
Lawrence Drive Little Lehigh Drive,
South
West
Lawrence Drive Macungie Avenue East and west
Lawrence Drive Seventh Street East
Lee Street Dalton Street South
Lee Street Harrison Street West
§ 15-214 FOREWORD § 15-214
FWD:277
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Lehigh Street Broad Street North and south
Lehigh Street Harrison Street South
Lehigh Street Jubilee Street North
Lehigh Street Long Street North
Liberty Street Barrett Road South
Liberty Street Berger Street North
Liberty Street Harrison Street South
North Linden
Court
Harrison Street South
South Linden
Court
Harrison Street North
Little Lehigh
Drive
Lawrence Drive South
Little Lehigh
Drive
Route 29 West
Little Lehigh
Drive North
Little Lehigh Drive South
Little Lehigh
Drive South
Little Lehigh Drive North
Long Street Fifth Street East and west
Long Street Lehigh Street East
Long Street Sixth Street West
Long Street Perkiomen Street North and south
Long Street Ninth Street East and west
Macungie Avenue North/Harrison Streets North and south
Main Street Chestnut Street East
East Main Street Alpine Street East and west
East Main Street Dalton Street West
East Main Street Mountain Boulevard East
Miklencic Drive Shimerville Road South
Minor Street Broom Street East and West
Minor Street Fifth Street East and west
Minor Street Fourth Street East and west
Minor Street Kline's Lane East
Minor Street Second Street East and west
Minor Street Sixth Street East and west
§ 15-214 EMMAUS CODE § 15-214
FWD:278
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Minor Street South Seventh Street West
Miriam Drive Frank Drive North
Mountain
Boulevard
Dalton Street North
Moyer Street Green Street North and south
Ninth Street Chestnut Street North and south
North Street Fifth Street East and west
North Street Fourth Street East and west
North Street Harrison Street North
North Street Keystone Avenue East and west
North Street Macungie Avenue East
North Street Route 29 West
North Street Second Street East and west
North Street Sixth Street East and west
North Street State Street East
North Street Sixth Street West
North Street Third Street East and west
Oak Street Furnace Street North and south
Penn Street Elm Street North and south
Penn Street North Street South
Penn Street Seem Street North
Perkiomen Street Harrison Street North
Perkiomen Street Long Street North and south
Perkiomen Street Ridge Street North and south
Pine Street Barrett Road South
Pine Street Franklin Street East and west
Pine Street Keystone Avenue 4-way
Pine Street Keystone Street East and west
Pine Street Macungie Avenue East and west
Pine Street Third Street West
Pine Top Circle Fifteenth Street West
Race Street West Minor Street East
Railroad Street Fourth Street East
Railroad Street Second Street East and west
Railroad Street Third Street East and west
§ 15-214 FOREWORD § 15-214
FWD:279
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Ridge Street Fifth Street East and west
Ridge Street Fourth Street East and west
Ridge Street Macungie Avenue West
Ridge Street Second Street East and west
Ridge Street Seventh Street East and west
Ridge Street Sixth Street East and west
Ridge Street Third Street East and west
Robert Road West Minor Street South
Second Street Berger Street North and south
Second Street Elm Street North and south
Second Street Harrison Street North and south
Second Street Pine Street North and south
Second Street Ridge Street North and south
Seem Street Fifth Street East and west
Seem Street Keystone Street East and west
Seem Street Second Street East and west
Seem Street Sixth Street West
Seem Street Third Street East and west
Seventh Street Berger Street North and south
Seventh Street Broad Street North and south
Seventh Street Harrison Street North and south
Seventh Street Minor Street North and south
Seventh Street North Street North and south
Seventh Street Pine Street North and south
Seventh Street Walnut Street South
Seventh Street
Circle
Pine Street South
Shimersville Road Pennsylvania Avenue East
Short Street Minor Street North and south
Sixteenth Street Shimerville Road South
Sixth Street Berger Street North
Sixth Street Broad Street North and south
Sixth Street Harrison Street North and south
Sixth Street North Street North and south
Spruce Street Barrett Road East and west
§ 15-214 EMMAUS CODE § 15-214
FWD:280
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Spruce Street First Street East and west
Spruce Street Franklin Street East and west
Spruce Street Macungie Avenue West
Spruce Street Second Street East and west
Tenth Street Broad Street North and south
Tenth Street North Street North
Tenth Street Walnut Street South
Third Street Elm Street North and south
Third Street Harrison Street North and south
Third Street Ridge Street North and south
Third Street Spruce Street North and south
Thirteenth Street West Minor Street North and south
Turner Street Berger Street North
Turner Street Harrison Street South
Turner Street Iroquois Street North
Twelfth Street West Broad Street North and south
Twelfth Street Pennsylvania Avenue North and south
Walnut Street Macungie Avenue East and west
Walnut Street Ninth Street East and west
Walnut Street Sixth Street East
Walnut Street Tenth Street West
Wayne Circle Seventh Street East
Wenner Street Harrison Street North and south
Wenner Street Jefferson and Seem
Streets
North and south
Wenner Street Spruce Street North and south
Wenner Street East George Street South
West Furnace Calvary East
West Minor Street Fourteenth Street West
West Minor Street Sixteenth Street East
West Minor Street Twelfth Street East
West Minor Street Robert Road West
West Wood Street Sixteenth Street East
West Wood Street West Minor Street West
Wieder's Lane East Main Street North
§ 15-214 FOREWORD § 15-214
FWD:281
§ 15-215. Yield Intersections Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 956, 8/19/2002; and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 11]
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Williams Street Berger Street North and south
Williams Street Elm Street North and south
Williams Street Ridge Street South
Williams Street Spruce Street North and south
Williams Street East George Street North
Wood Street Fifth Street East
Wood Street Fourth Street West
Wood Street Sixth Street East and west
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 15-213) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by Section 3323(c) of
the Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Beechwood Street Jefferson Street South
Cherokee Street Franklin Street West
East Main Street State Avenue North
Fourth Street Third Street North
Iroquois Street North Sixth Street West
Macungie Avenue North Street West
Pine Street Franklin Street East and west
Seventh Street Circle Franklin Street East
Spruce Street Seventh Street East
Wayne Circle Spruce Street North
West Furnace Street West Minor Street West
§ 15-214 EMMAUS CODE § 15-215
FWD:282
§ 15-216. Play Highways Established and Authorized. [Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986; as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 12]
§ 15-217. Operation of Recreational Type Vehicles. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986]
It shall be unlawful to operate snowmobiles, mini-bikes, all-terrain vehicles
or any other motorized recreational vehicle upon Borough streets or at any
Borough park lands; unless authorized by Borough Council or authorized by
the Pa. Vehicle Code.
§ 15-218. Restrictions on Use of Pushcarts. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986;
as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 13]
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more
than $300 and costs.
1. The following areas upon the streets in the Borough are established as
play highways:
Street Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
2. The Mayor is authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he
deems that action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any part of any street in the Borough, where sledding and
coasting, shall be permitted. That play highway shall be set apart for
the purpose under the direction of the Mayor.
3. No person shall drive any motor vehicle upon any play highway at any
time when that street shall be designated as a play highway, except in
case of emergency, with special permission of the Mayor or of the police
officer in charge, who shall first clear that play highway of all persons
using it for the purpose for which it was set aside. Any person who
violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not more than $300 and
costs.
1. The word "pushcart", as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in subsection 3 of this
section.
§ 15-215 FOREWORD § 15-218
FWD:283
§ 15-219. Establishing School Zones. [Added by Ord. No. 1178, 6/18/
2018]
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough, of not less than $100 for any calendar year, not less
than $50 for any six-month period, or not less than $25 for any threemonth
period. The permit fee may be amended from time to time by
Resolution of Council. The permit shall be granted to the applicant,
upon payment of the fee, and upon his signing an agreement with
Borough Council that he shall be bound by the conditions imposed by
Borough Council and made a part of the permit, dealing with the
following matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of no less
than $25 and not more than $300 and costs.
1. The following streets and lengths are established as School Zones
within the Borough of Emmaus.
Street From Distance To Times
East Minor
Street
Northwest
apex of
South Cherry
Street
813 lf Approximate
center of 33
East Minor
Street
School days:
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Elm Street Southwest
apex of
Perkiomen
Street
656 lf Southeast
apex of
North 6th
Street
School days:
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
§ 15-218 EMMAUS CODE § 15-219
FWD:284
Street From Distance To Times
Harrison
Street
Northwest
apex of
North 2nd
Street
623 lf Northeast
apex of
North 3rd
Street
School days:
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Macungie
Avenue
Northeast
apex of
North Street
1,484 lf Southwest
apex of Pine
Street and
Macungie
Avenue
School days:
6:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.;
1:30 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
North Street Starting 162
lf from the
west of the
Southwest
apex of
Harrison and
North Street
1,600 lf Westward
towards
intersection
of North
10th Street
and Cedar
Crest
Boulevard
School days:
6:30 a.m. to
8:30 a.m.;
1:30 p.m. to
3:00 p.m.
North Street Northwest
apex of
Perkiomen
Street
656 lf Northeast
apex of
North 6th
Street
School days:
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
Seem Street Southwest
apex of
North 2nd
Street
591 lf Southeast
apex of
North 3rd
Street
School days:
8:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.;
3:00 p.m. to
4:00 p.m.
2. The speed limit shall be set at 15 miles per hour for all vehicular traffic
during the established days and times as set forth in Subsection 1.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine and costs as determined by the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, or such other code, rule, regulation,
or other government enactment that is applicable.
§ 15-219 FOREWORD § 15-219
FWD:285

Part 3
RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND
LOAD
§ 15-301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 795, 8/15/1994,
§ 1]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a
gross weight in excess of 10,000 pounds for that bridge or street or part
of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between
Berger Street Wenner and Macungie Avenue
Buttonwood Street Fox and Borough line
Camp Street Dalton and Glenwood Streets
Dell Street Dalton and Glenwood Streets
Eagle Street Dalton and Glenwood Streets
East Main Street Dalton and Mt. Boulevard
Evergreen Street Dalton and Borough line
Fernwood Street Alpine and Borough line
Fox Street Dalton and Glenwood Streets
Frank Drive Harris Drive and Macungie Avenue
Franklin Street North and Seventh Street Circle
Glenwood Street Mt. Boulevard and Borough line
Harris Drive Lawrence Drive and Cedar Crest
Boulevard
Harrison Street Dalton and Macungie Avenue
Lawrence Drive Seventh Street and Little Lehigh Drive
Little Lehigh Drive Lawrence Drive and Cedar Crest
Boulevard
Mt. Boulevard Dalton and Glenwood Streets
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Sections 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code,
and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150
for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs. Provided: nothing in this section
shall prohibit any person from driving an emergency vehicle on any of
those streets or parts of streets or from driving on any of those streets
or parts of streets a truck or other commercial vehicle making local
§ 15-301 FOREWORD § 15-301
FWD:287
§ 15-302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 15-303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord.
1099, 8/19/2013, § 14]
deliveries to or pickups from premises located along that street or part
of a street.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for
any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under Section 4902(a) and Section 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle
Code, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and
costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by Section 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation
of the restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of
street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(b) and 4902(g)(1) of the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A., and upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $75, except that any person convicted of operating a vehicle
with a gross weight in excess of a posted weight shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $150 plus $150 for each 500
pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum
allowable weight.
§ 15-301 EMMAUS CODE § 15-303
FWD:288
Part 4
GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 15-401. Vehicles to Be Parked Within Marked Spaces. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 15-402. Angle Parking Required on Portions of Certain Streets.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 1052, 4/6/2009; and by
Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 15]
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Side Between
Main Street North and south Fourth and Chestnut Streets
On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at the
angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 15-403. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 697, 6/20/1988, § 2; by
Ord. 699, 9/6/1988; by Ord 707, 3/6/1989, § I; by Ord. 721, 12/4/
1989, § 1; by Ord. 731, 3/19/1990, § 1; by Ord. 745, 3/18/1991; by
Ord. 747, 5/20/1991; by Ord. 753, 9/3/1991, § 1, by Ord. 754, 9/3/
1991, § 1; by Ord. 756, 10/7/1991, § 1; by Ord. 758, 12/2/1991, § 1;
by Ord. 759, 12/16/1991, § 1; by Ord. 764, 3/16/1992, § 1; by Ord.
768, 12/7/1992, § 1; by Ord. 773, 5/3/1993, § 3; by Ord. 775, 6/21/
1993, § 1; by Ord. 786, 12/20/1993, § 1; by Ord. 812, 3/20/1995, § 1;
by Ord. 813, 3/20/1995, § 1; by Ord. 815, 6/6/1995, § 3; by Ord. 826,
2/20/1996; by Ord. 835, 7/15/1996, § I; by Ord. 857, 10/13/1997,
§ 403; by Ord. 863, 2/2/1998, § II; by Ord. 872, 10/19/1998; by Ord.
874, 11/2/1998; by Ord. 894, 12/6/1999; by Ord. 895, 12/6/1999; by
Ord. 896, 12/6/1999; by Ord. 898, -/-/1999; by Ord. 899, -/-/1999; by
Ord. 912, 11/20/2000; by Ord. 916, 11/20/2000; by Ord. 920, 1/22/
2001; by Ord. 921, 2/12/2001; by Ord. 929, 6/18/2001; by Ord. 950,
5/20/2002; by Ord. 960, 11/18/2002; by Ord. 963, 3/3/2003; by Ord.
971, 10/6/2003; by Ord. 972, 10/6/2003; by Ord. 996, 7/18/2005; by
Ord. 1004, 1/16/2006; by Ord. 1038, 4/7/2008; by Ord. 1053, 4/6/
2009; by Ord. 1056, 1/18/2010; by Ord. 1090, 11/5/2012; by Ord.
1091, 11/5/2012; and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 16]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Adrian Street North Andrew and Short Streets
Adrian Street South Short and South 3rd Streets
§ 15-401 FOREWORD § 15-403
FWD:289
Street Side Between
Apple Street North Beginning at the west curb of Williams
Street and extending westerly to the
east curb of Wenner Street
Arch Street North Tenth and Twelfth
Arch Street South 40' 10" to the East and 50' to the West
at the entrance to the Rodale parking
lot in the 1000 block of Arch Street
Bank Street North and
south
Fourth and Sixth Streets
Bank Street Center of
Street
Dead End of Bank Street at the 900
Block
Broad Street South Fourth and Fifth Streets
Broad Street North Seventh and Tenth Streets
Brunner Street East and
west
Chestnut and Green Streets
Chestnut (S.R.
2005)
South Main and Tenth Streets
Chestnut (S.R.
2005)
North and
south
Tenth and Cedar Crest Boulevard
Chestnut (S.R.
2005)
North Short Street + 200' W of Short Street
Chestnut (S.R.
2005)
North and
south
Property line of Auto Zone and the
Borough limits
East George Street South Williams and Wenner Streets
East George Street North and
south
A distance of 220 feet on East George
Street west from State Avenue
East Harrison
Street
North State and Reading R.R.
Fairview Street North Sixth and Fifth Streets
Fairview Street South 300 block
Fairview Street North 301 feet west of South 5th Street at
PP&L Pole #62797/S44335 and
continuing west to South 6th Street
Fourth Street West Railroad and Broad Streets
Fourth Street East Chestnut and Golden Streets
North Fourth
Street
West From the point of the intersection of
North Fourth Street and Elm Street
south 52'
§ 15-403 EMMAUS CODE § 15-403
FWD:290
Street Side Between
South Fourth
Street [Added by
Ord. 1109, 7/21/
2014]
East and
West
Bridge located between Railroad Street
and Jubilee Street
Glenwood Street North For a distance of 124 feet from Borough
Line Park
Glenwood Street South For a distance of 213 feet from Borough
Line Park
Green Drive North Cedar Crest Boulevard and Chestnut
Street
Green Street North and
south
Tenth and Willow Streets
Harrison Street North 200 feet from Wenner Street East near
the property boundary and the drainage
area
John Street East and
West
300 Block
Keystone Avenue East South edge of Moravian Church Garage
to corner of Keystone Avenue/Railroad
Street
Keystone Avenue West 30 feet North of Keystone Avenue/
Railroad Street
South Keystone
Avenue
West From the end west curb at the end of
South Keystone Avenue running 136
feet clockwise around the circumference
of the cul-de-sac known as the 1803
House Turnaround
Klines Lane West Southernmost track of Blue Mountain
Railroad to the Borough line
Lee Street West Harrison and Dalton Streets
Lehigh Street East & West Harrison Street to Carl Street
Macungie Avenue West Harrison and Pine Streets
Macungie Avenue East 60 feet to the north of the intersection
of Pine Street
Main Street South Keystone and East Main Streets
Macungie Avenue North Klines Lane and Ridge Streets
East Main Street South RR overpass and Weiders Land
East Main Street North #3 Fire Co. to West of Bridge
Minor Street North Andrew Street and South 4th Street
§ 15-403 FOREWORD § 15-403
FWD:291
Street Side Between
East Minor Street
[Repealed by
Ord. 1157, 8/21/
2017]
East Minor Street
[Added by Ord.
1162, 10/2/2017]
South From Klines Lane westwardly for 459
linear feet
West Minor Street North From 12th Street to the corner
Moyer Street West Jubilee and Golden Streets
Moyer Street West Chestnut and Green Streets
North 6th Street East 56 feet north of Ridge/North 6th Street
intersection
North 6th Street East 76 feet south of Ridge/North 6th Street
intersection
North 6th Street West 85 feet north of Walnut/North 6th Street
intersection
North 6th Street East Long Street and North Street
North 10th Street East and
west
Walnut and North Streets
North Street North and
south
Macungie Avenue and Cedar Crest
Boulevard
Penn Street East Elm and Seem Streets
Penn Street West South 200 feet from Seem Street
Pennsylvania
Avenue
West 10th Street to 13th Street
Pennsylvania
Avenue
North and
South
10th Street to 13th Street
Perkiomen Street East Elm Street and North Street
Pine Street South Distance of 228 feet west of west curb
line of Macungie Avenue and extending
west for a distance of 50 feet
Pine Street South Distance of 327 feet west of the west
curb line of Macungie Avenue extending
for a distance of 65 feet
Pine Top Circle South South 15th Street to the beginning of
the cul-de-sac
Railroad Street North and
south
Keystone and Third Streets
Railroad Street
[Added by Ord.
1120, 3/2/2015]
South South 4th Street and South 5th Street
(including intersection of South 5th
Street and Railroad Street)
§ 15-403 EMMAUS CODE § 15-403
FWD:292
Street Side Between
Ridge Street North Starting 55 feet west of west curb line
of 3rd Street and extending westerly for
154 feet for "No Parking Fire Lane"
Ridge Street South A distance of 141 feet on Ridge to
Keystone Avenue
Shimerville Road North and
south
PA Avenue and Bridge
Shimerville Road North South 16th Street west to the Borough
line
Short Street East Main and Ridge Streets
Short Street West Brunner and Ridge Streets
Sixteenth Street West West Wood Street south to a point 40'
south of PP&L pole no. 62230S44015
Sixteenth Street West Fire hydrant zone south to Shimerville
Road
Sixteenth Street East Shimerville Road and West Minor Street
State Road East and
west
Ridge Street to Borough line
South 5th Street East Wood Street and Furnace Street
Running 75 feet
South 6th Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1167, 12/4/
2017]
East From Chestnut Street southerly to
Jubilee Street
South 6th Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1167, 12/4/
2017]
West Beginning at 28 feet from the
southwestern curb of Chestnut Street
southerly for 49 feet
South 5th Street East Starting at intersection of Wood Street
going 77 feet north
South 7th Street East Minor and the Borough line
South 7th Street East Beginning 20' South of the South Curb
of Chestnut Street and Extending
Southerly for 60'
South 7th Street East Beginning 24 feet south of the south
curb of Chestnut Street and extending
southerly for 60 feet
South 7th Street West Conrail tracks and Broad Street except
80' south of the fire hydrant
§ 15-403 FOREWORD § 15-403
FWD:293
Street Side Between
South 7th Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1192, 8/19/
2019]
West Southeast apex of Minor Street
southerly to the driveway entrance at
202 South 7th Street for 14 feet
South 10th Street East and
West
Chestnut and Furnace Streets
South 14th Street West Shimerville Road to the Conrail Railroad
dead end
South 15th Street Northeast Beginning at the Joseph T. Miklencic
property for a distance of 200 feet more
or less.
South 15th Street Southwest Beginning at the Joseph T. Miklencic
property for a distance of 50 feet more
or less; Along the Easterly right-of-way
line of the Pennsylvania Turnpike for a
distance of 68 feet more or less; Along
the Easterly side of the Horace T.
Hendricks property for a distance of 160
feet more or less.
South 15th Street East Shimerville Road to a point of Joseph
Miklencic's property defined as South
28°00'W
South 12th Street
and Pennsylvania
Avenue
Southeast
corner of
West Minor Street South From the point of the intersection of
Race Street and South 12th Street east
150 feet
§ 15-404. (Reserved)
§ 15-404.1. Parking Prohibited in Certain Locations Certain Days
and Hours. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 695, 3/7/
1988; by Ord. 697, 6/20/1988, § 3; by Ord. 721, 12/4/1989; by Ord.
815, 6/6/1995, § 4; by Ord. 845, 4/7/1997; by Ord. 886, 8/2/1999; by
Ord. 897, 12/6/1999; by Ord. 900, -/-/2000; by Ord. 901, -/-/1999; by
Ord. 968, 6/16/2003; by Ord. 1005, 2/6/2006; by Ord. 1056, 1/18/
2010; by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 17; by Ord. 1138, 4/6/2016; and by
Ord. 1157, 8/21/2017]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
§ 15-403 EMMAUS CODE § 15-404.1
FWD:294
Street Side Between Days Hours
Chestnut
Street
North Short & 10th Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
Chestnut
Street
Two parking spaces in
front of crossovers at
731 Chestnut
Mon. - Fri.
Saturday
(Except on
Legal
Holidays)
9:00 a.m. - 5:00
p.m.
9:00 a.m. - 12:00
p.m.
Elm Street South Perkiomen
Street going
west 315 feet
School Days 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Main Street North
& South
Ridge to 4th
Street
Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
Main Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
1186, 3/18/
2019]
North
and
South
South 4th
Street and 332
Main Street
Sundays May
1 to November
30
3:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Main Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
1186, 3/18/
2019]
North
and
South
South 4th
Street and 332
Main Street
2nd and 4th
Sundays of
month,
December 1 to
April 30
3:00 a.m. to 1:00
p.m.
§ 15-404.1 FOREWORD § 15-404.1
FWD:295
Street Side Between Days Hours
East Minor
Street
South "Bus parking"
zone beginning
at the east curb
of Cherry Street
and extending
easterly 677
feet
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
East Minor
Street
North "No parking"
zone beginning
at the east curb
of Keystone
Avenue and
extending
easterly 252
feet
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
East Minor
Street
North "No parking"
zone beginning
15 feet east of
the east curb of
Cherry Street
and extending
easterly 290
feet
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
North Street North Perkiomen and
Moyer Streets
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
North Street North West of
Perkiomen
Street end of
school property
line
Mon - Fri 7:30 a.m. - 4:30
p.m.
North Street North Perkiomen and
Moyer
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Penn Street West South 200 feet
from Seem
Street
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Railroad
Street
North 4th & 5th
Streets
Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
§ 15-404.1 EMMAUS CODE § 15-404.1
FWD:296
Street Side Between Days Hours
Seem Street North Mulberry and
Pike Streets
School 7:30 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
Short Street West Main & Brunner Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
South 4th
Street
[Added by
Ord. No.
1186, 3/18/
2019]
West Chestnut Street
and Jubilee
Street
Sundays May
1 to November
30
3:00 a.m. to 3:00
p.m.
Wood Street South 40 feet east and
west of the
center of the
handicap ramp
in front of 560
Wood Street
Mon.-Fri. 7:00 a.m. - 4:00
p.m.
3rd Street East &
West
Green &
Railroad
Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
3rd Street West 77 feet south
from the end of
the curb radius
at the
intersection of
North 3rd
Street and
North 4th
Street
Mon. - Sat. 24
(except legal
holidays)
§ 15-404.1 FOREWORD § 15-404.1
FWD:297
Street Side Between Days Hours
4th Street East &
West
Chestnut &
Green
Mon. 7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
4th Street West Chestnut &
Railroad
Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
4th Street East Golden & Broad Mon.
(Excluding
those Mondays
that fall on a
legal holiday)
(This shall not
be in effect
from
December
1-March 31)
7:00 - 9:00 a.m.
5th Street,
North
East Directly
adjacent to the
entrance of the
day school near
Ridge Street
Mon. - Fri. 9:00 a.m. - 11:30
a.m.
§ 15-404.2. Storage of Vehicles on Streets Prohibited. [Ord. 695, 3/
7/1988]
No vehicle shall be stored upon any street. As used herein "stored" shall
mean the parking of a vehicle in one place upon any street continuously for
more than 72 hours.
§ 15-404.3. Unlawful to Park Inoperative, Uninspected or
Unregistered Vehicles. [Ord. 695, 3/7/1988]
It shall be hereafter unlawful to park or leave on the streets or highways
or public property of the Borough of Emmaus mechanically inoperable
vehicles, or vehicles without current registration plates or vehicles without
current inspection stickers.
§ 15-404.1 EMMAUS CODE § 15-404.4
FWD:298
§ 15-404.4. Resident Permit Parking. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
added by Ord. 774, 5/3/1993, § 1; as amended by Ord. 805, 11/7/
1994; by Ord. 806, 11/7/1994, § 1; by Ord. 829, 4/1/1996, §§ 1-3; by
Ord. 847, 4/7/1997; by Ord. 864, 2/2/1998; by Ord. 907, 8/7/2000; by
Ord. 911, 11/20/2000; and by Ord. 1047, 2/2/2009]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked,
for a period of time in excess of one hour on weekdays between 7:00
a.m. and 3:00 p.m., on any of the following streets or parts of streets,
any vehicle that does not have an approved resident parking permit:
Street Location
Berger Street From Macungie Avenue to Franklin Street
Greenleaf Street From Macungie Avenue to 7th Street
Harrison Street From Macungie Avenue to 7th Street
Iroquois Street [Added
by Ord. 1122, 3/16/
2015]
From Macungie Avenue to North 7th Street
Circle
Macungie Avenue From North Street to Pine Street
Macungie Avenue Walnut Street to North Street
Macungie Avenue Pine Street to Iroquois Street
Macungie Avenue Iroquois Street to Frank Drive
Macungie Avenue Walnut Street to Harrison Street
North Street From Macungie Avenue to 7th Street
Pine Street From Macungie Avenue to 7th Street
Pine Street Entire 600 block
Ridge Street Macungie Avenue to North 7th Street
Ridge Street North 8th Street to Crestway
Spruce Street From Macungie Avenue to 7th Street
Spruce Street From Franklin Street to 7th Street
Walnut Street Macungie Avenue to 9th Street
Wayne Circle From Spruce Street to 7th Street
7th Street From Harrison Street to Wayne Circle
7th Street Ridge Street to Harrison Street
7th Street Wayne Circle to Pine Street
7th Street Circle Pine Street to intersection of 7th Street and
Franklin Street
8th Street, North Walnut Street to Ridge Street
2. Purpose. The purpose of the resident parking program is to promote the
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough, reduce hazardous
traffic conditions, and the overburdening of existing streets and roads.
§ 15-404.4 FOREWORD § 15-404.4
FWD:299
3. Residential Permit Parking Program. The Emmaus Police Department is
hereby authorized to designate, subject to the approval of Borough
Council as hereby provided, certain streets and other public areas
within the Borough of Emmaus as permit parking areas in which
resident vehicles displaying valid parking permits may stand or be
parked without limitation by parking time restrictions established by
this section. Vehicles not displaying valid parking permits may stand or
be parked for a limited time not to exceed the time specified upon
adequately posted signs.
4. Designation of Residential Parking Areas. A residential area or street
shall be considered for designation as residential permit parking area
provided that designation criteria establishment by this section be
satisfied and that Borough Council, through enactment of an ordinance,
authorize the posting of appropriate signs specifying time limits and
period of the day for its application.
5. Designation Criteria. A residential area shall be deemed impacted and
thereby eligible for residential permit parking providing that the
following criteria are satisfied:
A. At least 50% of the street level, from footage use, is residential or
nonbusiness related.
B. During any period between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., on
Wednesdays, except holidays, the number of vehicles parked and/or
standing, legally or illegally, at on-street parking spaces, is equal to
70% of the legal on-street parking capacity of the area.
C. If the above criteria is not met at any time, the Emmaus Police
Department shall notify the Borough Council. The Borough Council
may consider revoking the residential parking permit status for
that street.
D. A street may be considered as a potential residential parking area
upon the receipt by Borough Council of a verified petition signed by
at least 90% of the residents on that street.
E. The signature of a resident on the petition demonstrates a
willingness to purchase a permit for this program.
F. Surveys shall be conducted of potential residential parking areas to
establish whether the criteria for establishing resident parking has
been satisfied.
G. Once established, a residential parking area may be abandoned
upon receipt of a verified petition signed by at least 90% of the
residents of that street.
6. Issuance of Permit Parking. Following Borough Council's approval of
the designation of residential permit parking area, the Police
Department may issue appropriate permits and shall cause parking
§ 15-404.4 EMMAUS CODE § 15-404.4
FWD:300
signs to be erected in the area indicating the times and conditions
under which parking shall be allowed. A permit shall be issued upon
application and payment of the applicable fee only to the owner and
operator of a motor vehicle who resides on the appropriate street. A
separate permit shall be required for each motor vehicle. Eligibility for
a permit shall be as follows:
A. Residents. The resident must prove residency and vehicle
ownership or evidence of having a leased or company owned
vehicle. Criteria shall be established for proof of residence. A
separate application shall be required for each vehicle and each
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee.
B. Visitors. Special permits may be issued to visitors for a period of
time not to exceed 14 days. No resident of a residential permit
parking area shall be issued more than two visitor permits at any
time.
7. Designation Process. If the area in question is not an approved
residential permit parking area and a petition signed by the required
number of residents is filed at which point a Committee of Council will
schedule and administer a hearing and then make a recommendation to
Council. Every resident of the proposed area will be notified of the
hearing by mail. Borough Council will make the final decision whether
to designate an area as an official residential permit parking area.
8. Display of Permit. A permit shall be displayed on the left side of the rear
bumper.
9. Permit Parking Exemption.
A. A resident vehicle on which is displayed a valid parking permit as
provided for herein shall be permitted to stand or be parked in the
residential permit parking area for which the permit has been
issued without being limited by time restrictions established
pursuant to this section. However, said resident's vehicle shall not
be exempt from parking restrictions or prohibitions established
pursuant to authority other than this section including, but not
limited to, "stopping and parking," "street sweeping," "loading
zones," "five minute parking zones," "handicapped zones" and any
other special parking restrictions.
B. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee the holder thereof
an on-street parking space within the designated residential permit
parking area.
10. Application for and Duration of Permit. Upon application and receipt of
requisite fee, a parking permit will be issued for each vehicle owned by
a resident on a street designated for resident permit parking. Permits
shall be valid for so long as the original applicant resides on said street
and owns said vehicle. Each application for a parking permit shall
contain information sufficient to identify the applicant, his resident
§ 15-404.4 FOREWORD § 15-404.4
FWD:301
§ 15-405. Parking of Trailers, Placement of Dumpsters and Portable
Storage Containers, and Repair of Vehicles on Streets Regulated.
[Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 873, 11/2/1998; by Ord.
1099, 8/19/2013, § 18; and by Ord. No. 1173, 5/7/2018]
address or address of real property owned or leased within the
residential permit parking area, and the license number of the motor
vehicle for which application is made and all other information as may
be deemed relevant by the Emmaus Police Department. If a resident
sells or otherwise transfers a vehicle bearing a permit parking sticker,
he shall remove the sticker before the transfer. If another vehicle is
purchased, a new application with the requisite fee must be made. A
replacement sticker for the same vehicle can be acquired at no charge
to the resident.
11. Permit Fees. There shall be no charge for each residential parking
permit.
12. Revocation of Permit. The Borough is authorized to revoke the
residential parking permit of any person found to be in violation of this
section and, upon written notification thereof, the person shall
surrender such permit to the Borough.
1. Definitions. The following words or terms shall have the following
meanings for this section:
DUMPSTER — A container used to temporarily store trash, refuse,
construction refuse or debris until such material is removed for disposal
by an authorized refuse hauler.
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — A portable, weather-resistant
receptacle designed and used for the storage or shipment of household
goods, wares, building materials or merchandise. This term shall not
include roll-off containers or storage containers having storage
capacity of less than 150 cubic feet. (Example of a roll-off container:
municipal yard waste and debris containers or open/unclosed
containers.)
TRAILER — Any nonmotorized vehicle designed to carry property,
goods, boats or merchandise and designed to be drawn by a motor
vehicle or truck tractor.
2. Parking of Trailers Without Attached Motive Power Prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain parked, on any
street or part of any street within the Borough of Emmaus a trailer as
defined above without having attached thereto a means of mechanical
traction and motive power so constructed or designed for the purpose
of pulling or drawing such trailer, except when temporary parking is
required for loading and unloading of a delivery of goods, merchandise
or materials.
§ 15-404.4 EMMAUS CODE § 15-405
FWD:302
3. Permit Required Prior to Placement of Dumpsters or Portable Storage
Containers on Any Street or Public Thoroughfare.
A. Dumpsters or portable storage containers may be placed at the
edge of the public street of the Borough only when it is not possible
to locate them on a private property.
B. All persons who place or cause dumpsters or portable storage
containers to be placed on any street or public thoroughfare must
first acquire a permit for such placement from the Borough. Permit
fees and a completed dumpster or portable storage container
permit application shall be submitted to the Borough through the
office of the Code Official for review and issuance of permit. The
Borough may deny a permit for reasons of safety, traffic congestion,
clear sight distance obstruction or other reason which may be
deemed proper by the Code Official.
C. Any dumpster for construction refuse placed upon the street shall
be permitted to remain for no longer than 60 days and shall be
properly marked with reflectors, reflective tape and/or flashing
yellow lights.
D. Any portable storage container placed upon the public street shall
be permitted to remain for no longer than 30 days and shall be
properly marked with reflectors, reflective tape and/or flashing
yellow lights.
4. Additional Regulations for Portable Storage Containers.
A. General Requirements.
(1) No more than one portable storage container having a storage
capacity no greater than 1,088 cubic feet shall be permitted on
a zoning lot.
(2) Up to three storage containers may be allowed on a zoning lot,
provided that each individual container has a storage capacity
of no greater than 350 cubic feet.
(3) No portable storage container shall have dimensions greater
than 16 feet in length, eight feet in width, or 8 1/2 feet in
height.
(4) All portable storage containers shall be in a condition free from
rust, peeling paint and other forms of deterioration.
(5) No container shall be placed in the clear sight triangle of any
intersection in streets and/or alleys.
5. Vehicle Repair Work on Street. No person shall park or allow to be
parked any vehicle on any street or part of any street within the
Borough of Emmaus for the principal purpose of repairing said vehicle,
except for repairs necessitated by an emergency when such repairs
§ 15-405 FOREWORD § 15-405
FWD:303
§ 15-405.1. Parking of Commercial Motor Vehicles, Truck Tractors,
Trailers, Buses, Motor Homes, and Trucks with Truck-Campers,
Regulations and Prohibitions. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as added by
Ord. 997, 7/18/2005; and as amended by Ord. 1030, 8/6/2007; by
Ord. 1087, 1/7/2013; and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 18]
would reasonably be expected to take no more than one hour to make
the vehicle operable.
6. Penalties.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 per
day per offense, plus costs of prosecution; provided the Borough
officer enforcing this provision may issue a warning instead of a
citation for a first offense, except in situations of extreme danger or
apparent deliberate defiance of this section.
B. And further provided, it shall be the duty of the officer and of
parking ordinance enforcement personnel of the Borough to report
to the appropriate official all violations of any provision of this
section, indicating in each case, the section violated; the license
number of the vehicle involved in the violation or the owner of a
dumpster or portable storage container placed in violation of this
section; the location where the violation took place; and any other
facts that may be necessary in order to secure clear understanding
of the circumstances attending the violation. The Borough officer
or other person making the report shall also attach to or place upon
such vehicle, trailer, dumpster, or portable storage container, a
notice or ticket stating that the vehicle was parked in violation of
this section. The notice shall contain instructions to the owner or
driver of a vehicle, trailer, dumpster, or portable storage container
that if he will report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the
sum indicated on the citation within 72 hours after the time of the
notice, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of further fine and costs described in Subsection 6A,
above.
1. Definitions.
BUS — A motor vehicle designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or used
to transport passengers or property:
If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more
pounds or such lesser rating as the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation shall adopt under the provisions of § 6103(e) of the
Vehicle Code (relating to promulgation of rules and regulations
by the Department), as determined by Federal regulation and
(1)
§ 15-405 EMMAUS CODE § 15-405.1
FWD:304
MOTOR HOME — A motor vehicle designed or adapted for use as
a mobile dwelling or office, except a vehicle equipped with a truckcamper.
PARKING PERMIT — A written order or official certificate granting
special permission to allow an individual to park a motor vehicle in a
designated location.
TRAILER — A vehicle designed to be towed by a motor vehicle.
TRUCK-CAMPER — A structure designed, used or maintained primarily
to be loaded or affixed to a motor vehicle to provide a mobile dwelling,
sleeping place, office or commercial space.
TRUCK TRACTOR — A motor vehicle designed and used primarily for
drawing other vehicles and not so constructed as to carry a load other
than a part of the weight of the vehicle and load so drawn.
published by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation as a
notice in the Pennsylvania Bulletin.
If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver.
(2)
(3) If the vehicle is a school bus.
If the vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required
to be placarded in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation regulations.
This term does not include an antique or classic motor vehicle,
or an implement of husbandry, or any motor home or recreational
trailer operated solely for personal use, or motorized construction
equipment, including, but not limited to, motorscrapers, backhoes,
motorgraders, compactors, excavators, tractors, trenchers, and
bulldozers.
(4)
2. Prohibition on Parking of Commercial Motor Vehicles.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain
parked, on any Borough-owned street, alley, right-of-way or
Borough-owned property a commercial motor vehicle, truck
tractor, trailer having a potential gross vehicle weight exceeding
26,001 pounds, or any combination thereof, except when
temporarily parked for loading or unloading goods, merchandise,
persons, or materials, or when parked in connection with ongoing
road construction.
3. Prohibition on Parking of Buses, Motor Homes, and Trucks with Truck-
Campers.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain
parked, on any Borough-owned street, alley, right-of-way or
Borough-owned property a motor home, or truck camper with a
§ 15-405.1 FOREWORD § 15-405.1
FWD:305
§ 15-406. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days
and Hours. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 697, 6/20/
1988, § 4; by Ord. 749, 5/20/1991; by Ord. 757, 10/21/1991, § 1; by
Ord. 773, 5/3/1993, § 4; by Ord. 789, 2/22/1994, § 1; by Ord. 794, 8/
1/1994, § 1; by Ord. 814, 6/6/1995, § 1; by Ord. 815, 6/6/1995, § 5; by
Ord. 823, 12/4/1995, § 1; by Ord. 870, 7/6/1998; by Ord. 885, 5/17/
1999; by Ord. 888, 7/19/1999; by Ord. 932, 6/18/2001; by Ord. 942,
12/17/2001; by Ord. 1003, 1/16/2006; by Ord. 1039, 4/7/2008; by
Ord. 1042, 8/18/2008; by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013 § 20; by Ord. 1144, 9/
19/2016; by Ord. 1147, 11/7/2016; and by Ord. 1148, 12/5/2016]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Chestnut North 5th and
Perkiomen
7 8:00 a.m. -
8:00 p.m.
2 hrs.
Chestnut North 200' west of
Short to 4th
7 8:00 - 8:00 1/2 hr.
length exceeding 23 feet 11 inches and/or a width exceeding eight
feet five inches, except when temporarily parked for loading or
unloading goods, merchandise, persons, or materials. Temporary
parking shall be defined as a period not to exceed 72 consecutive
hours.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or allow to remain
parked, on any Borough-owned street, alley, right-of-way or
Borough-owned property a bus between the hours of 5:00 p.m. -
7:00 a.m., Monday - Friday, and all day on Saturday and Sunday,
except when temporarily parked for loading or unloading
passengers. Temporary parking shall be defined as a period not to
exceed one hour.
4. Exempt Motor Vehicles.
A. This section shall not apply to municipal or emergency vehicles.
5. Penalties.
A. Any person who violates a provision of this section shall be subject
to a written warning for the first offense and, upon conviction, a
fine of $50 for the second offense, a fine of $75 for the third offense,
and a fine of $300 for each subsequent offense.
§ 15-405.1 EMMAUS CODE § 15-406
FWD:306
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Chestnut North Between 30'
west of the
west curbline
of Macungie
Avenue
extending
westerly 48'
7 8:00 - 8:00 2 hrs.
Chestnut 723
Chestnut
Street
1 hr.
Chestnut North 415 Chestnut
Street (2
spaces)
7 7:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
15 min.
Jubilee
Street
North 4th & Lehigh Mon-Fri 7:00 a.m. -
5:00 p.m.
15 min.
Jubilee
Street
South Lehigh Street
and South 5th
Street,
beginning 45 lf.
from the
western corner
of Lehigh
Street
extending for
36 lf. for 2
parking spaces
7 24 hours 15 min.
Main North
and
South
4th & Chestnut 7 8:00 - 8:00 2 hrs.
Main North
and
South
3rd & Cherry 7 8:00 - 8:00 2 hrs.
Main North
and
South
Short & 3rd 7 8:00 - 8 2 hrs.
Main North
and
South
Cherry &
Keystone
7 8:00 - 8:00 2 hrs.
Main 324 Main
Street
2 hrs.
§ 15-406 FOREWORD § 15-406
FWD:307
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Macungie
Avenue
West 120 feet south
of Green Street
Mon. -
Sat.
(except
holidays)
15 min.
North
Street
South 516 North
Street (1
space)
Mon -
Sat
10:00 a.m. -
8:00 p.m.
30 min.
Penn
Street
East North to Apple Mon. -
Fri.
(except
holidays)
6 - 6 15 min.
Railroad North 4th to 5th 7 8 - 8 2 hrs.
Ridge
Street
North Fifth & Warren Mon-
Sat
— 15 min.
Ridge
Street
South Fifth Street
westerly for 75'
Mon-Fri 8:00 a.m. -
8:00 p.m.
2 hrs.
Ridge
Street
South Fifth Street
westerly for 75'
Saturday8:00 a.m. -
12:00 p.m.
2 hrs.
Short West Main to
Brunner
7 8 - 8 1/2 hr.
3rd Street East and
West
Green &
Railroad
7 8 - 8 2 hrs.
3rd Street,
North
At 111 North
3rd Street (2
spaces)
7 8 - 8 2 hrs.
3rd Street,
North
At 31 North
3rd. Street
Mon-
Sat
8 - 8 2 hrs.
4th Street East and
West
Chestnut &
Green
7 8 - 8 2 hrs.
4th Street West Chestnut &
Railroad
7 8 - 8 1/2 hrs.
4th Street,
South
West Between
Chestnut
Street and
Railroad Street
2 hrs.
5th Street East Ridge & 125' in
a northerly
direction
Mon-
Sat
— 15 min.
6th Street,
North
East At 23 North 6th
Street
Mon-Fri 8:00 a.m. -
6:00 p.m.
2 hrs.
§ 15-406 EMMAUS CODE § 15-406
FWD:308
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
10th,
North
West 200' south of
North Street to
240' south of
North Street
7 24 5 min.
§ 15-407. Special Purpose Parking Zones Established; Parking
Otherwise Prohibited. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord.
297, 6/20/1988, § 5; by Ord. 764, 3/16/1992, § 2; by Ord. 834, 7/1/
1996, I; by Ord. 846, 4/7/1997; by Ord. 890, 8/23/1999; by Ord. 891,
8/23/1999; by Ord. 1010, 9/5/2006, by Ord. 1017, 2/5/2007; and by
Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 21]
The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it shall
be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to remain parked,
in any such zone, except as specifically provided for that zone:
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
Elm Street — 529 Elm Street Handicapped parking
only 5 minute load/
unload zone Sundays
only 7:00 a.m. - 7:00
p.m.
Keystone Avenue East From end of "no
parking here to
corner zone" to
end of existing
curb
Main Street
[Added by Ord.
No. 1190, 5/20/
2019]
South 332 Main Street One space for
handicapped parking
between 10:00 a.m. and
2:00 p.m. on any
Sunday on days in
which the Emmaus
Farmers’ Market is in
operation
North 5th Street
[Added by Ord.
1131, 10/5/2015]
West Public street in
front of 20 North
5th Street
Handicapped parking
between 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on any
given Sunday
North 5th Street
[Added by Ord.
1131, 10/5/2015]
West Public street in
front of 22 North
5th Street
Handicapped parking
between 7:00 a.m. and
12:00 noon on any
given Sunday
§ 15-406 FOREWORD § 15-407
FWD:309
Street Side Location
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle
2nd Street, North 42 North 2nd
Street
Handicapped parking
between 5:00 p.m. and
9:00 p.m. any Tuesday
4th Street, North St. John's U.C.C. Handicapped parking
from 8:00 a.m. to 12:00
p.m. on any Sunday
7th Street, North North
East
Corner
From end of safety
zone at North 7th
Street and
Harrison Street
(North East
Corner) for a
Distance of 38 feet
(two vehicles).
Patient Parking Only
7th Street, North South Arts Pavilion in
Emmaus
Community Park
Three parking spaces
for performing bands
§ 15-408. Standing or Parking on Roadway for Loading or
Unloading. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 815, 6/6/
1995, § 6; by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 22; and by Ord. 1113, 10/6/
2014]
It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle (other
than a pedalcycle) on the roadway side of any edge or curb of any street,
except that standing or parking for the purpose of loading or unloading
persons or property shall be permitted between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m., and for no longer than necessary for loading or unloading. Such
allotted times may be amended, only as adopted by ordinance and listed
hereafter:
Street Side Between
Allowed Times to
Load and Unload
(Reserved)
§ 15-409. Penalties. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 677,
4/20/1987; by Ord. 926, 4/16/2001; by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 23;
and by Ord. 1117, 12/15/2014]
1. Any person who violates any provision of § 15-406 shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15 and costs.
Any person who violates any provision of §§ 15-401, 15-402, 15-403,
15-404.2 and 15-404.4 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $20 and costs. Any person who violates any provision of
§§ 15-404.1, 15-404.3 and 15-408 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $25 and costs. Any person who violates any
§ 15-407 EMMAUS CODE § 15-409
FWD:310
provision of § 15-407, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 and costs. It shall be the duty of the police officers
and of parking enforcement personnel of the Borough to report to the
appropriate official all violations of any provision of these subsections,
indicating, in each case: the section violated; the license number of the
vehicle involved in the violation; the location where the violation took
place; and any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure
a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
The police officer or other person making the report shall also attach
to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of these subsections. The notice shall contain
instructions to the owner or driver of the vehicle that, if he will report
to the office of the Chief of Police and pay the sum of not less than
associated parking fine for violations paid within 10 days, that act will
save the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and
costs prescribed in the first sentence of this subsection.
2. Any person who commits any violation not otherwise herein stated, but
similar to and including violations of the parking provisions above and
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code Title 75
Pa.C.S.A., Vehicles, shall be subject to a fine of not less than $20. This
shall include but not be limited to parking on private property, parking
too far from the curb, parking on the wrong side, blocking a driveway,
and parking in a crosswalk. Violations for parking in a fire lane or too
close to a fire hydrant shall result in a fine of not less than $25.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this Part and who fails to pay
the fine set forth in this section shall be cited after the 10th day
following the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $25 and not more than $300 and costs.
§ 15-409 FOREWORD § 15-409
FWD:311

Part 5
(RESERVED)
§ 15-501. (Reserved)
§ 15-501 FOREWORD § 15-501
FWD:313

Part 6
OFF-STREET UNMETERED PARKING
§ 15-601. Unmetered Parking Lots Established. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 798, 9/6/1994, § 1; and by Ord. 1099, 8/
19/2013, § 24]
The following are established as the unmetered parking lots operated by the
Borough:
Lot Parking Prohibited
Emmaus Public Library 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Emmaus Community Park 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m.
Emmaus Borough Building 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Employee
Parking Only
Jubilee Street Parking Spaces (5th
Street to 6th Street)
All vehicles that utilize these spaces
shall possess current motor vehicle
inspection and insurance. No vehicle
shall remain parked in the same space
for a period longer than 24 hours.
Boats, recreational vehicles, trailers,
and any vehicles larger than the
allotted marked parking space are
prohibited from utilizing these spaces.
Conducting vehicle maintenance on
any vehicle is prohibited in any of the
allotted spaces.
§ 15-602. Reserved Parking Spaces for Handicapped May be
Provided. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 931, 6/18/
2001; by Ord. 973, 12/15/2003; by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 25; and
by Ord. 1101, 11/4/2013]
1. Handicap Parking in Parking Lots.
A. Borough Council at its discretion may provide, at convenient and
suitable locations in any unmetered parking lot, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by
appropriate signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this
section, for any person to park in any such reserved parking space
any vehicle unless that vehicle bears or displays either: a
"handicapped registration plate," a "handicapped parking placard,"
a "disabled veteran registration plate," or a "disabled veteran
placard." Provided: all provisions, requirements and restrictions
contained in the other sections of this Part shall apply to vehicles
lawfully parked in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 15-601 FOREWORD § 15-602
FWD:315
Parking Lot Side Location
28 South 4th Street (2
spaces)
Town Hall Parking Lots
14th Street Parking Lot
(5 spaces)
Community Park
Swimming Pool
1401 Shimerville Road
Emmaus Public Library
(2 spaces)
11 East Main Street
Main Street (near
Triangle Park)
North 327 Main Street
Ridge Street North 24 feet West of the parking
lot entrance to the Central
Fire Station and extending
west a distance of 22 feet
2. Handicap Parking on Public Streets.
A. Borough Council at its discretion may provide at convenient and
suitable locations in any public street reserved parking spaces for
handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this section, for any
person to park in any such reserved parking space, any vehicle
unless that vehicle bears or displays either: a "handicapped
registration plate," a "handicapped parking placard," a "disabled
veteran registration plate," or a "disabled veteran placard."
Provided: all provisions, requirements and restrictions contained in
the other sections of this Part shall apply to vehicles lawfully
parked in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
Street Side Location
2nd Street West Building located at 48 North
2nd Street
121 North 2nd Street East
3rd Street West Building located at 26 North
3rd Street
3rd Street West Building located at 139 North
4th Street
520 North 3rd Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1145, 10/3/2016]
4th Street (2 spaces) East Building located at 333 Ridge
Street
4th Street (2 spaces) East Building located at 139 North
4th Street
§ 15-602 EMMAUS CODE § 15-602
FWD:316
Street Side Location
28 South 4th Street North
130 South 4th Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1168, 12/18/
2017]
North 5th Street (2
spaces)
East Building located at 35 North
5th Street
North 5th Street East Building located at 105 North
5th Street
220 North 5th Street West
404 North 5th Street
[Added by Ord. 1108,
7/21/2014]
28 South 5th Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1140, 5/16/2016]
32 South 5th Street West
North 6th Street (48)
[Repealed by Ord.
1113, 10/6/2014]
317 South 6th Street East
221 North 7th Street
[Added by Ord. 1105,
4/7/2014]
227 North 7th Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1145, 10/3/2016]
120B South 7th Street West Building located at 702 Broad
Street
446 South 7th Street West
224 Adrain Street
[Added by Ord. 1139,
4/18/2016]
348 Broad Street
[Added by Ord. 1132,
11/16/2015]
376 Broad Street South
525 Broad Street
[Added by Ord. 1124,
4/6/2015]
§ 15-602 FOREWORD § 15-602
FWD:317
Street Side Location
546 Broad Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1171, 4/2/2018]
570 Broad Street
[Added by Ord. 1124,
4/6/2015; repealed by
Ord. No. 1179, 8/20/
2018]
Chestnut Street North Building located at 327 Main
Street
Chestnut Street (811)
[Repealed by Ord.
1120, 3/2/2015]
813 Chestnut Street
[Added by Ord. 1130,
9/8/2015; repealed by
Ord. 1143, 8/15/
2016]
819 Chestnut Street North
177 Elm Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1149, 1/3/2017]
228 Furnace Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1179, 8/20/2018]
653 Furnace Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1168, 12/18/
2017]
572 Jubilee Street
[Added by Ord. No.
1187, 3/18/2019]
529 Minor Street North
640 Minor Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1180, 10/15/
2018]
North Street (2 spaces) South Building located at 139 North
4th Street
509 North Street North
425 Railroad Street North Building located at 427
Railroad Street at Jubilee
Street
§ 15-602 EMMAUS CODE § 15-602
FWD:318
Street Side Location
215 Ridge Street North
Ridge Street (226)
[Repealed by Ord.
1105, 4/7/2014]
430 Ridge Street South Building located at 35 North
5th Street
540 Ridge Street South
551 Ridge Street North
556 Ridge Street
[Added by Ord. 1108,
7/21/2014; repealed
by Ord. 1154, 3/20/
2017]
543 Ridge Street North
553 Ridge Street North
656 Ridge Street
[Repealed by Ord.
1164, 11/6/2017]
517 Seem Street North
613 Walnut Street North
624 Walnut Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1182, 11/5/2018]
637 Walnut Street North
Walnut Street (638)
[Added by Ord. 1105,
4/7/2014; repealed by
Ord. 1124, 4/6/2015]
733 Walnut Street
[Repealed by Ord.
No. 1175, 5/7/2018]
3. All additions, deletions, and amendments of handicap parking spaces
shall be by ordinance by the Borough Council. Borough Council shall
base its decision on established criterion, including available public
parking, available private off-street parking, need and specific
circumstances of individuals requesting handicap parking, and other
criteria as recommended by the Chief of Police and Mayor and
approved by Borough Council.
§ 15-602 FOREWORD § 15-603
FWD:319
§ 15-603. Unlawful to Park Overtime or When Lot Closed. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 765, 5/18/1992, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 15-604. Unmetered Lots for Certain Types of Vehicles. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The unmetered parking lots established by § 15-601 of this chapter shall be
for the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in
any such lot.
§ 15-605. Manner of Parking. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle, and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
§ 15-606. Parking on Rental Basis Only. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as
amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 26]
The parking spaces in unmetered parking lots shall be available for parking
on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by Borough
Council from time to time and shall be for a calendar month or the part
of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are made.
The rental fee shall be paid in advance to Borough Hall, for the use of
the Borough, and after the first month shall be automatically renewable
until the renter notifies the Borough that he wishes to terminate the rental
arrangements or until such time as the Borough notifies the renter of the
same. At any time, however, the Borough may, by amending § 15-601 of this
Part, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking lot or a portion
of the parking spaces in any such lot, or may change any unmetered parking
lot, or part of an unmetered parking lot, to a metered parking lot or to
1. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 15-601 of
this chapter; or
2. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use;
or
3. Except with special permission from Council.
1. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him;
2. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section; or
3. To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
§ 15-603 EMMAUS CODE § 15-606
FWD:320
metered parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be assigned by
the Borough Manager. The name of the renter of a parking space and/or
the numbers and/or letters on the registration tag of the vehicle entitled
to be parked there shall be retained by the Borough at Town Hall and the
rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space with a
marking signifying the space is occupied by a renter.
§ 15-607. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended
by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 27; and by Ord. 1117, 12/15/2014]
1. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this Part, and instructing the
owner or driver that if he shall report to the Police Department and pay,
for the use of the Borough, the sum of a parking ticket consistent with
§ 15-409 above, unless otherwise noted below in this subsection,
enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the special parking
fine boxes installed at various locations within the Borough, within that
time limit, that act will save the violator from prosecution and from
payment of the fine and prosecution. Any person who violates any
provision of § 15-602, shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $50 and costs. Any person who violates any provision of
§ 15-603 shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $15 and costs. Any person who violates any provision of § 15-606
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $20
and costs.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this Part and who fails to pay
the fine set forth in this section shall be cited after the 10th day
following the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $25 and not more than $300 and costs.
§ 15-606 FOREWORD § 15-607
FWD:321

Part 7
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 15-701. Applicability and Scope. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
This Part is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a-22) of the Vehicle
Code,16 and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound those
vehicles which are parked in a tow away zone and in violation of parking
regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have been abandoned (as defined
by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in such a manner as to interfere
with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may be towed under the provisions
of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.
§ 15-702. Authority to Remove and Impound. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986;
as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 28]
The Emmaus Police Department shall have authority to remove and
impound, or to order the removal and impounding, of any vehicle parked
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 15-701 of this Part. Provided: no such vehicle shall be
removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this
Part, or the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 15-703. Tow Away Zones Designated. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice
that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 15-704. Designation of Approved Storage Areas; Bonding; Towing
and Storage. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done
only by "approved storage areas" that shall be designated from time to
time by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to
Borough Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an
amount satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners
of impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in
the custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage.
The approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule
of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this chapter, and,
when the schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
16.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 15-701 FOREWORD § 15-704
FWD:323
removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage.
Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 15-705. Effect of Payment of Towing and Storage Charges. [Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this chapter
shall, unless payment is made "under protest", be final and conclusive,
and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
If payment of any towing or storage charges is made "under protest", the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a district justice. Payment of
towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 15-706. Reclamation Costs. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by
Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 29]
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus no less than a $50 fee of which $25 and any other fees associated
with Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7306, shall be transferred to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation by the garage to which the
vehicle was taken.
§ 15-707. Records of Vehicles Removed and Impounded. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this Part and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 15-708. Restrictions upon Removal of Vehicles. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle within a reasonable time.
§ 15-709. Penalty. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 1099,
8/19/2013, § 30]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $100 together with all costs of
disposing of the vehicle, towing, legal, storage, and other associated costs
pursuant to Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7312. For a subsequent offense, the
violator shall, upon conviction, pay a fine of not less than $200 and not more
than $500 or imprisonment for not more than 90 days, or both.
§ 15-704 EMMAUS CODE § 15-710
FWD:324
§ 15-710. Reports and Disposition of Unclaimed Vehicles. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle
Code, by the person having legal custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle
has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle may be transferred to a
licensed salvor who will then be responsible for filing the proper reports
and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the provisions of Chapter
73 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code (75 Pa C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as
amended).
§ 15-710 FOREWORD § 15-710
FWD:325

Part 8
SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
§ 15-801. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 31]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 15-803 of this
Part, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency
(designated in this Part as a "snow emergency"). Information on the
existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Borough through radio,
newspaper or other available media, and information on the termination of
the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 15-802. Parking Prohibited, Driving Motor Vehicles Restricted, on
Snow Emergency Routes During Emergency. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 15-803. Snow Emergency Routes Designated. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 697, 6/20/1988, § 6; by Ord. 993, 3/7/
2005; and by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 32]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street From To
Broad Street Fourth Street 5th Street
Chestnut Street Main Street West Borough line
Dalton Street East Main Street East Borough line
East Main Dalton Street State Avenue
Harrison Street State Avenue Macungie Avenue
Keystone Avenue Main Street Ridge Street
Lawrence Drive Macungie Avenue Little Lehigh Drive
Little Lehigh Drive Lawrence Drive Cedar Crest Boulevard
Macungie Avenue Chestnut Street Lawrence Drive
Main Street Short Street State Avenue
North Street Macungie Avenue Cedar Crest Boulevard
PA Route #0029 Chestnut Street Pine Street
1. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 15-803 of this
Part; or
2. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route, unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 15-801 FOREWORD § 15-803
FWD:327
Street From To
Penna. Avenue Tenth Street South Borough line
South Fifth Street Broad Street Borough line
South Fourth Street Chestnut Street Broad Street
South Tenth Street Chestnut Street Pennsylvania Ave
Sixth Street Chestnut Street Harrison Street
State Avenue Main Street East Borough line
§ 15-804. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended
by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 33; and by Ord. 1117, 12/15/2014]
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-801 of this Part, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and
costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 15-801 of this Part, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route, without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and not
more than $300 and costs.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this Part and who fails to pay
the fine set forth in this section shall be cited after the 10th day
following the violation and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $25 and not more than $300 and costs.
§ 15-803 EMMAUS CODE § 15-804
FWD:328
Part 9
(RESERVED)
§ 15-901. (Reserved)
§ 15-901 FOREWORD § 15-901
FWD:329

Part 10
PEDESTRIAN REGULATIONS
§ 15-1001. Pedestrians to Obey Traffic-Control Signs. [Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
At all locations in the Borough where official traffic-control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestriancontrol
signals installed under § 15-1002 of this Part, shall obey the
directions of those traffic-control signals, as follows:
§ 15-1002. Pedestrian-Control Signal Locations Established. [Ord.
675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 34]
1. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk;
2. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway;
3. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
1. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Tenth Street and Chestnut Street
Cedar Crest Boulevard (S.R. 0029) and Chestnut Street (S.R. 2005)
2. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal or
upraised hand symbol shall obey the direction of that signal, as follows:
A. When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal or upraised hand symbol,
a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the direction of
the signal or symbol, but any pedestrian who has partially
completed his crossing on the "Walk" signal or walking person
symbol should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal or upraised hand symbol is showing.
B. When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the indication, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
indication should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone.
3. Any pedestrian who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal
or upraised hand symbol, as indicated above, shall be guilty of a
summary offense and a violation of this Part.
§ 15-1001 FOREWORD § 15-1003
FWD:331
§ 15-1003. Locations Where Pedestrian Crossing in Unmarked
Crosswalks Restricted. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Except when authorized by a police officer or other appropriately attired
person authorized to direct, control or regulate traffic, it shall be unlawful
for any pedestrian to cross the roadway at any of the following streets, at
the intersection with that street indicated.
Street Intersection Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
§ 15-1004. Locations Where Pedestrians May Cross Only in
Crosswalk. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 15-1005. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this Part shall be guilty of a
summary offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$5 and costs.
§ 15-1006. Right-of-Way of Pedestrians in Crosswalks. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986; as added by Ord. 1099, 8/19/2013, § 35]
1. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough except in
a crosswalk;
2. To cross the roadway, in any of the following portions of streets in the
Borough, except in a crosswalk:
Street Between
(Reserved)
Provided: nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to cross
in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§ 15-1002 of this Part.
1. When traffic-control signals are not in place or not in operation, the
driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to a pedestrian crossing
the road-way within any marked crosswalk or within any unmarked
crosswalk at an intersection.
A. Exercise of Care by Pedestrian. No pedestrian shall suddenly leave
a curb or other place of or other place of safety and walk or run into
the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute a hazard.
B. Limitation on Vehicles Passing. Whenever any vehicle is stopped at
any crosswalk to permit a pedestrian to cross the roadway, the
driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
§ 15-1003 EMMAUS CODE § 15-1006
FWD:332
C. Application. This section does not apply under the conditions stated
in Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3542(b) (relating to pedestrians
crossing at other than crosswalks.)
D. Penalties. The driver of a vehicle who violates this section shall be
guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50, pursuant to Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3542.
§ 15-1006 FOREWORD § 15-1006
FWD:333
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 15-1006 EMMAUS CODE § 15-1006
FWD:334
Part 1
REGULATIONS
§ 16-101. Definitions. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK OR PARKS — Unless specifically limited, shall be deemed to include
all parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, tennis courts, beaches, recreation
structures and facilities, and also entrances and approaches thereto, and all
other land or property or structures now or hereafter owned or acquired by
the Borough of Emmaus for park or recreational purposes.
PERSON — Any natural person, corporation, organization of persons,
company, association or partnership.
RULES AND REGULATIONS — Any rules and regulations hereby or
hereafter promulgated by the Borough Council under the authority herein
conferred.
§ 16-102. Park Hours. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All parks shall be opened daily to the public at such hours as the Borough
Council may from time to time designate, but in no event shall any person
be permitted to be in attendance in any park between 9:00 p.m. and sunrise,
unless special permission be granted by the Borough Council.
§ 16-103. Prohibited Conduct. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended
by Ord. 1045, 10/6/2008; and by Ord. 1081, 10/17/2011, § A]
No person in attendance at a park shall:
1. Injure, deface, remove, cut or damage any of the trees, plants, shrubs,
turf, buildings, structures, signs or fixtures, or any other property of the
Borough located within the park.
2. Litter any area of the park with garbage, paper, bottles, cans or other
waste material; nor dispose of the same in any way except in
receptacles designated for such purpose.
3. Kindle or maintain any fire in the park except in fireplaces or areas
specially designated for that purpose and located by authority of the
Borough Council.
4. Remove any bench, seat, table or other appliance without permission of
the Borough Council.
5. Injure, deface, destroy or remove any notice, rule or regulation posted
at any place within the park by authority of the Borough Council; nor
shall any notice or placard be posted within the park other than by
authority of said Borough Council.
§ 16-101 FOREWORD § 16-103
FWD:335
6. Set up any booth, table or stand for the sale of any article or service
whatsoever within the limits of the park without permission of the
Borough Council; distribute, sell, service or rent any services or
commodity or solicit for any purpose without permission of the Borough
Council.
7. Operate, stop or park any vehicle, bicycle or other means of conveyance
except in areas where permitted or designated by proper authority of
the Borough Council, or operate the same in a reckless or negligent
manner or in excess of any posted speed limit or in such a manner as to
become a nuisance to other area users.
8. Operate commercial vehicles, unless providing authorized services.
9. Bring onto the premises, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or
illegal drugs of any kind; no person shall enter the park in an
intoxicated state or otherwise be under the influence of alcohol or
illegal drugs. However, beer, except in bottles, is permitted and is
restricted to the picnic areas.
10. Discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks or other
missile propelling instruments or explosives or arrows, or other
dangerous weapons, which have such properties as to cause annoyance
or injury to any person or property, unless permission has been granted
by the Borough Council in designated areas; police officers in the
performance of their duties will be exempt from these provisions.
However, an individual will be permitted to use deadly force with a
firearm or weapon solely to protect oneself or a third person against
death, serious bodily injury, kidnapping, or sexual intercourse by force
or threat as provided by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 505(b) and § 506(a).
11. Play ball, swim, golf, pitch horseshoes, engage in archery, camp or
launch, dock or land any boat, engage in finding buried objects with
special detectors, or participate in any other form of recreation,
sporting endeavor or pastime, except in those areas which may be
designated from time to time for that purpose by the Borough Council.
12. Disrobe or change clothing except in buildings or facilities made
available for that purpose.
13. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person using
the park for recreational purposes.
14. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane or obscene language or
words.
15. Commit any disorderly or immoral acts.
16. Hold any public meeting or rally with more than five persons or engage
in any marching or driving as members of a military, political or other
organization without permission of the Borough Council, which
requires a statement of information, including the name of the
§ 16-103 EMMAUS CODE § 16-103
FWD:336
§ 16-104. Fishing. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All laws pertaining to fishing in the Commonwealth shall apply to fishing in
parks and recreation areas, and provisions thereof are hereby incorporated
by reference.
§ 16-105. Authorization to Promulgate Additional Rules. [Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The Borough Council is authorized to establish additional rules and
regulations as deemed necessary.
§ 16-106. Authority to Close Areas. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Recreation facilities which become hazardous for public use due to weather,
water, fire or unforeseeable conditions may be closed only at the discretion
of the Borough Council.
§ 16-107. Enforcement. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The police officers of the Borough are charged with enforcement of the
provisions of this Part and of rules and regulations promulgated by the
Borough Council.
§ 16-108. Penalties. [Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than
$300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
organization, its purpose, number of persons expected to be invited,
expected duration and name(s) of person(s) in charge.
17. Disobey a proper order of a police officer or disobey or disregard or fail
to comply with any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition, instruction
or direction given by an authorized person and posted or displayed by
sign, notice, bulletin, card, poster, or when notified or informed as to its
existence by the Borough Council or an authorized person.
18. Hunt for, capture or kill, or attempt to capture or kill, or aid or assist in
the capturing or killing of, in any manner, any wild bird or wild animal
of any description, either game or otherwise. [Amended by Ord.
1126, 5/4/2015]
19. Allow pets to walk with them or accompany them, except for service
animals, whose assistance is necessary and required by an individual
due to an ongoing physical handicap (i.e., seeing eye or guide
assistance dog, hearing ear dog, etc.).
§ 16-103 FOREWORD § 16-109
FWD:337
§ 16-109. Rules of Conduct for Triangle Park. [Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as added by Ord. 1061, 11/16/2009; and by Ord. 1081, 10/17/
2011, § B]
1. Definitions.
PARK — These regulations shall apply to Triangle Park, located within
the boundaries created by the south unit block of 4th Street, the 300
block of Main Street, and the portion of Chestnut Street between Short
Street and 4th Street.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, corporation, organization
of persons, company, association, or other legally recognizable entity.
PARK HOURS — The park shall be open to the public on a daily basis.
The Borough Council, by resolution, may establish times when the park
is closed on a regular basis. Absent a specific resolution limiting the
times and/or dates that the park is closed on a regular basis, the park
shall remain open at all times. Nothing in this section shall prohibit
the Borough Council from closing the park on a temporary basis to
accommodate any legitimate purpose.
2. Prohibited Conduct. No person in attendance at the park shall:
A. Operate a skateboard, rollerblades, roller skates, bicycle, or other
form of wheeled device used for transportation or recreation in any
area of the park, except for operating such a device onto the park
as a means of ingress and egress to an from the park. Operation of
devices such as wheelchairs, strollers, or other assistive devices in
the park is permitted.
B. Deface, damage, cut, vandalize, injure, or remove any of the trees,
plants, turf, structures, signs, fixtures, or any other property of the
Borough located in the park.
C. Swim, play, or bathe in the fountain, or introduce any foreign object
or liquid into the fountain.
D. Play any type of game or participate in any type of event that
involves the throwing, kicking, pitching, or projecting of any object.
E. Use threatening, abusive, insulting, profane, or obscene language
or gestures.
F. Commit any disorderly or immoral act.
G. Disturb the peace by any conduct so as to annoy any other person
using the park.
H. Remove any notice, sign, placard, rule, or regulation posted by the
Borough at any place in the park.
§ 16-109 EMMAUS CODE § 16-109
FWD:338
I. Litter any area of the park, or fail to use the refuse and/or
recyclable containers for the disposition of garbage and/or
recyclables.
J. Set up any booth, table, or stand for the sale or display of any
article or service, or for the promotion of a cause or event without
the permission of the Emmaus Borough Council.
K. Possess or consume any alcoholic beverage or illegal drugs of any
kind; no person shall enter the park in an intoxicated state or
otherwise under the influence of alcohol or illegal drugs.
L. Kindle or maintain a fire of any sort.
M. Discharge any firearms, slingshots, firecrackers, fireworks, arrows,
or other missile propelling instruments or explosives, or any
weapons or implements with such properties as to cause
annoyance or injury to any person or property. Police officers in the
performance of their law enforcement duties are exempt from
these provisions. However, an individual will be permitted to use
deadly force with a firearm or weapon solely to protect oneself or a
third person against death, serious bodily injury, kidnapping, or
sexual intercourse by force or threat as provided by 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 505(b) and § 506(a).
N. Disobey any proper order of a police officer or disobey or disregard
or fail to comply with any rule or regulation, warning, prohibition,
instruction, or direction given by an authorized person and posted
or displayed by sign, or when notified or informed of its existence
by the Borough Council or an authorized person.
O. Bring any pet or pets onto the park.
3. Authorization to Promulgate Rules. The Borough is authorized to
establish additional rules and regulations as it deems necessary.
4. Authority to Close Areas. The park may be closed by Borough
employees, with or without notice, in the event of the development of
any hazardous condition. The Borough Council may temporarily close
the park for any legitimate purpose.
5. Enforcement. The Emmaus Police Department shall enforce this section
and the rules and regulations promulgated thereby.
6. Penalties. Any person violating any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300,
and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 16-109 FOREWORD § 16-109
FWD:339

Part 2
RESTRICTIONS
§ 16-201. Utilization of Certain Indentured Lands. [Ord. 824, 1/2/
1996, § 1]
Those lands conveyed to the Borough of Emmaus by a certain indenture
dated July 29, 1958, and recorded in the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds
Office in Deed Book 925, page 529, shall be utilized by the Borough for
playground purposes.
§ 16-201 FOREWORD § 16-201
FWD:341
Chapter 17
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
(See: Chapter 27, Zoning, Part 18)
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 16-201 EMMAUS CODE § 16-201
FWD:342
Part 1
USE OF SEWERS
§ 18-101. Definitions. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960, Art. 1; as amended by
Ord. 1071, 7/6/2010]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Emmaus Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania municipality
authority.
BUILDING SEWER — The extension from the sewer drainage system of any
structure to the lateral of a sewer.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, a
Pennsylvania municipal corporation, acting by and through its Council or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form of
energy rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing,
trade or business process or in the course of the development, recovery or
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including
such ground, surface or storm water as may be present.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a sewer to the
curb line or, if there is no curb line, to the property line. The Borough
shall be responsible for any required maintenance or repair of the lateral,
unless the maintenance or repair is necessitated by an illegal discharge
from the building sewer or root growth or other intrusion that enters
the sewer system through the building sewer or at the connection of the
building sewer to the lateral, in which instances the property owner shall
be responsible for such maintenance and repair.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in this Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property, including such ground, surface or storm water
as may be present.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collecting,
pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
§ 18-101 FOREWORD § 18-101
FWD:343
situate in or adjacent to this Borough and owned by the Authority and
leased to this Borough for operation and use.
STREET — Any street, road, lane, court, alley and public square.
§ 18-102. Use of Public Sewers Required. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960, Art.
2; as amended by Ord. 371, 5/2/1960, § 1]
1. The owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any street
in which is a sewer shall connect such improved property therewith, in
such manner as this Borough may require, within 60 days after notice
to such owner from this Borough to make such connection, for the
purpose of discharge of all sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from
such improved property, subject to such limitations and restrictions as
shall be established herein or otherwise shall be established by this
Borough, from time to time.
2. All sanitary sewage and industrial wastes from any improved property,
after connection of such improved property with a sewer shall be
required under Subsection 1, shall be conducted into a sewer, subject to
such limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or
otherwise shall be established by this Borough, from time to time.
3. No person shall place or deposit or permit to be placed or deposited
upon public or private property within this Borough any sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes in violation of subsection 1.
No person shall discharge or permit to be discharged to any natural
outlet within this Borough any sanitary sewage or industrial wastes in
violation of subsection 1, except where suitable treatment has been
provided which is satisfactory to this Borough.
4. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle
shall be used and maintained at any time for the disposal of sanitary
sewage or industrial wastes upon any improved property which has
been connected to a sewer.
Every such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar
receptacle in existence shall be abandoned as a disposal for sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes and, at the discretion of this Borough,
shall be cleansed and filled under the direction and supervision of this
Borough; and any such privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
similar receptacle not so abandoned and, if required by this Borough,
cleansed and filled, shall constitute a nuisance and such nuisance may
be abated as provided by law, at the expense of the owner of such
improved property.
5. No privy vault, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or similar receptacle at
any time shall be connected with a sewer.
6. The notice by this Borough to make a connection to a sewer, referred to
in subsection 1, shall consist of a copy of this Part, including any
§ 18-101 EMMAUS CODE § 18-102
FWD:344
§ 18-103. Building Sewers and Connections. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960,
Art. 3; as amended by Ord. 1027, 7/2/2007]
amendments at the time in effect, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection, and may be given at any time after a sewer is
in place which can receive and convey sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes for treatment and disposal from the particular improved
property.
1. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into or use,
alter, or disturb, in any manner, any sewer or the sewer system with out
first obtaining a permit, in writing, from the Borough. In addition, any
building floor drain shall have gravity or pump discharge completely
independent of the sanitary sewer system, except where the entire
finished floor is at an elevation above the finish grade around the
exterior of the building. No person shall make connection of roof
downspouts, exterior foundation drains, area drains, or other sources of
surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or building drain,
which, in turn, is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary
sewer.
2. Application for a permit required under § 18-103(1) shall be made by
the owner of the improved property to be served.
3. No person shall make or cause to be made a connection of any improved
property with a sewer until such person shall have fulfilled each of the
following conditions:
A. Such person shall have notified the Borough Manager of the desire
and intention to connect to a sewer.
B. Such person shall have applied for and obtained a permit as
required by § 18-103(1).
C. Such person shall have given the Borough Manager at least 24
hours' notice of the time when such connection will be made so that
this Borough may supervise and inspect the work of connection and
necessary testing.
4. Except as otherwise provided in this § 18-103, each improved property
shall be connected separately and independently with a sewer through
a building sewer. Grouping of more than one improved property on one
building sewer shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good sanitary reasons or other good cause
shown, but then only after special permission of this Borough, in
writing, shall have been secured.
5. All costs and expenses of construction of a building sewer and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building sewer to a sewer shall be
borne by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such
owner shall indemnify and save harmless this Borough from all loss or
damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly, as a result of
§ 18-102 FOREWORD § 18-103
FWD:345
§ 18-104. Rules and Regulations Governing Building Sewers and
Connections to Sewers. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960, Art. 4; as amended by
Ord. 371, 5/2/1960, §§ 2, 3; and by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
construction of a building sewer or of connection of a building sewer to
a sewer.
6. Materials for a building sewer, jointing materials and methods of
installation shall be in accordance with requirements of § 18-104 and
shall be subject to approval of this Borough.
7. The permit required by § 18-103(1) shall be displayed prominently upon
the improved property to be connected to a sewer at all times during
construction of the building sewer and connection of the building sewer
to a sewer.
8. A building sewer shall be connected to a sewer at the lateral. No person
shall make a connection directly to or tamper with, in any manner, a
sewer.
The invert of a building sewer at the point of connection to a lateral
shall be at the same or a higher elevation than the invert of the sewer.
A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the connection of a building
sewer to a lateral shall be made secure and watertight. Special fittings
for connection of a building sewer to a lateral may be used only after
approval of this Borough has been secured.
9. If the owner of any improved property abutting on or adjoining any
street in which is a sewer, after 60 days' notice from this Borough, in
accordance with § 18-102(1), shall fail to connect such improved
property, as required, this Borough may make such connection and may
collect from such owner the costs and expenses thereof by a municipal
claim, an action in assumpsit or such other legal proceedings as may be
permitted by law.
1. Building sewers shall be no less than four inches in diameter.
2. Pipe used in a building sewer shall be one of the following types:
A. Cast iron soil pipe - "medium" weight.
B. Vitrified clay sewer pipe - "standard strength".
C. Cement asbestos sewer pipe.
D. 2.0 Plastic Vinyl Chloride (PVC) pipe.
3. Uniform bearing shall be provided along the entire length of a building
sewer; and all joints of a building sewer shall be watertight and rustproof.
No cement mortar joints shall be used. When hot-poured joints
are used, the trench shall be free of water.
§ 18-103 EMMAUS CODE § 18-104
FWD:346
4. Where an improved property, at the time of securing a permit under
§ 18-103(1) to connect to a sewer, shall be served by its own sewage
disposal system or device, the existing house sewer line shall be broken
on the structure side of such sewage disposal system or device and
attachment shall be made, with proper fittings, to continue such house
sewer line, as a building sewer, undiminished in inside diameter, but not
less than four inches, to the lateral.
5. A building sewer to serve one improved property may occupy the same
trench as a building sewer to serve the next adjoining improved
property; Provided, however, that the common trench is on or
immediately adjacent to the common property line and such joint
occupancy is by mutual agreement of the owners concerned.
6. Cast iron soil pipe of a building sewer laid in a trench must be
supported properly at each joint. When vitrified clay sewer pipe or
cement asbestos sewer pipe is used in a building sewer, the entire
length of such pipe, as well as the joint, must have uniform bearing.
Vitrified clay sewer pipe in a building sewer may be laid only in virgin
soil and may not be laid in fill.
7. Fittings in a building sewer shall conform to the type of pipe used in
construction.
8. Changes in direction in a building sewer must be made by use of "Y"
branches or of 1/8 or 1/16 bends. Caulking or lead or poured joints to
angles of less than a 1/16 bend equivalent only shall be permitted.
9. Fittings or connections in a building sewer which have an enlargement,
chamber or recess with a ledge, shoulder or reduction of pipe area that
shall offer any obstruction to flow shall not be allowed.
10. Joints in cast iron soil pipe in a building sewer shall be paced with
oakum in the bell and spigot terminations and thereafter shall be filled
with molten lead to a depth of at least one inch and not to be depressed
more than 1/8 inch below the rim of the hub. The lead then must be
caulked in place. No paint, varnish or other coating shall be permitted
on the jointing material until after the building sewer has been tested
and approved as provided in § 18-104(17-19).
11. Bell and spigot joints in vitrified clay sewer pipe in a building sewer
shall be packed with oakum, jute or hemp at the base and thereafter
shall be poured with hot compound as required for the purpose. Such
hot compound shall be poured against dry surfaces having a bond
strength of no less than 100 pounds per square inch, shall not soften at
temperatures up to 160° F., shall not be soluble in the waste to be
carried by the building sewer and shall be root repellent. Each such
joint shall be poured completely in one continuous operation and shall
not be tested until at least one hour after completion of such pouring.
Mechanical joints of plastic or synthetic, rubberlike materials,
commonly known as compression joints, may be used with approval of
this Borough.
§ 18-104 FOREWORD § 18-104
FWD:347
12. Joints in cement asbestos sewer pipe in a building sewer shall be made
with sleeve couplings of the same composition as the pipe and shall be
sealed with rubber rings.
13. Joints between cast iron soil pipe and vitrified clay sewer pipe in a
building sewer shall be made by inserting the cast iron soil pipe into the
bell of the vitrified clay sewer pipe. Such joints shall be made as
provided in § 18-104(11) dealing with hot poured joints.
14. A building sewer shall be provided with a horizontal trap, known as an
interceptor trap, of not less than four inches inside diameter, of cast
iron equivalent to cast iron soil pipe. Such trap shall be provided with a
vent and clean-out openings, each to be at a level at least equal to the
finished grade level and to be provided with vent cowls. Lines from such
trap to such finished grade level shall be of the same size and material
as the building sewer.
15. The interceptor trap required under § 18-104(14) shall be located at a
point to be determined and approved by the Borough Plumbing
Inspector in accordance with rules and regulations applicable thereto
as adopted by Borough. Such trap and its vent shall be on the property
side of the curb.
16. The slope or grade of a building sewer, when the inside diameter is four
inches or more, shall be no less than 1/4 inch per foot of length and
shall be downward in the direction of flow; Provided, however, that
when cement asbestos sewer pipe shall be used the slope may be
reduced but shall be not less than 1/8 inch per foot of length.
17. This Borough shall observe all testing of a building sewer. All
equipment and material required for testing shall be furnished by the
owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
In the event a building sewer is not approved by this Borough, a
further test or tests shall be made following completion of necessary
corrections. A fee of $5 will be charged by this Borough for observation
of each test subsequent to the initial test.
18. No building sewer shall be covered until it has been inspected, tested,
as provided in § 18-104(17), and approved. If any part of a building
sewer is covered before so being inspected, tested and accepted, it
shall be uncovered for inspection and testing at the cost and expense of
the owner of the improved property to be connected to a sewer.
19. Every building sewer shall be tested by filling the same with water,
completely, so that every section shall be tested with not less than a tenfoot
head of water. Water shall be kept in the building sewer for 15
minutes before inspection starts and no leakage shall be observable at
the time of inspection.
§ 18-104 EMMAUS CODE § 18-104
FWD:348
§ 18-105. Permit Required for Making Connections. [Ord. 367, 1/4/
1960, Art. 5; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 18-106. Reservations. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960, Art. 6]
Upon approval of the test of a building sewer by this Borough a
certificate of approval will be issued to the owner of the improved
property to be connected to a sewer.
20. Whenever this Borough has reason to believe any building sewer has
become defective, such building sewer shall be subject to test and
inspection. Defects found upon such test and inspection, if any, shall be
corrected as required by this Borough, in writing, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property served through such
building sewer.
21. Every building sewer of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
22. Every excavation for a building sewer shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Streets, sidewalks and other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building sewer shall be restored, at the cost and
expense of the owner of the improved property being connected, in a
manner satisfactory to this Borough.
1. Any person who has been engaged regularly in the performance of
plumbing work in this Borough for a period of one year prior to
enactment of this Part shall be deemed competent to obtain a permit.
Any other person seeking to obtain a permit shall exhibit such evidence
of competency as this Borough may require, from time to time.
2. Any person not possessing a permit shall not perform any plumbing
work upon any improved property which is connected to a sewer or
which is to be connected to a sewer.
3. Any improved property upon which plumbing work is performed by a
person not possessing a permit will not be approved for connection to a
sewer.
1. If any person shall fail or refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Borough, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a building sewer, within 60 days of receipt of such notice, this
Borough may refuse to permit such person to discharge sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes into the sewer system until such
unsatisfactory condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of
this Borough.
2. This Borough reserves the right to refuse to any person the privilege of
connection of any improved property to a sewer, or to compel
discontinuance of use of a sewer by any person, or to compel the
§ 18-104 FOREWORD § 18-106
FWD:349
§ 18-107. Penalties. [Ord. 367, 1/4/1960, Art. 7; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 1 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
pretreatment of industrial wastes, in order to prevent discharge into
the sewer system of wastes which may be deemed by this Borough to be
harmful to the sewer system or to have a deleterious effect on sewage
treatment processes.
3. This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with a sewer and the sewer system, which additional rules
and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be
construed as part of this Part.
§ 18-106 EMMAUS CODE § 18-107
FWD:350
Part 2
RATES
§ 18-201. Definitions. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 1]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms used in this Part shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Emmaus Municipal Authority, a Pennsylvania municipal
authority.
B.O.D. (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in ppm by weight, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure for five days at 20° C. The
standard laboratory procedure shall be that found in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Sewage" published by
the American Public Health Association.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, a
Pennsylvania municipal corporation, acting by and through its Council or, in
appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized representatives.
CHLORINE DEMAND — The quantity of chlorine absorbed in water, sewage
or other liquids, allowing a residual of 0.1 ppm by weight after 15 minutes
of contact.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes resulting from preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from handling, storage and sale of produce.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals and from which structure
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes shall be or may be discharged.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance of energy
rejected or escaping in the course of any industrial, manufacturing, trade
or business process or in the course of the development, recovery of
processing of natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage, including
such ground, surface or stormwater as may be present.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any property located in this Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity.
PH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of hydrogen ions,
expressed in grams per liter of solution, and indicates the degree of acidity
or alkalinity of a substance.
PPM — Parts per million.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — Garbage that has been shredded to
such a degree that all its particles will be carried freely under normal sewer
flow conditions, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
§ 18-201 FOREWORD § 18-201
FWD:351
SANITARY SEWAGE — Normal water-carried household and toilet wastes
from any improved property, including such ground, surface or stormwater
as may be present.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — The plant and facilities operated for such
purpose by the City of Allentown, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania, to which the
sewer system is to be connected.
SEWER — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the sewer system used
or usable for sewage collection purposes and to which ground, surface and
stormwater is not admitted intentionally.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for collection,
pumping, treating and disposing of sanitary sewage and industrial wastes,
situate in or adjacent to this Borough and owned by the Authority and
leased to this Borough for operation and use.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or are in
suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are removable by
laboratory filtration.
TOXIC SUBSTANCE — Any poisonous substance, including copper, cyanide
and chromium ions.
WATER SYSTEM — The facilities of this Borough for the supply of water to
the public in this Borough.
§ 18-202. Sewer Rentals and Charges. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 2]
Sewer rentals and charges are imposed upon and shall be collected from
the owner of each improved property within this Borough which shall be
connected with the sewer system, whether the benefit resulting from such
connection shall be direct or indirect, which sewer rentals and charges shall
commence and shall be effective on the first day of October, 1960, or on the
date when the Borough first shall be capable of accepting sanitary sewage
and industrial wastes from such improved property for transportation to
and treatment at the sewage treatment plant, whichever date last shall
occur, and shall be payable quarterly, as provided in this Part.
§ 18-203. Computation of Sewer Rentals and Charges. [Ord. 368, 1/
18/1960, § 3; as amended by Ord. 540, 1/19/1976; by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986; by Ord. 740, 12/17/1990, § 1; by Ord. 810, 12/5/1994, § 1;
by Ord. 952, 7/1/2002, § I; by Ord. 1020, 12/18/2006, § 1; by Ord.
1049, 12/29/2008, § I; and by Ord. 1093, 12/17/2012, § I; and by Ord.
1151, 12/19/2016]
1. Effective with the first billing as of January 1, 2017, the sewer rental
charge shall be as follows:
Per Quarter
Per connection $23.75
Per Each 1,000 gallons $2.31
§ 18-201 EMMAUS CODE § 18-203
FWD:352
§ 18-204. Time and Method of Payment. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 4]
2. Effective with the first billing as of January 1, 2017, the Borough of
Emmaus shall establish a reserve fund for purposes of potential future
significant structural repairs to the sewer collection and processing
system, including, but not limited to, potentially, the Allentown WWTP
and the Emmaus Interceptor, as well as significant structural repairs to
Borough of Emmaus sewer lines and manholes.
A. The reserve fund shall be used exclusively for the purposes of
significant structural repairs of the sewer collection and processing
system and shall not be utilized to balance the sewer fund budget.
This provision may only be changed by a superseding ordinance. It
is the intention of Council that this fund shall remain restricted to
the above-mentioned uses only, and funds may not be borrowed or
shifted from said fund even on a temporary basis except by a
superseding ordinance.
B. The reserve fund shall be shown as a separate line item on
quarterly sewer bills to all customers and shall be labeled in such a
way that it is clearly identified.
C. The reserve fund rate shall be calculated based on the size of the
water meter at each address as follows and shall be billed with
quarterly bills:
Water Meter Size
(inches) Rate Per Quarter
5/8 $12.25
1 $17.19
1 1/2 $25
2 $35
3 $50
4 $65
3. Any future rate increases may be passed by resolution or ordinance of
Borough Council.
4. Nothing herein shall be construed as an admission of future
responsibility for charges to the Allentown WWTP as the same are
governed by a 1959 agreement (and subsequent agreements) with
Allentown.
1. Sewer rentals and charges imposed by this Part shall be payable
quarterly.
In the case of an owner of improved property whose quarterly bill for
sewer rentals and charges shall be computed in whole or in part upon
the basis of water volume usage metered by this Borough in connection
§ 18-203 FOREWORD § 18-204
FWD:353
§ 18-205. Liens for Sewer Rentals; Filing and Collection of Liens.
[Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 5]
Sewer rentals and charges imposed by this Part shall be a lien on the
improved property connected to and served by the sewer system; and any
such sewer rentals and charges which are delinquent shall be filed as a lien
against the improved property so connected to and served by the sewer
system, which lien shall be filed in the office of the Prothonotary of Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania, and shall be collected in the manner provided by law
for the filing and collecting of municipal claims.
with the water system, the quarterly billing date shall be the same date
and shall cover the same quarterly period as shall be applicable for
billing by this Borough in connection with the water system.
In the case of an owner of improved property whose quarterly bill for
sewer rentals and charges shall be computed on any basis completely
independent of water volume usage metered by this Borough in
connection with the water system, the quarterly billing dates shall be
the fifteenth days of January, April, July and October, respectively, in
each year and shall cover a quarterly billing period consisting of the
immediately preceding three complete calendar months.
2. Sewer rentals and charges shall be due and payable upon the
applicable quarterly billing date set forth in Subsection 1 of this
§ 18-204 and the appropriate amount computed in accordance with this
Part shall constitute the net bill. If sewer rentals and charges are not
paid within 30 calendar days after each quarterly billing date, an
additional sum of 10% shall be added to such net bill, which net bill,
plus such additional sum, shall constitute the gross bill. Payment made
or mailed and postmarked on or before the last day of such 30 calendar
day period shall constitute payment within such period. If the end of
such 30 calendar day period shall fall on a legal holiday or a Sunday,
payment made on or mailed and postmarked on the next succeeding
week day which is not a legal holiday shall constitute payment within
such period.
Whenever service to any improved property shall begin after the first
day or shall terminate before the last day of any quarterly billing period,
sewer rentals and charges for such period shall be prorated equitably,
if appropriate, for that portion of the quarterly billing period during
which such improved property was served by the sewer system.
3. Every owner of improved property which is connected to the sewer
system initially shall provide this Borough with and thereafter shall
keep this Borough advised of his correct address. Failure of any person
to receive quarterly bills for sewer rentals and charges shall not be
considered an excuse for non-payment nor shall such failure result in an
extension of the period of time during which the net bill shall be
payable.
§ 18-204 EMMAUS CODE § 18-206
FWD:354
§ 18-206. Measuring Volume of Sanitary Sewage and Industrial
Wastes. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 6]
1. Methods of Measuring Volume.
A. Whenever the entire water supply of an improved property
discharging sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the
sewer system is supplied by the water system, the volume of water
furnished, as determined from meter readings of the water system,
shall be used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals and charges,
subject to adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this Part.
B. Whenever an improved property discharging sanitary sewage and/
or industrial wastes into the sewer system shall have a source or
sources of water supply in addition to or other than the water
system, the owner of such improved property shall provide a meter
on such additional or other source or sources of water supply. The
total volume of water consumed, as determined from the meter
readings of the water system and the meter readings of the meter
or meters on such additional or other source or sources of water
supply, or the meter readings of the meter or meters on such other
source or sources of water supply, as appropriate, shall be used as
the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or industrial
wastes in computing the sewer rentals and charges, subject to
adjustment, if appropriate, as provided in this Part.
C. Whenever an improved property shall use water from the water
system and/or water from a source or sources of supply in addition
to or other than the water system for cooling or unpolluted
commercial or industrial process purposes, and all or part of the
water so used shall not be discharged into the sewer system, the
volume used as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals and charges may be
adjusted by one of the following methods:
(1) By installing a meter or other measuring device on the
connection to the sewer system. The readings from such meter
or measuring device shall be used as the measure of discharge
of sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing
sewer rentals and charges.
(2) By installing a meter or other measuring device to measure the
volume not being discharged into the sewer system. The
readings from such meter or measuring device shall be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the
remainder shall be used as the measure of discharge of
sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes in computing sewer
rentals and charges.
(3) If it is not practical, in the opinion of this Borough, to install a
meter or other measuring device to determine continuously the
§ 18-206 FOREWORD § 18-206
FWD:355
§ 18-207. Access. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960, § 10]
This Borough shall have the right of access at reasonable times to any part
of any improved property served by the sewer system as shall be required
for purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling and testing and for
performance of other functions relating to service rendered by this Borough
through the sewer system.
§ 18-208. Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 368,
1/18/1960, § 11]
This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, such additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper in connection
with use and operation of the sewer system, which rules and regulations
shall be, shall become and shall be construed as part of this Part.
volume not discharged into the sewer system, this Borough
shall determine, in such manner and by such method as it
may prescribe, the percentage of metered water which is being
discharged into the sewer system. The quantity of water used
as the measure of discharge of sanitary sewage and/or
industrial wastes in computing sewer rentals and charges shall
be the percentage so determined of the quantity measured by
the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to such estimated
percentage shall be submitted to this Borough, after notice of
such estimate. The decision of this Borough with respect to the
matter shall be final for the then current calendar year.
2. Measuring Devices. Meters or other measuring devices which shall not
be owned by this Borough in connection with the water system but
which shall be required or permitted under provisions of this Part shall
be furnished and installed by the owner of the improved property at his
expense, shall be under the control of this Borough and may be tested,
inspected or repaired by this Borough whenever necessary. The owner
of the improved property upon which such meter or other measuring
device shall be installed shall be responsible for its maintenance and
safekeeping; and all repairs thereto shall be made at the expense of the
owner, whether such repairs shall be made necessary by ordinary wear
and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by this Borough,
shall be due and payable immediately upon completion of such repairs
and shall be collected in the same manner as quarterly bills for sewer
rentals and charges.
3. Meter Readings. The Borough shall be responsible for the reading of all
meters or other measuring devices and the same shall be available to
this Borough at all reasonable times.
§ 18-206 EMMAUS CODE § 18-209
FWD:356
§ 18-209. Penalties. [Ord. 368, 1/18/1960; as added by Ord. 515, 6/
3/1974; and as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 2 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 18-209 FOREWORD § 18-209
FWD:357

Part 3
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS
§ 18-301. Short Title. [Ord. No. 1174, 5/7/2018]
This Part shall be known, and may be cited, as the Borough's "Wastewater
Discharge Limitations Ordinance."
§ 18-302. Adoption of Ordinance. [Ord. No. 1174, 5/7/2018]
The Borough hereby adopts Ordinance No. 15346 of the City of Allentown,
enacted by City Council on February 1, 2017, and signed by the Mayor
on February 9, 2017, as its Wastewater Discharge Limitations Ordinance,
subject to the revisions, additions and exceptions as more particularly set
forth in § 18-303, herein.
§ 18-303. Revisions, Additions and Exceptions. [Ord. No. 1174, 5/7/
2018]
The following constitute the revisions, additions and exceptions to the
adoption of Ordinance 15346 as the Borough's Wastewater Discharge
Limitations Ordinance:
1. Nothing contained in, or required by, Ordinance 15346 shall be
interpreted or applied to supersede, contravene or modify any of the
rights, duties, obligations, requirements or terms of any intermunicipal
agreements between the Borough and the City of Allentown, including,
without limitation, the agreement of March 17, 1959, and in all
respects, such intermunicipal agreements shall remain and continue in
full force and effect, except as may be amended by the parties in writing
from time to time.
2. Nothing contained in, or required by, Ordinance 15346 shall be
interpreted or applied to cause the Borough to be a "user" or an
"industrial user" as those terms are defined or used in Ordinance
15346, with respect to the Borough's operation or maintenance of the
Borough-owned POTW.
3. Section 2.1.B.12 of Ordinance 15346 is deleted, but only to the extent
that it conflicts with the agreement between the Borough and the City
of Allentown, dated March 17, 1959.
4. Section 2.5 of Ordinance 15346 is deleted, but only to the extent that it
conflicts with the agreement between the Borough and the City of
Allentown, dated March 17, 1959.
5. All reporting requirements applicable to users or industrial users which
are set forth in Ordinance 15346 shall be deemed amended to include
the requirement that all reports required to be submitted, in addition to
being submitted to the City of Allentown or the Lehigh County
§ 18-301 FOREWORD § 18-303
FWD:359
Authority, as the case may be, shall be submitted also to the Borough
Manager of the Borough of Emmaus.
6. Nothing contained in, or required by, Ordinance 15346 shall be
interpreted or applied to limit the right of the Borough to, subject to
Borough discretion, enforce the requirements of Ordinance 15346 with
respect to users and industrial users located within the Borough.
§ 18-303 EMMAUS CODE § 18-303
FWD:360
Part 4
ASSESSMENT OF CONSTRUCTION COSTS
§ 18-401. Procedure. [Ord. 667, 7/1/1985, § 1]
1. Plans shall be submitted to the Borough Council by the Health and
Sanitation Committee recommending extensions to the sewer system.
2. Specifications shall be prepared for such extensions with such
engineering detail as the Health and Sanitation Committee deems
necessary.
3. Borough Council may approve of such plans and specifications by
Resolution.
4. When such plans and specifications have been approved, the cost of the
assessable sewers to be charged against properties benefited,
improved or accommodated shall be calculated.
5. Borough Council may charge part or all of the cost of assessable sewers
by Resolution against properties benefited, improved or accommodated
thereby by assessment according to the front foot rule.
6. A copy of the plans and the specifications and the accompanying
Resolutions shall be kept on file by the Borough Manager at the
Municipal Building of the Borough, where the same may be inspected
by interested persons.
§ 18-401 FOREWORD § 18-401
FWD:361

Part 5
TESTING, INSPECTION, REPAIR AND REPLACEMENT OF
BUILDING SEWERS AND SEWER LATERALS
§ 18-501. Purpose. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
The purpose and intent of this Part is to provide for the operation and
maintenance of the Borough's sanitary sewer system in a reliable and
serviceable condition, to eliminate or minimize sewage overflows by
eliminating or minimizing stoppages or blockages and to reduce sources
of infiltration and inflow into the Borough's sanitary sewer system so as to
comply with all applicable legal requirements pertaining to that system.
§ 18-502. Definitions. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BUILDING SEWER — The extension of the sanitary sewer system from the
sewer drainage system of any structure to the lateral of a sanitary sewer.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLIANCE or COMPLIANCE CERTIFICATE — A
certificate from the Public Works Inspector or his or her designee certifying
that the building sewer or sewer lateral on a property offered for sale
or transfer conforms to the requirements set forth in Chapter 18 of the
Borough of Emmaus Consolidated Code of Ordinances.
FAMILY — Direct relatives, limited to include mother, father, son, daughter,
brother, sister, step-parents, step-children and spouses.
INFILTRATION AND INFLOW — The flow or seepage of stormwater or
groundwater into the building sewer or sewer lateral, sometimes referred
to as "I&I."
PROPERTY — Any real property that is located within the corporate limits
of the Borough of Emmaus and connects, or is connected, to the Borough's
sanitary sewer system.
PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTOR — The Borough of Emmaus Public Works
Inspector or his or her designee.
SALE — The conveyance of an interest in property which results in a change
in the title to that property. A sale shall be deemed to occur upon the
execution of an agreement of sale.
SEWER LATERAL — That part of the sanitary sewer system extending from
a structure on the property to the curbline or, if there is no curbline, to the
property line.
TRANSFER — The conveyance of an interest in property which results in
a change in the occupancy of that property. A transfer shall be deemed to
occur upon the execution of a lease, or in the absence of a written lease or
other agreement for occupancy, the effective date of the oral lease or other
agreement.
§ 18-501 FOREWORD § 18-503
FWD:363
§ 18-503. Prohibitions. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
§ 18-504. Testing. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
1. It shall be unlawful for any owner of property connected, or to be
connected, to the Borough's sanitary sewer system to fail to perform
required testing or to construct, operate or maintain a building sewer
or sewer lateral in a defective condition. As used in this Part, "defective
condition" includes, but is not limited to:
A. Displaced joints;
B. Root obstruction;
C. Substantial deterioration;
D. Damaged or missing cleanout;
E. Damaged or missing backwater overflow prevention device
required pursuant to 2015 IPC Section 715.1 of the Borough Code;
F. Any condition which will allow infiltration and inflow of extraneous
water or exfiltration of sewage;
G. Any condition that materially increases the possibility of a blockage
or overflow;
H. Constructed without a proper permit or with materials not
approved by the Borough;
I. Lack of a manufactured connection to the Borough's sewer system;
J. Otherwise in violation of Borough requirements; or
K. In such a condition that the tests required by this Part cannot be
accomplished to the satisfaction of the Borough.
1. Testing of New Building or Sewers or Sewer Laterals. All new building
sewers and sewer laterals shall be tested by air, water or video
inspection method. The method used shall be at the discretion of the
Borough. The test shall encompass the full length of the building sewer
or sewer lateral and shall conform to all testing requirements
established or utilized by the Borough in its discretion. All testing
required hereunder shall be performed by or on behalf of the property
owner(s) at his or her expense.
2. Testing of Existing Building Sewers and Sewer Laterals.
A. Conditions Requiring Cleaning and Testing of Building Sewers or
Sewer Laterals. All building sewers or sewer laterals, including but
not limited to those serving residential, multiple residential,
industrial and commercial properties connected to the Borough's
sanitary sewer system, shall be cleaned and tested, at the property
§ 18-503 EMMAUS CODE § 18-504
FWD:364
owner's expense, when any of the following events occur in the
opinion of the Public Works Inspector:
(1) The installation of additional plumbing facilities that produces
a significant increase in sewage flow from the property.
(2) A change of use of the property that produces a significant
increase in sewage flow from the property served.
(3) Subsequent to a sale or transfer of the property and prior to
the passage of title or occupancy, except that a conveyance
without full consideration of ownership between family
members does not require testing. A formal written waiver of
the requirements of this Subsection 2A(3) may be obtained
from the Borough of Emmaus Public Works Inspector if the
property owner can prove to the satisfaction of the Borough
that an approved inspection was conducted within the previous
two years of the property transfer.
(4) Upon repair or replacement of all or part of the building sewer
or sewer lateral.
(5) Upon a determination that the cleaning, testing, repair or
replacement is required for the protection of the public health,
safety, and welfare.
B. Exemptions and Waivers. The testing provisions of this Part shall
not apply to:
(1) A sale or transfer occurring prior to the effective date of this
Part;
(2) A sale or transfer occurring within 10 years of the completion
of construction, or complete replacement, of a building sewer
and sewer lateral, provided that the property owner shall
prove entitlement to the exemption to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Inspector;
(3) The sale or transfer of property to a buyer or transferee who at
the time thereof had been actually and continuously residing at
the property with the seller or transferor for a period of not
less than one year; provided that the property owner shall
prove entitlement to the exemption to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Inspector;
(4) A sale or transfer between family members where an
inspection was performed and approved within two years of
the sale or transfer; provided that the property owner shall
prove entitlement to the exemption to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Inspector; and
(5) A sale or transfer between a property owner and a trust or
other similar instrument; provided that there is no change in
§ 18-504 FOREWORD § 18-504
FWD:365
§ 18-505. Testing Criteria for Building Sewers and Sewer Laterals.
[Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
the occupancy of the property and provided that the property
owner shall prove entitlement to the exemption to the
satisfaction of the Public Works Inspector.
C. The availability of an exemption or a waiver hereunder shall not
relieve the property owner from compliance with all of the
remaining requirements of this Part.
1. The owner or an agent of the owner of a property shall notify the
Borough at least 24 hours prior to testing so that the Borough may
witness the same. A failure to provide notice hereunder shall render the
testing void at the option of the Public Works Inspector, who may order
a retest at the property owner's expense.
2. All building sewers or sewer laterals shall be tested by television video
inspection method in accordance with all requirements imposed by the
Borough. When cleaning and testing of a building sewer or sewer
lateral is required hereunder, the building sewer or sewer lateral shall
first be cleaned and then tested using an internal video inspection for
the full length of the building sewer or sewer lateral. The internal video
inspection shall be completed by a person or firm competent by
experience to perform the work. Video recordings of the inspection
shall be submitted to the Borough for verification of the condition of the
building sewer or sewer lateral.
3. A building sewer or sewer lateral will comply with the provisions of this
Part if video inspection verifies all of the following conditions:
A. The building sewer or sewer lateral is free of roots, grease
deposits, and other solids which may impede or obstruct or may
impede or obstruct in whole or in part the transmission of sewage.
B. There are no illicit or illegal connections to the building sewer or
sewer lateral such as roof or yard drainage facilities.
C. All joints in the building sewer or sewer lateral are tight and sound
to prevent the exfiltration of sewage and the infiltration of
groundwater.
D. The building sewer or sewer lateral is free of structural defects,
cracks, breaks, or missing portions and the grade is reasonably
uniform without major sags or offsets.
E. The building sewer or sewer lateral is equipped with at least one
cleanout located within five feet of the building. If a cleanout does
not exist, the owner will be required to place a cleanout in if other
repairs are required, however, if it is determined that a cleanout is
the sole repair required, it shall not be mandatory to install a
cleanout.
§ 18-504 EMMAUS CODE § 18-505
FWD:366
§ 18-506. Escrowed Funds and Compliance Certificate. [Ord. No.
1185, 1/21/2019]
If weather or other conditions beyond the control of the property owner
prevent required repairs from being performed prior to the transfer of
title following a sale of property or at the time of occupancy under an
agreement, whether oral or written, to transfer the property, a sum
sufficient to pay for such repairs as determined by the Public Works
Inspector shall be paid to the Borough, along with all applicable fees, and a
compliance certificate shall then be issued. If the proceeds of the completed
sale or transfer are needed to make the required repair(s), a compliance
certificate may be obtained within seven days after the transfer of title or
occupancy under an agreement to transfer, provided that funds have been
escrowed in an amount sufficient to make the required repairs. Escrowed
funds shall be used to make and complete the required repairs and approve
the same, all within 30 days of the date of the transfer of title in the case of
a sale or occupancy under an agreement to transfer.
§ 18-507. Timing. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
§ 18-508. Ability to Choose Inspector. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
The property owner may select a qualified inspector to perform the
inspection work. The inspector must be a licensed contractor in good
standing in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania experienced in sanitary
sewer construction and testing. The property owner may also authorize the
Borough to perform the inspection work. In such instance, the property
owner shall pay a fee, as set forth in the Borough's fee schedule, as may be
adopted by resolution from time to time. If the Borough solicits proposals
for inspection services, the property owner may select, at its own discretion,
4. A video inspection shall be valid for a period of two years from the date
of the video.
1. A compliance certificate may be issued:
A. Immediately after inspection if no repairs are required;
B. When the required repairs have been made, approved and all
applicable fees paid;
C. Upon payment to the Borough of an amount of money equal to the
Public Works Inspector's good faith estimate of repair costs and
inspection fees; or
D. If the proceeds of the sale or transfer are needed for the repair,
within seven days after finalization or closing of the sale or
occupancy under a lease or other agreement to transfer the
property, provided the required funds have been placed into escrow
for purposes of building sewers or sewer lateral repair or
replacement.
§ 18-505 FOREWORD § 18-508
FWD:367
the selected inspector and pay the fee as agreed upon by the Borough. In all
cases, inspection results shall be submitted to the Borough for review and
approval or determination of required remedial mitigation.
§ 18-509. Testing Failure Mitigation. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
When an existing building sewer or sewer lateral fails to meet the
conditions required by this Part, the property owner shall make all repairs
necessary to bring the building sewer or sewer lateral into compliance with
this Part, or replace the building sewer or sewer lateral in accordance with
all Borough requirements. All costs of repair or replacement of the building
sewer or sewer lateral shall be borne by the property owner.
§ 18-510. Building Sewer and Sewer Lateral Compliance; Issuance
of Certificate of Compliance. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
The Borough shall review the final, submitted video for compliance with
this Part. When all conditions are met to the satisfaction of the Borough,
the building sewer or sewer lateral shall be certified as complying with the
provisions of this Part and the Borough Code. The Borough shall thereupon
issue a Certificate of Compliance to the property owner, noting that the
building sewer or sewer lateral serving the property is properly equipped,
structurally sound, meets the service conditions of the Borough of Emmaus
and will not require testing for a two-year period from the date of issuance
unless the Borough has reason to believe the building sewer or sewer lateral
may have become defective since issuance of the Certificate of Compliance.
§ 18-511. Repair or Replacement of Building Sewer and Sewer
Lateral Upon Sale or Transfer. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
The repairs or replacement of building sewers or sewer laterals that result
from the testing required as result of the sale or transfer of property shall
be completed prior to the sale or transfer. For property sold or transferred
with escrowed funds for required repairs, such work shall be completed
within 180 days after the sale or transfer.
§ 18-512. Hardship Deferrals. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
1. In the event that the property owner establishes to the satisfaction of
the Borough that the required repair or replacement of a building
sewer or sewer lateral will result in undue hardship inconsistent with
the purpose or intent of this Part, a request for hardship status may be
submitted to the Borough Manager for review and consideration by
Borough Council. Grounds for granting a hardship deferral shall
include:
A. Severe illness or incapacitation of the property owner;
B. The immediate transfer or removal of the property owner from the
state, thereby making the hiring of a contractor to repair or replace
§ 18-508 EMMAUS CODE § 18-512
FWD:368
§ 18-513. Enforcement. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
In the event of a failure to comply with this Part within the required, the
Borough may bring an enforcement action and exercise other remedies
as provided by Borough Code, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and
all applicable laws, against the property owner and any other responsible
party. In addition hereto, any property owner who fails to fully comply
with this Part shall be responsible for all damages that arise from or
relate to such failure. For purposes of this section, "damages" include all
compensatory damages, fines, penalties, assessments, reasonable attorney
and consulting fees incurred by the Borough and other monetary exactions
that may be awarded to, levied, or assessed by any person, firm,
corporation, company, or public entity.
§ 18-514. Extension of Time. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
A property owner may request an extension of time for repairs or
replacements that are required as a result of testing. Extension requests
shall be in writing and must include the name and contact information of
the party responsible for accomplishing the repair or replacement of the
building sewer or sewer lateral. The Public Works Inspector shall review the
request and may grant a time extension up to, but no more than, 180 days.
§ 18-515. Common Interest Developments. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/
2019]
The homeowners' associations of a common interest development shall
provide video inspection verification of all privately owned building sewers
and sewer laterals within the common interest areas at least once every
10 years for duties and obligations imposed by this Part in relation to
any building sewer or sewer lateral located within a common area of the
development. If no homeowners' association exists, then the individual unit
the building sewer or sewer lateral impractical or overly
burdensome; and
C. Any physical or financial situation that would render compliance
with the time limits for the repair or replacement of building sewer
or sewer lateral extraordinarily difficult or impractical.
2. A property owner to whom a hardship deferral is granted shall be given
written notice thereof. Said notice shall inform the property owner that
the building sewer or sewer lateral repair or replacement requirement
is deferred for a period of up to 180 days after the date on which the
repairs were otherwise required or for such other definitive period in
excess of 180 days as shall be determined by Borough Council.
3. A property owner aggrieved by a decision of the Borough Council shall
have the right to appeal in accordance with the Local Agency Law.17
17.Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 105.
§ 18-512 FOREWORD § 18-515
FWD:369
owners shall be jointly and severally liable for the duties and obligations
with respect to the building sewers and sewer laterals as required by this
Part.
§ 18-516. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. No. 1185, 1/21/2019]
Any property owner or other person subject to this Part who violates or
permits a violation of this Part shall, upon being found guilty in a summary
criminal proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, pay the Borough
of Emmaus a fine of at least $500, not to exceed $1,000, plus all court
costs and reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough of Emmaus
on account of such violation. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation hereof. Further, the appropriate officers or
agents of the Borough of Emmaus are hereby authorized to issue a ceaseand-
desist order and/or to seek equitable relief, including injunctions, to
enforce compliance herewith in which case the Borough shall be entitled to
recover in addition to any penalties or other relief its reasonable attorney's
and engineering fees, expert fees and court costs. If the property owner
or other person subject to this Part fails to remedy a violation causing
immediate public harm after receiving due notice, the Borough, its
employees, and/or contractors are authorized to enter the property and
perform all work necessary to remedy such condition and the property
owner or such other person subject to this Part shall pay all costs and
expenses incurred by the Borough within 30 days of receipt of an invoice for
the work. A failure to pay hereunder may result in the filing of a municipal
lien against the property or the initiation of other legal remedies.
§ 18-515 EMMAUS CODE § 18-516
FWD:370
Chapter 19
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 18-516 FOREWORD § 18-516
FWD:371

Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 20-101. Definitions. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 101; as amended by
Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 101]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
ANNUAL ASSESSMENT — An annual charge paid to the Borough for each
dwelling unit or entity, regardless of whether the dwelling unit or entity
is occupied, for the collection of garbage and refuse by the Borough of
Emmaus or its contractor.
CONTRACTOR — The person, firm or corporation that has been authorized
by the Borough by contract to collect, transport and dispose of municipal
solid waste within the Borough of Emmaus.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or non-processing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, theaters, and any other business
activity, including home offices and home occupations.
DWELLING UNIT — A group of rooms located within a structure and
forming a single habitable unit for the exclusive use of the occupants
thereof, with facilities which are used for and intended to be used for living,
sleeping, cooking and eating.
ENTITY — Any single-family dwelling, multi-family dwelling, rooming units,
commercial establishments, institution, or any other legally recognized
person, corporation, partnership, or such other arrangement obtaining
legal recognition.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storage, preparation, cooking and consumption of
foods.
GROUP HOME — Residential clients and attendant staff, living together in a
dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit under a common housekeeping
management plan based on an intentionally structured relationship
designed to provide organization and stability.
INDEPENDENT HAULER — A person, firm, or corporation, other than
the Borough's contractor, that a commercial establishment, an industrial
establishment, institution, school, nursing home, rest home, funeral parlor,
doctor or dental office, or multi-family dwelling has contracted with to
collect, transport and dispose of its solid waste.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, fish farms, refineries and the like.
MULTI-FAMILY DWELLING — Any building under one roof which contains
two or more complete dwelling units.
§ 20-101 FOREWORD § 20-101
FWD:373
REFUSE — The collective term applying to rubbish, ashes, paper products,
rags, street sweepings, excelsior, straw, boxes, old clothes, shoes, leather
scraps, pieces of carpet, cloth, glass, china, wood, sand, brick, tile, etc., and
all waste material and riffraff too large for collection in containers, such as
furniture, tanks and appliances.
YARD WASTE — Any leaves, garden residues, grass clippings, shrubbery,
tree trimmings and Christmas trees.
§ 20-102. Administration. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 102; as amended by
Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 102]
1. The Borough is authorized to award a contract for the collection,
removal, transportation and disposal of municipal waste generated
from single-family dwellings, dwelling units, group homes, multi-family
dwellings and commercial establishments as well as any other type of
entity the Borough deems necessary or acceptable. Such contract shall
contain provisions to be performed and carried out by contractors in
compliance with all Borough ordinances.
2. The Borough Council shall, prior to the commencement of a calendar
year, enact a resolution determining the "annual assessment" for solid
waste collection in the Borough of Emmaus. The assessment shall be for
the purpose of determining the amount to be paid to the Borough for
the collection, removal, transportation, and disposal of municipal solid
waste, including all refuse and recyclables, electronic waste, household
hazardous waste, "Dumpster Day" services, as well as leaf waste,
compost services, yard waste, holiday tree waste, as required by this
chapter. [Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
3. The following entities shall pay one Annual assessment for each
calendar year, subject to the payment criteria set forth in § 20-104 of
this chapter.
A. Single-family dwelling.
B. Each unit in a multi-family dwelling, with the owner of the property
being primarily liable for payment of the assessment.
C. Commercial establishment that is not a home occupation or a home
office, or any other type of home-based business.
D. Churches and non-profit organizations that are not classified as a
home occupation or a home office, or any other type of home-based
activity.
E. Hotels, rooming homes, bed and breakfasts, and group homes.
All such establishments shall comply with all recycling ordinances,
laws, rules, and regulations.
4. Any building or structure containing multiple businesses or commercial
establishments shall be assessed one annual assessment for each
§ 20-101 EMMAUS CODE § 20-102
FWD:374
separate business or commercial establishment in or on the building or
structure.
5. Any building or structure containing a dwelling unit or units and a
commercial unit or units shall be assessed one annual assessment for
each dwelling unit or commercial unit in or on the building or structure.
6. The owner or possessor of a dwelling unit that is used as a home office
or a home occupation, or any other type of home-based business or
activity, shall be assessed 1 1/4 of an annual assessment for refuse
services at the owned or possessed property.
7. The Borough of Emmaus shall not collect garbage or refuse for any
industrial establishment, any schools, nursing homes, rest homes,
funeral parlors, doctor or dental offices, or any establishment creating
medical, dental or animal waste.
8. Any commercial establishment, business, or multifamily dwelling owner
may be excluded from paying the full annual assessment for the
collection of garbage, refuse, and recyclables under this Part if the
entity furnishes, on an annual basis, to the Borough Manager or his or
her designee, a notarized certification in a form prescribed by the
Borough, confirming that the property is obtaining dumpster service
being provided by the contractor or by an independent hauler, which
certification shall state: [Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
A. The name, address, contact person, phone number, and e-mail
address of the independent hauler.
B. A description of the manner in which recyclables will be collected,
transported, removed and disposed from the property, including,
but not limited to, the containers that will be used, a description of
the collection method, and the frequency of the collection.
C. That if there is any material change in the collection of refuse or
recyclables, the entity completing the form will immediately notify
the Borough of the change.
D. That the collection of refuse and recyclables will not have an
interrupted period of collection during the calendar year for which
the form is submitted.
E. That the collection, transportation, removal, and disposal of all
solid waste from the premises will conform to and be in compliance
with all local health regulations, the Borough's Solid Waste
Ordinance and any other relevant ordinances, and any and all state
and federal laws, rules and regulations.
F. That the entity obtaining dumpster service releases the Borough
from the collection, transportation, removal and disposal of any
solid waste, including recyclables, from the property serviced by
the contractor or independent hauler.
§ 20-102 FOREWORD § 20-102
FWD:375
G. That the entity obtaining dumpster service authorizes the Borough,
its employees, or its designees to enter upon the property of the
entity or such location where the dumpster service is located to
inspect the refuse and recyclable collection facilities in place to
ascertain their conformity to this Part and all applicable laws, rules,
and regulations.
H. That the entity and its contractor or hauler shall submit yearly
tonnage reports for both refuse and recycling separately to the
Borough of Emmaus no later than January 30 each year for the
previous year's collection. The tonnage reports shall be submitted
on official weight slips or letterhead by the contractor or hauler.
8.1. Any establishment electing to obtain dumpster service pursuant to this
section shall pay to the Borough an annual administrative fee in an
amount set by resolution of Borough Council for each building,
occupied structure or commercial unit served so as to offset the
Borough's cost for administering, managing, and monitoring
compliance with federal, state, and local refuse disposal and recycling
requirements. The Borough may elect to assess an additional fee for
each building, occupied structure, or commercial unit utilizing this
service, while also utilizing the Borough's electronic waste, household
hazardous waste, "Dumpster Day" services, or leaf waste, yard waste,
and/or holiday tree waste services. [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/
2019]
9. All industrial establishments, schools, nursing or rest homes, funeral
parlors, and medical and dental offices shall provide the Borough
Manager with written proof of arrangements those entities have made
with an independent hauler for the removal of refuse and garbage. Such
establishments agree that they will comply with State and local health
regulations, and release the Borough from the collection of any garbage
or refuse from its establishment.
10. All refuse and garbage collected by the contractor of the Borough of
Emmaus shall be collected, conveyed and disposed of by the Borough of
Emmaus through its contractor, provided that the Borough may require
any entity owning or occupying any premises that has accumulated
garbage and refuse at the time of collection in excess of six thirty-gallon
containers, or their equivalent by weight and volume, to personally
collect, convey and dispose of such garbage and refuse in accordance
with all regulations for collection, conveyance and disposal prescribed
in this Part or hereinafter directed by the Borough Council. In addition,
said entity may be required to pay such additional fees for the removal
thereof as determined by the Borough Manager.
11. All assessments, charges or other payments due under this Part shall be
borne and paid by the owner of the premises from which the garbage or
refuse is collected or upon which said refuse is accumulated and
disposed of, or the entity producing the refuse, or the entity responsible
for the existence or disposal thereof. If the entity from which the
§ 20-102 EMMAUS CODE § 20-102
FWD:376
garbage or refuse is collected is not the owner, then the owner shall
be jointly and severally liable with such entity for the payment of the
assessment fee to the Borough.
12. Responsibility of Manager; Refuse and Recycling Cordinator.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
A. The collection, disposal, and transportation of garbage and refuse
in the Borough of Emmaus shall be under the supervision of the
Borough Manager. Unless determined by contract, the Borough
Manager shall have the authority to determine the days of
collection, type and location of waste containers, and to change and
modify the same after notice as may be required by law.
B. Borough Council may appoint an individual as the Refuse and
Recycling Coordinator for the Borough, and his or her duties shall
include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Provide municipal refuse/recycling program technical
assistance.
(2) Provide commercial, institutional, and community event
refuse/recycling program technical assistance.
(3) Complete the annual report process as required.
(4) Review and report Borough recycling program analytics to
elected officials.
(5) Collaborate and communicate with haulers.
(6) Gather and maintain statistical information on the Borough's
recycling, solid waste and yard waste programs.
(7) Collect and interpret data from commercial, industrial, and
institutional establishments.
(8) Assist in managing the Emmaus Lower Macungie (ELM) joint
composting equipment program.
(9) Monitor, maintain, and ensure compliance through
enforcement and education that all haulers and contractors
meet the requirements of PA Act 101.18
(10) Assist with the development, writing, preparation, and
evaluation of bids, RFPs and contracts.
(11) Prepare and write grants and other funding opportunities.
(12) Conduct meetings, education events, community events,
programs, and activities throughout the community, including
18.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 20-102 FOREWORD § 20-102
FWD:377
§ 20-103. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 103; as amended
by Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 103]
but not limited to Borough-sponsored events, educational
facilities, apartment complexes, and the business community.
(13) Oversee and coordinate recycling program facilities at
Borough parks and facilities.
(14) Coordinate refuse and recycling efforts for community events.
(15) Assist and prepare documentation for grants, audits, reviews,
and other meetings as needed.
(16) Oversee special programs such as Dumpster Day events,
household hazardous waste events, and electronics recycling
efforts.
(17)Work jointly with the Environmental Advisory Committee for
recycling and education efforts.
(18) Attend regional and statewide PA DEP meetings, classes, and
events as needed.
13. The Borough Council is authorized to make regulations concerning the
hauling of refuse and garbage collected inside or outside the Borough
of Emmaus over the streets of the Borough. No refuse or garbage shall
be hauled over the streets of the Borough except in water-tight vehicles
with a tight cover so as to prevent offensive odors from escaping
therefrom and refuse being blown, dropped or spilled therefrom. No
garbage or refuse shall be dumped or disposed of within Borough
limits.
14. Ownership of garbage and refuse set out for collection shall be vested
in the Borough of Emmaus.
15. Garbage and refuse must originate at the property where it is set out
for collection.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, convey over any of the
streets of the Borough of Emmaus or dispose of any refuse or garbage
accumulated in the Borough in any manner not approved by this Part or
its subsequent regulations.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any garbage or refuse in any
street or other public place or upon private property, whether owned by
such person or not, within the Borough of Emmaus, except in proper
receptacles for collection. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse
or garbage in any stream or any other body of water.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to allow the accumulation of refuse
or garbage on any premises in the Borough of Emmaus other than for
the purpose of collection in the manner provided by this Part or by
§ 20-102 EMMAUS CODE § 20-103
FWD:378
§ 20-104. Fees, Penalties, Discounts and Delinquencies. [Ord. 964,
4/9/2003, § 104]
regulation of the Borough Council. Any unauthorized or unreasonable
accumulation of refuse or garbage on any premises is hereby declared
to be a nuisance and prohibited. Failure to remove unauthorized or
unreasonable accumulation of refuse within 15 days of written notice to
either the occupant or owner shall be deemed to be a violation of this
Part.
4. It shall be unlawful to place in any containers provided for the regular
collection of garbage and refuse any wearing material, bedding or
refuse from premises where highly infectious or contagious diseases
have prevailed or where there is highly flammable or explosive refuse
or garbage.
5. It shall be unlawful to place yard waste for collection, except as
provided for by the Borough.
6. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the occupants of the
premises on which the refuse or garbage receptacles are stored, or the
contractor, to remove the covers of any of the refuse or garbage
receptacles or to remove the refuse or garbage stored in such
containers.
7. Except as otherwise provided in this Part regarding the placement of
containers for collection, no trash container, refuse or garbage
container or recycling container shall be placed or stored at any
property so as to be visible from the front of the property.
8. Refuse may not be set out for collection more than 12 hours prior to the
time of collection. Empty containers must be removed from the
curbside collection location within 12 hours of collection.
1. The assessment fees or charges for the collection and disposal of
garbage and refuse shall be established by the Emmaus Borough
Council on an annual basis by the passage of a resolution for refuse and
garbage collection assessment fees or charges.
2. Each entity from which the Borough of Emmaus will collect garbage
and refuse shall receive an annual assessment fee or charge prepared
by the Office of the Borough Manager and/or his or her designee and
sent to each such entity in January of each year, or as soon thereafter as
practical.
A. The due date for the payment of that assessment fee or charge by
each entity shall be 90 days from billing date.
B. Should the assessment fee or charge be paid within 60 days of the
billing date, each entity shall receive a $10 discount deducted from
the assessment.
§ 20-103 FOREWORD § 20-104
FWD:379
C. Any payment received after 30 days past the due date, as
hereinabove stated, shall be subject to a 10% additional
assessment fee or charge.
D. In addition to the 10% penalty, any assessment fee or charge paid
more than 60 days after the due date shall be subject to an
additional 1% fee for each 30 days the assessment fee or charge is
delinquent.
3. Any person or any entity which fails to pay the annual assessment fee or
charge as set forth above or who in any way violates any provision of
this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30
days. Every day that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a
separate offense and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by this
section for each and every such separate offense.
4. Any violation of § 20-102(15) concerning the hauling of waste over the
streets of the Borough shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000
and/or imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days.
5. The Borough's Code Enforcement Officer, Police Department, Health
Officer or such other person or persons designated by the Borough
Council shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 20-104 EMMAUS CODE § 20-104
FWD:380
Part 2
COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
§ 20-201. Title. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 201]
This Part shall be known as the Borough of Emmaus Municipal Solid Waste
Ordinance.
§ 20-202. Definitions. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 202; as amended by
Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 202]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning given to them in this
section:
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being authorized as a "Collector."
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — A person authorized to collect, transport and dispose of
municipal waste from the Borough of Emmaus.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
nonmanufacturing or non-processing business, including, but not limited
to, stores, markets, offices, restaurants, theaters, and any other business
activity, including home offices and home occupations, and any other homebased
business activity.
DISPOSAL — The incinerating, depositing, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a
manner that the waste or a constituent of the waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste from the Borough of Emmaus, including
without limitation landfills and resource recovery facilities (as that term
is used in § 20-304). For the purpose of a municipal contract the disposal
site shall comply with the applicable requirements of the Lehigh County
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Management Plan as amended from time to
time.[Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, selling, storing, preparing, cooking and consumption of foods.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
manufacturing or processing including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries, and the like.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment engaged in
service to persons including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
§ 20-201 FOREWORD § 20-202
FWD:381
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storing,
collecting, transporting, processing, treating, and disposing of municipal
waste by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained
gaseous material resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
waste water treatment plant, or air pollution control facility. "Municipal
waste" shall also include all recyclables, as defined in this chapter.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, Federal government
or agency, State government or agency, or any other legal entity that is
recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of a person.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators,
recycling facilities, and resource recovery facilities.
REGULAR — At least three or more times per month.
REFUSE — The collective term applying to all garbage, rubbish, ashes,
leaves and grass trimmings from residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional premises.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semi-solid or contained
gaseous materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97, § 103).
Recyclable materials are not deemed to be waste.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste, and it shall
be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one
year constitutes disposal.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste
generated or present at any time from the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 20-203. Storage of Municipal Waste. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 203]
1. General. It shall be the duty of every owner of property and every
person occupying any dwelling unit, premises or place of business
within the Borough of Emmaus where municipal waste is produced and
is accumulated, by his own expense and cost, to provide and keep at all
times a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal waste
which may accumulate during the intervals between collection of such
municipal waste by an authorized collector.
§ 20-202 EMMAUS CODE § 20-203
FWD:382
§ 20-204. (Reserved)
§ 20-205. Transportation of Solid Waste. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 205]
§ 20-206. Disposal of Municipal Waste. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 206]
2. Storage and Container Requirements on Residential Properties.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
A. Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owner or occupant
of each residential property or the occupant of residential
properties shall be placed in containers for collection by an
authorized collector. The containers shall be durable, watertight,
and made of metal or plastic. Securely tied plastic bags may be
used in cases where such bags can be used without being torn open
by domestic or wild animals. However, this provision shall expire
April 14, 2020. As of April 15, 2020, all residential properties
utilizing curbside solid waste collection shall be required to utilize
containers that shall be durable, watertight, and made of metal or
plastic. Individual plastic bags and loose waste shall be prohibited
from curbside collection. The size of each container shall not
exceed a ninety-six-gallon capacity. However, large containers
designed for use with special hoisting equipment may be used if the
collector serving the property uses collection vehicles with such
special hoisting equipment.
3. Storage on Commercial, Institutional and Industrial Properties.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be done in the same
type of containers as are required for residential properties except
that containers larger than 30 gallons may be used, where needed,
to accommodate larger volumes of municipal wastes. Such
containers shall be kept in good working order.
B. Location of Containers. Containers for collection at commercial,
institutional and industrial properties shall be located on such
premises at a place which shall not interfere with public or private
sidewalks, driveways, roads, streets, highways or entrances and
exits of public or private buildings.
1. Prevention of Spillage. Any person transporting solid waste within the
Borough of Emmaus shall prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles
or containers used in the transport of such solid waste.
1. Designated Facilities. All municipal waste produced, collected and
transported from within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of
Emmaus shall be, to the extent permitted by law, disposed of at disposal
facilities designated by the Borough of Emmaus and in accordance with
any currently effective solid waste management plan of the Borough of
Emmaus. In the absence of such designated facilities and/or such
§ 20-203 FOREWORD § 20-206
FWD:383
§ 20-207. Exclusions. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 207]
currently effective solid waste management plan, municipal waste from
the Borough of Emmaus must be disposed of at a state-permitted
facility.
A. Bid specifications issued by the Borough for collection services
shall include the following stipulations: [Added by Ord. No. 1188,
4/15/2019]
(1) That materials designated by the Borough for inclusion in the
municipal recycling program shall not be collected and
disposed with the municipal waste; and
(2) That solid waste materials collected will only be taken to
disposal sites or facilities that have current agreements with
Lehigh County.
2. Notice to Collectors. If the Borough of Emmaus designates the disposal
facilities as provided for above, all authorized collectors and other
interested persons shall be informed of the location and other
information pertaining to the designated disposal facilities to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste collected, transported, removed and
disposed.
3. Special Collection Events. The Borough of Emmaus may, at its sole
discretion, elect to sponsor certain events throughout the year. Those
events may include but may not be limited to Dumpster Day events and
household hazardous waste collection events. In any such event, the
selected hauler or contractor shall possess the appropriate licenses,
permits, containers, approvals, and insurances as mandated by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and federal government to transport
and dispose of waste for these events. [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/
15/2019]
A. The Borough of Emmaus, prior to any event, shall establish the
acceptable items that shall be permitted to be disposed of at the
event.
B. Household hazardous waste events shall be registered with
Pennsylvania DEP in advance.
C. Household hazardous waste, once collected and accumulated, shall
be managed as hazardous waste. Therefore, any entity transporting
and disposing of the waste shall be appropriately permitted,
insured, and authorized to haul and dispose of the waste in
authorized transportation vehicles and containers. The entity shall
list the Borough of Emmaus as an insured entity for the
transportation and disposal of the waste and shall execute a hold
harmless agreement with the Borough of Emmaus, relieving the
Borough of any and all liability that may be a result of the transport
and disposal of the waste.
§ 20-206 EMMAUS CODE § 20-207
FWD:384
§ 20-208. Penalties and Remedies. [Ord. 964, 4/9/2003, § 208]
1. Individuals Not Engaged in Collection. Nothing contained herein shall
be deemed to prohibit any residential property occupant not regularly
engaged in the business of collecting municipal waste from hauling his
own municipal waste on an irregular and unscheduled basis, to a Statepermitted
disposal facility.
2. Hazardous and Residual Waste. The provisions of this Part do not apply
to anything but the storage, collection, transportation and disposal of
municipal waste and do not apply, therefore, to hazardous or residual
waste as defined by the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act.
1. Penalty. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Part shall,
upon conviction by a District Justice, be subject to a fine of up to but not
more than $1,000 together with the costs of prosecution, and in default
of the payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not
more than 90 days. Every violator of the provisions of this Part shall be
deemed guilty of a separate offense for each and every day such
violation shall continue and shall be subject to the penalty imposed by
this section for each and every such separate offense.
2. Additional Remedies. In addition to the foregoing penalty the Borough
of Emmaus may require the owner or occupant of a property to remove
any accumulation of solid waste and should said person fail to remove
such solid waste after 10 days following written notice, the Borough of
Emmaus may cause the solid waste to be collected and disposed of with
the costs for such actions to be charged to the owner or occupant of the
property in a manner provided by law.
3. Abatement. The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough of Emmaus from instituting appropriate actions
or proceedings to prevent the violation of this Part, to restrain, correct
or abate any such violation, or to prevent any act, conduct, business or
activity constituting a violation.
§ 20-207 FOREWORD § 20-208
FWD:385

Part 3
RECYCLING PROGRAM
§ 20-301. Short Title. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Emmaus
Waste Reduction and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 20-302. Authority. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 2]
This Part is enacted pursuant to the Solid Waste Management Act, P.L. 380,
No. 97, July 7, 1980 and the Municipal Waste Planning Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, No. 101, July 28, 1988.
§ 20-303. Purpose and Goals. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 3; as amended
by Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 303]
It is the purpose of this Part to:
§ 20-304. Definitions. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 4]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ABATEMENT — The restoration, reclamation, recovery, etc., of a natural
resource adversely affected by the activity of a person.
AVERAGE DAILY VOLUME — The mean daily volume received at a facility
taking into account weather and seasonal variations, scheduled community
cleanup days and other factors.
1. Require waste reduction and recycling as a means of managing
municipal waste, conserving resources and supplying energy.
2. Protect the public health, safety and welfare from the short and long
term dangers of collection, transportation, processing and storage of
municipal waste.
3. Establish and implement within the Borough of Emmaus a recycling
program to return valuable materials to productive use, to conserve
energy and to protect capacity at municipal waste processing or
disposal facilities.
4. Each person living or working in the Borough of Emmaus shall be
taught the economic, environmental and energy value of recycling and
waste reduction, and shall be encouraged through a variety of means to
participate in such activities.
5. The Borough of Emmaus shall, to the greatest extent practicable,
procure and use products and materials with recycled content, and
procure and use materials that are recyclable.
§ 20-301 FOREWORD § 20-304
FWD:387
COMMONWEALTH AGENCY — The Commonwealth and its departments,
boards, commissions and agencies, Commonwealth owned universities, and
the State Public School Building Authority, the State Highway and Bridge
Authority and any other authority now in existence or hereafter created or
organized by the Commonwealth.
DEGRADABLE PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — Plastic beverage carriers
that degrade by biological processes, photodegradation, chemodegradation
or degradation by other natural processes. The degradation process does
not produce or result in a residue or by-product considered to be hazardous
waste.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Resources of the
Commonwealth and its authorized representatives.
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leaking or placing
of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner that the solid waste
or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment, is emitted into
the air or is discharged into the waters of this commonwealth.
FEASIBILITY STUDY — A study which analyzes a specific municipal waste
processing or disposal system to assess the likelihood that the system can
be successfully implemented, including, but not limited to, an analysis of
the prospective market, the projected costs and revenues of the system, the
municipal waste-stream that the system will rely upon and various options
available to implement the system.
HOST MUNICIPALITY — The municipality other than the county within
which a municipal waste landfill or resource recovery facility is located or
is proposed to be located.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LOCAL PUBLIC AGENCY —
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of solid
wastes by any person engaging in such process.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source separation and collection
program for recycling Emmaus's waste or source separated recyclable
materials, or a program for designated drop-off points or collection centers
Counties, cities, boroughs, towns, townships, school districts and any
other authority now in existence or hereafter created or organized by
the commonwealth.
A.
All municipal or school or other authorities now in existence or
hereafter created or organized by any county, city, borough, township
or school district or any combination thereof.
B.
Any and all other public bodies, authorities, councils of government,
officers, agencies or instrumentalities of the foregoing, whether
exercising a governmental or proprietary function.
C.
§ 20-304 EMMAUS CODE § 20-304
FWD:388
for recycling Emmaus's waste or source-separated recyclable materials,
that is operated by or on behalf of the Borough of Emmaus. The term
includes any source separation and collection program for composting yard
waste that is operated by or on behalf of the Borough of Emmaus. The term
shall not include any program for recycling construction/demolition waste
or sludge from sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial, or
institutional water supply treatment plant, waste water treatment plant
or air pollution or air pollution control facility. The term does not include
source-separated recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designated, operated
or maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such
facility possesses a permit from the Department under the Solid Waste
Management Act. The term does not include any facility that is used
exclusively for disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
OPERATOR — A person engaged in solid waste processing or disposal.
Where more than one person is so engaged in a single operation, all persons
shall be deemed jointly and severally responsible for compliance with the
provisions of this Part.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association, institution
or cooperative enterprise. In any provision of this Part prescribing a fine,
imprisonment or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term
"person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation or other
legal entity having officers and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — Plastic rings or similar plastic connectors
used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages, including, but not
limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices, mineral
waters, soda and beer.
POLLUTION — Contamination of any air, water, land or other natural
resources of the Borough of Emmaus that will create or is likely to create a
public nuisance or to render the air, water, land or other natural resources
harmful, detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to
domestic, municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or
other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or
other life.
POST-CONSUMER MATERIAL — Any product generated by a business or
consumer which has served its intended end use, and which has been
separated or diverted from solid waste for the purposes of collection,
recycling and disposition. The term includes industrial by-products that
§ 20-304 FOREWORD § 20-304
FWD:389
would otherwise go to disposal or processing facilities. The term does not
include internally generated scrap that is commonly returned to industrial
or manufacturing processes.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities and resource
recovery facilities.
PROJECT DEVELOPMENT — Those activities required to be conducted
prior to constructing a processing or disposal facility that has been shown
to be feasible, including, but not limited to, public input and participation,
siting, procurement and vendor contract negotiations, and market and
municipal waste supply assurance negotiations.
PUBLIC AGENCY — Any commonwealth agency or local public agency.
RECYCLED CONTENT — Goods, supplies, equipment, materials and
printing containing post-consumer materials.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as municipal waste or the
mechanized separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than
through combustion) and creation and recovery or reusable materials other
than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING FACILITY — A facility employing a technology that is a process
that separates or classifies municipal waste and creates or recovers
reusable materials that can be sold to or reused by a manufacturer as a
substitute for or a supplement to virgin raw materials. The term "recycling
facility" shall not mean transfer stations or landfills for solid waste nor
composting facilities or resource recovery facilities.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and
any sludge from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply
treatment facility, waste water treatment facility or air pollution control
facility, provided that it is not hazardous. The term shall not include coal
refuse as defined in the act of September 24, 1968, (P.L. 1040, No. 318),
known as the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act. The term shall not include
treatment sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of
which is being carried on pursuant to and in compliance with a valid permit
issued pursuant to the Act of June 22, 1937 (P.L. 1987, No. 394), known as
The Clean Streams Law.
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides
for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal
waste that is generated off-site, including, but not limited to, a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy, and
any chemical and biological process that converts municipal waste into fuel
§ 20-304 EMMAUS CODE § 20-304
FWD:390
product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of municipal
waste that is generated off-site whether or not the facility is operated to
recovery energy. The term does not include:
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to, municipal,
residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous materials. The term does not include coal ash or drill cuttings.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — The act of July 7, 1980 (P.L. 380, No.
97).
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials that are
separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the purpose of
recycling.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste. It shall be
presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one
year constitutes disposal. This presumption can be overcome by clear and
convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any
time after generation.
TREATMENT — Any method, technique or process, including, but not
limited to, neutralization, designed to change the physical, chemical or
biological character or composition of any municipal waste so as to
neutralize such waste or so as to render such waste safer for transport,
suitable for recovery, suitable for storage or reduced in volume.
WASTE REDUCTION — Design, manufacture or use of a product to
minimize weight of municipal waste that requires processing or disposal,
including, but not limited to:
§ 20-305. Powers, Duties, and Responsibilities of the Borough of
Emmaus. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 5]
A. Any composting facility.
B. Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
Any separation and collection center, drop-off point or collection center
for recycling, or any source separation or collection center for
composting leaf waste.
C.
Any facility, including all units in the facility, with a total processing
capacity of less than 50 tons per day.
D.
Design or manufacturing activities which minimize the weight or
volume of materials contained in a product, or increase durability or
recyclability; and
A.
Use of products that contain as little material as possible, are capable
of being reused or recycled or have an extended useful life.
B.
§ 20-304 FOREWORD § 20-305
FWD:391
1. Responsibilities. The Borough of Emmaus shall have the power and its
duty shall be to assure the proper and adequate transportation,
collection and storage of municipal waste which is generated or present
within its boundaries, to assure adequate capacity for the disposal of
municipal waste generated within its boundaries by means of the
procedure set forth in § 1111 of the Municipal Waste Planning
Recycling and Waste Reduction Act and to adopt and implement a
program for the collection and recycling of municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials as provided in this Part.
2. Powers. In carrying out its duties under this section, the Borough of
Emmaus may adopt resolutions establishing procedures, regulations
and standards for the recycling, transportation, storage and collection
of municipal waste, or source-separated recyclable materials which
shall not be less stringent than, and not in violation of or inconsistent
with, the provisions and purposes of the Solid Waste Management Act,
the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act and
the regulations promulgated pursuant thereto.
3. Duties. The Borough of Emmaus shall implement the provisions of this
Part by collecting, transporting, processing or marketing sourceseparated
materials or may contract, subject to competitive bidding,
with any person to carry out its duties for the recycling, transportation,
collection and storage of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials, if the recycling, transportation, collection or
storage activity or facility is conducted or operated in a manner that is
consistent with the Solid Waste Management Act, the Municipal Waste
Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, this Part and the
regulations promulgated pursuant thereto. Any such person shall be
jointly and severally responsible with the Borough of Emmaus when
carrying out its duties for transportation, collection or storage activity
or facility.
4. Curbside Collection of Residential Recycling. Residential recycling shall
be collected at the curb at least one time per month. The frequency of
collection shall be determined in the refuse and recycling contract that
the Borough enters into with its selected hauler. [Added by Ord. No.
1188, 4/15/2019]
5. Recycling at Community Events Mandated. Any entity, including but not
limited to municipal, commercial, institutional, or industrial entities,
shall be required to provide appropriately identified and marked
recycling containers and opportunities for individuals to recycle at any
"community event." [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
6. Curbside Collection of Leaf Waste, Yard Waste, and Holiday Trees. The
Borough of Emmaus shall provide for the curbside collection of leaf
waste, yard waste, and holiday tree waste at least once per month or
twice per year as required by PA Act 101,19 as amended. Holiday tree
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 20-305 EMMAUS CODE § 20-305
FWD:392
§ 20-306. Designated Sites. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 6; as amended
by Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 306]
All municipal waste, including recyclables, shall be disposed of at a facility,
and in a manner that complies with all laws, rules, and regulations, of
any local governing body, state, or federal government, or any agency or
department of the same.
§ 20-307. Borough of Emmaus Recycling Program. [Ord. 720, 12/4/
1989, § 7; as amended by Ord. 1057, 9/21/2009, § 307]
The Borough of Emmaus hereby establishes and implements a source
separation and collection program for recyclable materials in accordance
with § 1501 of the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act. The source separation and collection program shall include
the following regulations:
waste shall be conducted for no less than a two-week period after
December 25 each year. The frequency and dates for collection of leaf
waste and yard waste shall be established by the Borough prior to
January 1 of each year. [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
7. Leaf Waste Drop-Off Center. The Borough of Emmaus shall provide a
site for property owners to drop off yard waste and leaf waste. The site
shall be opened throughout the year, with days and times for the
calendar year to be established prior to January 1. [Added by Ord. No.
1188, 4/15/2019]
1. All persons, commercial establishments, institutions, governments, and
any other entity in the Borough of Emmaus shall separate the following
classes of materials into an approved container for the storing of
recyclable materials, and shall dispose of them so as to ensure that they
are processed and transported to a facility that recycles the materials:
A. Aluminum food and beverage containers.
B. Glass food and beverage containers - brown, clear, or green.
C. Ferrous (Iron) cans.
D. PET plastic containers with the symbol #1 - with screw tops only,
without caps.
E. HDPE natural plastic containers with the symbol #2 - narrow neck
containers only (milk and water bottles).
F. HDPE pigmented plastic containers with the symbol #2 - narrow
neck containers only, without caps (detergent, shampoo bottles,
etc.).
G. Plastics with symbols #3, #4, #5, #6, #7 - narrow and screw top
containers.
§ 20-305 FOREWORD § 20-307
FWD:393
H. Newsprint.
I. Corrugated Cardboard. All cardboard shall be broken down flat and
neatly stacked at the curb in a manner that it will not be blown
away by wind or fall into a public right-of-way, street, or sidewalk.
[Amended by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
J. Magazines.
K. Catalogues.
L. Cereal boxes.
M. Telephone books.
N. Printer paper.
O. Copier paper.
P. Mail.
Q. All other office paper without wax liners.
Upon placement of recyclable items at the curbside for collection
by any party contracted by the Borough to perform refuse
collection, transportation, and disposal, such recyclable items
shall become the property of the Borough's contractor.
2. Persons are required to separate leaf waste from other municipal waste
generated at their homes, apartments, and other residential
establishments, as well as commercial, institutional, and municipal
establishments, until collection, unless those persons or entities have
otherwise provided for the composting of leaf waste. [Amended by
Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
3. A commercial establishment, owner of a multi-family dwelling,
municipal building or office, or an institutional establishment, shall
establish a collection system for recyclable materials at each building
or occupied structure on the premises. The collection system must
include suitable locations for the containers, and written instructions to
the occupants of each dwelling unit or commercial unit concerning the
mandatory use of the collection system. The collection system shall
provide that recyclables will be removed from the premises at least
once every four weeks. Owners and landlords are required to monitor
compliance by all occupants on their premises, and shall be responsible
to correct any noncompliance and institute such procedures as are
reasonable and necessary to minimize the likelihood or possibility of
noncompliance with this Part. Any entity obtaining services of an
independent hauler shall pay an administrative fee, as set annually by
the Borough Council, as referenced in § 20-104 of Part 1 of this chapter.
4. Electronic Recycling. The Covered Device Recycling Act (PA Act 108 of
2010)20 mandates that all manufacturers of certain electronics shall
§ 20-307 EMMAUS CODE § 20-307
FWD:394
§ 20-308. (Reserved)
§ 20-309. (Reserved)
§ 20-310. Annual Report. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 10]
On or before February 15 of each year, the Borough Manager shall submit
a report to Lehigh County which shall describe the weight or volume of
materials that were recycled by the municipal recycling program in the
preceding calendar year.
§ 20-311. Criminal Penalties. [Ord. 720, 12/4/1989, § 11]
Any person, other than a municipal official exercising his official duties,
who violates any provision of this Part, any resolution enacted hereunder,
any order issued hereunder, or the terms or conditions of any contract
awarded in the implementation of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not more than $1,000
and costs and, in default of the payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
provide recycling programs for those electronics no longer in use. The
Borough of Emmaus, at its discretion, may also establish an electronics
recycling program for the property owners and citizens within the
Borough of Emmaus. The Borough shall bid out this service when
bidding out all refuse and recycling contracts. Borough Council shall
have the sole discretion to elect to provide this service to its citizens;
however, in such cases that the Borough provides this service, at a
minimum, the items allowed for recycling shall be no less than those
outlined in PA Act 108 of 2010. [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
5. Recycling at Community Events Mandated. Any entity, including but not
limited to municipal, commercial, institutional, or industrial entities,
shall be required to provide appropriately identified and marked
recycling containers and opportunities for individuals to recycle at any
"community event." [Added by Ord. No. 1188, 4/15/2019]
20.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6031.101 et seq.
§ 20-307 FOREWORD § 20-311
FWD:395
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 20-311 EMMAUS CODE § 20-311
FWD:396
Part 1
STREET EXCAVATIONS
§ 21-101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The following words, when used in this Part, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
EXCAVATION — Any activity within the right-of-way of any street, alley, or
cartway which involves cutting, breaking, or disturbing the surface thereof.
In this Part, the term OPENING shall have essentially the same meaning as
excavation.
STREET — Any public street, avenue, road, square, alley, highway, or other
public place located in the Borough and established for the use of vehicles,
but shall not include state highways.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, corporation
or municipal authority.
In this Part, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine shall
include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 21-102. Permit Required to Make Opening or Excavation. [Ord.
467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
It shall be unlawful for any person to open or to make any excavation of
any kind in any of the streets in the Borough without first securing a permit
therefor, as hereinafter provided.
§ 21-103. Application for Permit. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person who shall desire to make any opening or excavation in any of the
streets in the Borough shall make application to the Manager in writing for
that purpose. Such application shall be made upon blanks to be furnished
by the Borough and shall set forth the name of the applicant, the exact
location of the proposed opening or excavation, and the approximate size or
depth thereof, and shall contain an agreement on the part of the applicant
that the work shall be done in full compliance with the ordinances of the
Borough and the laws of the Commonwealth in relation thereto, and that the
applicant shall well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough
from and indemnify it against any and all actions, suits, demands, payments,
costs and charges for or by reason of the proposed opening or excavation,
and all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom,
or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith, or from
any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto.
§ 21-101 FOREWORD § 21-104
FWD:397
§ 21-104. Permit Fee. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Before any permit shall be issued to open or excavate any street in the
Borough the applicant shall pay a permit fee in such minimum amount as
fixed by resolution of Council to cover the cost of inspection and other
incidental services in connection therewith. When application shall be made
to open or excavate any longitudinal opening or excavation in excess of 10
feet, before any permit shall be issued so to open or excavate, the applicant
shall pay in addition to such minimum fee, an additional fee at such rate as
may be fixed by Council for each 100 feet or fraction thereof to be opened
or excavated upon such street.
§ 21-105. Issuance of Permits Restricted. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Permits shall be issued only to persons furnishing public utility services or
the owner or owners of the real property adjoining the location where such
opening or excavation is to be made.
§ 21-106. Information Contained on Permit. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970;
as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any permit issued hereunder shall specify the exact location where the
opening or excavation is to be made, the approximate permitted size or
depth thereof and the time within which the work for which the permit is
granted to be completed.
§ 21-107. Permit Approval/Disapproval. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
A permit may be issued to the applicant after all the requirements therefor
have been filed. If the application is disapproved, written notice of
disapproval together with reasons therefor shall be given to the applicant.
§ 21-108. Responsibility to Contact Utilities. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970;
as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The work authorized by the permit is subject to all the provisions of the
Act of December 10, 1974, P.L. 852, No. 287, § 1 et seq., as amended or
supplemented from time to time. It shall be the permittee's responsibility
to contact the utilities that have recorded their facilities in compliance with
said Act. A partial list of utilities providing services in the Borough and their
office addresses may be obtained from the County Recorder of Deeds.
§ 21-109. Refilling of Opening or Excavation; Restoration of
Surface; Responsibility for Defects Occurring Within Two Years.
[Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person who shall open or excavate any street in the Borough shall
thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation in such a manner
§ 21-104 EMMAUS CODE § 21-109
FWD:398
as to prevent any settling thereafter, and shall restore the surface to the
same condition as it was before the opening or excavation, and such
restoration shall be in accordance with the specifications of the Department
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania which are hereby
adopted as specifications of the Borough for restoration of surfaces of
streets in the Borough, as restored, the surface shall conform to the proper
grade and be of the same surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare
immediately adjoining the opening. If within two years after the restoration
of the surface as herein provided, defects shall appear therein resulting
from defective backfilling by the applicant, the applicant shall reimburse
the Borough for the cost of all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 21-110. Responsibility of Permit Holder for Certain Work; Right of
Borough to Do Certain Work; Charges Therefor. [Ord. 467, 5/18/
1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by or
for the person to whom or which the permit has been issued at his or its
expense, and all such work shall be subject to the provisions of this Part
and to the supervision and approval of the Public Works Inspector, provided
that the Public Works Inspector may if he deems it necessary to the proper
performance of the work, require that cutting of the surface of streets and
the backfilling of all excavations therein shall be done by the Borough, in
which event the applicant shall pay the actual cost of the work performed
by the Borough.
§ 21-111. Requirements for Work; Correction of Unsatisfactory
Work; Completion of Incomplete Work. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as
amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
1. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curb line
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
2. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
3. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses, or any
other subsurface lines or constructions, until permission of the proper
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
shall have been obtained.
4. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Public Works Inspector and permission therefor endorsed upon the
permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in the
presence of the Mayor or an inspector designated by him, and shall be
done only in a method approved by him.
§ 21-109 FOREWORD § 21-111
FWD:399
§ 21-112. Emergency Openings. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus, to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter, and that all other provisions of this
Part are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not be
immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such pipe,
line, construction, or apparatus, the Borough Manager, after such notice as
5. All openings or excavations shall be backfilled promptly with modified
2A stones and thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which layers
shall not exceed eight inches in depth. Backfilling shall be placed to
within 10 inches of the surface.
6. A temporary paving of coldpatch premix, thoroughly bound and
compacted, shall be installed flush with the surface of the adjoining
paving and maintained for a period of 90 days.
7. On concrete base streets, such base shall be replaced with concrete and
the minimum size of the opening or excavation shall be 16 square feet.
8. During the making of any excavation in the street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the applicant and the parties
making the same to keep the street in a safe and passable condition
both day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and
all excavating permits granted hereunder are granted under and
subject to the express condition that the person to whom the same is
issued shall indemnify, save and keep harmless the Borough from any
loss in damages, or otherwise whatsoever, which may or shall be
occasioned at any time by the said excavation, or by any leak, explosion
or other injury from any pipe, apparatus, conduit, or any other matter
placed in the said excavation.
9. The applicant shall notify the Public Works Inspector when the opening
or excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is done,
when backfilling work is completed, when the temporary paving has
been installed and when the street has been permanently restored so
that inspections may be made.
10. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Public Works Inspector be unsatisfactory and the
same shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions within
the time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the permit
was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the Public Works
Inspector, the Borough may proceed to correct such unsatisfactory
work or complete any such work not completed, and charge the cost
thereof, plus 20% to the applicant.
§ 21-111 EMMAUS CODE § 21-112
FWD:400
he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the particular case,
shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by such emergency,
and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such owner or person.
§ 21-113. Restrictions Regarding Trees and Shrubbery. [Ord. 467, 5/
18/1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The permission herein granted does not confer upon the permittee or its
contractors the right to cut, remove or destroy trees or shrubbery within the
legal right-of-way except under specifications, regulations and conditions as
the Borough may prescribe.
§ 21-114. Work Necessitating Opening or Excavation to be Done
Prior to Street Improvement and Not Until five Years Thereafter;
Exception. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 604, 10/15/
1979; and as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The Borough Manager shall give timely notice to all persons owning
property abutting on any street within the Borough about to be paved or
improved, and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough,
and all such persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas or
sewer connections, as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate
excavation of the said street within 30 days from the giving of such notice,
unless such time is extended in writing for cause shown by the Borough
Manager. New paving shall not be opened or excavated for a period of
five years after the completion thereof, except in case of emergency, the
existence of which emergency and the necessity for the opening or
excavating of such paving to be determined by the Borough Manager. If
it is sought to excavate upon or open a sewer within five years after the
completion of the paving applicant shall make written application to the
Borough Council, and a permit for such opening shall be issued only after
express approval of the Borough Council.
§ 21-115. Permittee Responsibilities for Future Relocation of Work.
[Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
If at any time in the future the roadway is widened, reconstructed or the
alignment or grades are changed, the permittee further agrees to change
or relocate all or any part of the structures covered by this permit which
interfere with the improvement of the roadway at its own cost and expense.
§ 21-116. Conditions for Laying and Extending Utility Lines. [Ord.
467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
No new water, sewer, steam or gas main or electric, telephone or other
utility line shall hereafter be laid or constructed, and no such existing main
or line shall be extended, in any of the streets of the Borough until the plan
therefor shall have been first filed with the Borough Manager and such plan,
and the exact location of such main or line, approved by him. The Borough
Manager shall not approve the locating of any such main or line at a depth
§ 21-112 FOREWORD § 21-116
FWD:401
of less than 30 inches from the surface of the street unless he shall be
convinced that locating the same at a depth of more than 30 inches from the
surface is impossible or impractical.
§ 21-117. Bond Required. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
No company, corporation or association shall dig up any street or alley
without first giving to the Borough a bond with some acceptable trust
or surety company as surety in the sum of $10,000, conditioned for the
faithful performance of these provisions and also for any and all damages,
claims, demands, suits, costs and counsel fees occasioned or arising from
the digging up, opening or closing of said streets and alleys.
§ 21-118. Payment for Work Done by Borough. [Ord. 467, 5/18/
1970; as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof
shall be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions
hereof within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the
Borough. Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall
be collectible by the Borough by an action in assumpsit or in the manner
provided by law for the collection of municipal claims.
§ 21-119. Penalties. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord. 604,
10/15/1979; and as amended by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 21-120. Applicability. [Ord. 467, 5/18/1970; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs.
§ 21-116 EMMAUS CODE § 21-120
FWD:402
Part 2
RIGHT-OF-WAY OBSTRUCTIONS
§ 21-201. Definitions. [Ord. 451, 2/3/1969, § 1]
PAVEMENT OR SIDEWALK — That area extending from the curbline to the
property line which is generally used by pedestrians.
PERMANENT OBSTRUCTIONS — Any type of structure that cannot be
moved without demolishing or destroying it.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association or corporation.
PROPERTY LINE — That line which is coincident to and identical with the
line marking the extremity of the right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — That area extending from property line to property line
which includes the pavement, street and pavement between two opposite
property lines.
STREET — That area from curbline to curbline which is generally used by
vehicular traffic.
TEMPORARY OBSTRUCTIONS — Any type of structure or obstruction that
can be readily and easily moved, including, but not limited to displays of
merchandise or produce simply setting on pavement area.
§ 21-202. Permanent Obstructions. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 2]
It shall be unlawful for any person to put, place, erect or cause to be put,
placed or erected any permanent obstruction in the right-of-way of any
public thoroughfare, except as hereinafter allowed and provided for:
§ 21-203. Temporary Obstructions. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 3; as
amended by Ord. 598, 5/7/1979; and by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Temporary obstructions on the right-of-way area may be allowed upon
the obtaining of a "Temporary Use Permit" to be issued by the Assistant
Manager/Code Enforcement Officer upon the following conditions:
1. Permanent obstructions such as steps and/or open porches now in
existence and essential for ingress and egress to property abutting the
pavement or sidewalk area providing such obstruction does not extend
beyond the property line into the pavement or sidewalk area a distance
of more than five feet along streets having a right-of-way width of 57
feet or more, and on all other streets of less width not more than 1/3 the
width of the sidewalk or pavement area except that no permanent
obstructions may extend beyond the property line on streets with a
right-of-way width of 30 feet or less. Permanent awnings may be
erected over such steps and/or open porches providing such awning
does not extend further into the area over the sidewalk or pavement
than does the steps and/or open porch.
§ 21-201 FOREWORD § 21-203
FWD:403
§ 21-204. Fees. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 4]
In all cases where "Temporary Use Permits" are issued, a fee shall be paid
to the Borough of Emmaus by the applicant. The amount of this fee shall
be determined by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Emmaus.
§ 21-205. Form of Permit. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 5]
The "Temporary Use Permit" shall contain the following information:
1. That such temporary obstruction must be one that can be readily
removed from the right-of-way area.
2. That such temporary obstruction extend into the sidewalk or pavement
area no more than five feet along streets having a right-of-way width of
57 feet or more, and on all other streets of less width not more than 1/3
the width of the sidewalk or pavement area except that no temporary
obstruction shall be allowed along streets with a right-of-way width of
30 feet or less.
3. A temporary obstruction must be constructed and maintained so that it
will not be a hazard to the public using the sidewalk or pavement area.
4. The temporary obstruction must be removed from the pavement or
sidewalk area one hour after sunset if in the judgment of the Assistant
Manager/Code Enforcement Officer such temporary obstruction
represents a hazard to the public safety during the hours between
sunset and sunrise.
5. Plans and specifications for the construction of all temporary
obstructions must accompany application for "Temporary Use Permit"
and be approved by the Assistant Manager/Code Enforcement Officer.
6. No "Temporary Use Permit" shall be issued by the Assistant Manager/
Code Enforcement Officer if in his opinion such temporary obstruction
will create a safety hazard to the use of the sidewalk or pavement area
by pedestrians.
7. No "Temporary Use Permit" shall be issued for locations which are in
districts zoned as R-L Residence Districts or R-M Residence Districts by
the Zoning Chapter of the Borough of Emmaus or its amendments.
1. Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
2. Name and address of applicant.
3. Name and address of business.
4. Area of temporary obstruction in square feet.
5. Reason for "Temporary Use Permit".
6. Date of issue.
§ 21-203 EMMAUS CODE § 21-205
FWD:404
§ 21-206. Posting of Permit. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 6]
Upon the issuance of the "Temporary Use Permit" by the Building Official,
the applicant must post said permit at a conspicuous place on the premises
for which it has been issued.
§ 21-207. Duration of Permit. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 7]
§ 21-208. Penalties. [Ord. 451, 3/3/1969, § 8; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
2 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 2 continues shall constitute a separate offense.
7. Date of expiration.
8. Signature of Assistant Borough Manager/Code Enforcement Officer.
1. The "Temporary Use Permit" shall be issued annually for the twelvemonth
period beginning July 1st and ending June 30th of each year.
2. The Building Official of the Borough of Emmaus shall have the power to
revoke a "Temporary Use Permit" for failure to comply with the
provisions of this Part. Notice of such revocation shall be in writing and
include reasons for such revocation.
§ 21-205 FOREWORD § 21-208
FWD:405

Part 3
SNOW AND ICE AND MUD REMOVAL
§ 21-301. Removal of Snow and Ice From Sidewalks. [Ord. 992, 7/
18/2005; as amended by Ord. 1077, 5/2/2011]
§ 21-302. Prohibition of Depositing Snow and Ice Into Roadways.
[Ord. 992, 7/18/2005]
1. No person owning or occupying any property that adjoins a street in the
Borough of Emmaus shall permit snow or ice to accumulate or remain
upon adjacent sidewalks, pavements, gutters or other walking surfaces
for a period of time in excess of 24 hours after precipitation ends.
2. Anyone who fails or neglects to remove snow or ice within 24 hours
after the end of precipitation shall be served a notice to remove by an
authorized officer of the Borough or as directed by the Mayor. Following
service of such notice, should such person fail or neglect to comply with
the notice to remove within 24 hours, that person shall be liable to the
Borough for the costs of remediation and fines.
3. Anyone who violates the provisions of this section during a calendar
year shall, upon conviction thereof, be required to pay a fine of: $100
for the first offense; $150 for the second offense; and $200 for each
subsequent offense; together with the costs of remediation expended by
the Borough and the administrative costs and legal fees incurred by the
Borough in the enforcement of these provisions. The costs of
remediation and enforcement may be placed upon the subject property
as a municipal lien through appropriate proceedings, if not paid to the
Borough within 30 days.
1. No person shall remove snow or ice from any sidewalk, pavement or
private property in the Borough of Emmaus, and put, place or deposit or
cause to put, place or deposit any snow or ice into any portion of the
public right-of-way designated for vehicular travel. The portion of the
public right-of-way designated for vehicular travel shall be defined as
the area on each side of the center line of the roadway, whether marked
or unmarked, that is used for vehicular movement of travel.
2. Where reasonably possible, all accumulated snow or ice shall be placed
into the area behind the sidewalks where possible. At locations where
there is no area that exists to place the accumulated snow or ice, it shall
be permissible to place the accumulated snow or ice into small piles
along the curb line of the roadway, provided that the placement of the
snow or ice does not present a safety hazard or a drainage problem, or
some other unacceptable condition, as determined by a designated
representative of the Borough.
3. Anyone who violates the provisions of this section during a calendar
year shall, upon conviction thereof, be required to pay a fine of: $25 for
the first offense; $50 for the second offense; and $100 for each
§ 21-301 FOREWORD § 21-302
FWD:407
§ 21-303. Prohibition of Depositing Foreign Debris on Roadways.
[Ord. 992, 7/18/2005]
subsequent offense; together with the costs of remediation expended
by the Borough and the administrative costs and legal fees incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of these provisions. The costs
of remediation may be placed upon that individual's property as a
municipal lien through appropriate proceedings, if not paid within 30
days.
1. No one shall deposit, place, spill or spread mud, dirt or any foreign
debris of any kind on any portion of any public roadway in accordance
with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4903(a) and (b).
2. Anyone who violates any provision of this section shall be served a
notice to remove by an authorized officer of the Borough or as directed
by the Mayor, requiring immediate compliance. Should the person fail
to comply with the notice to remove, the Borough, its workforce or
designated agents, may perform the necessary work to eliminate the
foreign debris from the roadway.
3. Anyone who violates any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be fined in accordance with the provisions of 75 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 4903(f).
§ 21-302 EMMAUS CODE § 21-303
FWD:408
Part 4
SIDEWALK AND CURB CONSTRUCTION
§ 21-401. Duty to Construct Sidewalks, Curbs, Ramps for Handicap
and Driveway Crossovers. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord.
1046, 3/16/2009]
1. Definitions.
ADAAG — Acronym for Americans with Disabilities Act Accessibility
Guidelines.
BOROUGH ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer for the Borough of
Emmaus.
CARTWAY — The portion of the public right-of-way designated for
vehicular use, including opened and unopened streets.
CONTRACTOR — Any person, corporation, association or partnership
or other form of organization which constructs or attempts to construct
curbing, sidewalks, driveway crossovers and handicap ramps on any
street or alley in the Borough of Emmaus.
CROSSOVER — The portion of a driveway extending from the back
line of the sidewalk to the curb, including the planting area between
the curb and sidewalk, if any exists, for the full width of the driveway,
including flared edges at the radii.
PEDESTRIAN CONNECTIVITY — The intent or expectation to connect
by pedestrian walkability areas involving a main thoroughfare, schools
and/or parks to provide access to a destination, either inside or outside
the Borough, in accordance with engineering safety standards.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility or
corporation.
PROPERTY LINE — That line which is coincident to and identical with
the line marking the extremity of the right-of-way boundary.
PUBLIC WORKS INSPECTOR — The code enforcement officer, public
works director, or assistant public works deductible or other Borough
officials designated by the Emmaus Borough Council to act as the
Public Works Inspector. This term shall also include any of the aforesaid
individual's agents or designees.
RECONSTRUCTION — Any construction, paving, surfacing, repaving,
resurfacing, repair or maintenance work which removes or disturbs any
portion of the existing structure of any right-of-way.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The width of a strip of land between property lines
set for public use or ownership as a street, alley, crosswalk, easement
or other facility.
STREET — A right-of-way dedicated to the public for the movement
of traffic with space for utilities and providing access to abutting
properties. "Street" may also be referred to as an "avenue," "road,"
§ 21-401 FOREWORD § 21-401
FWD:409
"boulevard," "expressway," "court" or land with right-of-way width
greater than 20 feet.
2. Duty of Property Owners. It shall be the duty of all property owners
having frontage on a dedicated and open street to construct sidewalk,
curbs, handicap ramps and driveway crossovers in accordance with the
technical specifications herein provided.
3. Required Maintenance. Sidewalks, curbs, handicap ramps and
driveway crossovers installed prior to the adoption of this Part shall be
required to be maintained in good repair as hereinafter specified.
4. Removal of Sidewalks. Should any property owner desire to remove any
sidewalk previously installed in an area, the property owner may apply
to the Public Works Inspector for approval to remove such sidewalk.
Property owners shall have the right to appeal any determination by the
Public Works Inspector to the Emmaus Borough Council.
5. Optional Installation. Any owner of property abutting a public street in
the Borough of Emmaus may, at their discretion, construct and install
sidewalks on the public right-of-way at their option. Should sidewalks
be installed, the property owner shall maintain said sidewalk in
accordance with the technical specifications herein provided.
6. Required Installation. In the event that the Borough determines that
any street or streets are to be reconstructed or repaved, or that a major
public improvement is needed in the right-of-way, after the adoption of
this Part, then after review and any recommendation by an appropriate
committee, the Borough may require the installation of sidewalks,
curbs, handicap ramps and driveway crossovers along or adjacent to
those streets within the time limit specified in the official notice
provided by the Public Works Inspector. Failure to install and construct
sidewalks in accordance with this provision will necessitate the
construction of such sidewalks, curbs, handicap ramps and driveway
crossovers by the Borough at the property owner's expense plus a 10%
administrative fee. A property owner's failure to pay for the Borough's
construction of sidewalks, curbs, handicap ramps and driveway
crossovers in accordance with this provision shall result in the filing of
a municipal lien by the Borough of Emmaus.
7. Legislative Intent. The preamble paragraphs to this Part are
incorporated herein by reference as a substantive part hereof.21
21.Editor's Note: The preamble paragraphs to Ord. 1046 provides: "WHEREAS, the Borough
Council of the Borough of Emmaus has determined the need for a new comprehensive
community-wide policy to govern the requirement, installation, construction and
maintenance of sidewalks, curbs, handicap ramps and driveway crossovers throughout the
Borough of Emmaus; and "WHEREAS, a new Sidewalk Ordinance No. 989 was previously
enacted by Borough Council on January 17, 2005; and "WHEREAS, certain sections of the
Borough are recognized as not conducive to the installation and construction of sidewalk
for various topographical and logistical reasons; and "WHEREAS, it is the stated
legislative policy of the Borough of Emmaus to establish pedestrian connectivity
throughout the Borough; and "WHEREAS, to implement the aforesaid policy, the Borough
Council intends to connect certain areas of the Borough with concrete sidewalks in
accordance with the grant of legislative power set forth by the Pa. Borough Code, 53 P.S.
§ 21-401 EMMAUS CODE § 21-402
FWD:410
§ 21-402. Failure to Comply. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by
Ord. 1046, 3/16/2009]
Property owners shall receive at least 30 days notice from the Public Works
Inspector requiring construction or repair of sidewalks, curbs, handicap
ramps and/or driveway crossovers. If a property owner fails to construct
and/or repair sidewalks, curbs, handicap ramps and/or driveway crossovers
by the date specified in the notice, the Borough will perform the necessary
work, at the property owner's expense plus a 10% administrative fee.
§ 21-403. Slope and Width of Sidewalk. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as
amended by Ord. 1046, 3/16/2009]
Sidewalks shall be constructed or reconstructed to slope towards the street
at the rate of 1/4 inch to one foot. If the grades of intersecting conditions
make compliance herewith impractical then the slope shall be determined
by the Borough. All sidewalk widths shall be five feet six inches measured
from the rear face of the curb. Space for grass plot shall be 1 1/2 feet, with
the sidewalk in these areas being a minimum of 4 1/2 feet. Where trees
may encroach in the required sidewalk width, width of sidewalk will be
determined by the Public Works Inspector. Sidewalk width shall not be less
than three feet.
§ 21-404. Specifications for Construction. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as
amended by Ord. 1046, 3/16/2009]
1. Curb Excavation and Street Cuts. Before excavating to install or replace
curb adjoining an improved Borough street, the existing pavement shall
be neatly cut at a minimum distance from, and parallel to, the curbline.
This distance is not to exceed 18 inches.
2. Sidewalk Exceptions. Excavation for sidewalks shall be a minimum of
nine inches below the top of the sidewalks. The excavation must be
evenly spread crushed stone to a depth of at least four inches, wetted
thoroughly and tamped or rolled to an even surface. Concrete, as
hereinafter specified, of a thickness of not less than five inches shall be
placed on said surface or base.
3. Typical Curb Section. All curbs shall consist of concrete and shall be a
minimum of 22 inches in depth, six inches in width at the top and eight
inches in width at the bottom, the front face having a batter and the
back thereof to be vertical. The front face of the curb shall have a seven
inch exposed vertical face (reveal) from the gutter line to the top of the
curb.
4. Curb Radius Construction. A radius curb shall be constructed at the
intersection of all streets or alleys. The minimum radius of a curb at
street intersection shall be 10 feet where feasible. The minimum radius
§§ 46801 and 46802; and "WHEREAS, the Borough Council determines it is in the best
interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of Emmaus to
enact the following:"
§ 21-402 FOREWORD § 21-404
FWD:411
of a curb at an alley intersection shall be the same as the width
of the ordained sidewalk area along the street. The radius shall be
of the standard cross-section for the entire length. All curbs at the
intersection of public alleys shall extend along the alleys for the full
width of the sidewalks.
5. Areas Where Utilities Are Prohibited. No utility poles or other utility
facilities shall be placed within the radius curb or radius sidewalk.
6. Areas Where Driveways Are Prohibited. No driveway shall be
constructed across or through any radius curb or radius sidewalk.
7. Monolithic Construction Not Permitted. Curb and sidewalk must be
constructed separately. Monolithic construction is prohibited.
8. Roof Drains.
A. Roof drains shall not discharge over newly constructed or
reconstructed curb and sidewalk. All new and existing downspouts
must outlet into the street gutter by means of a three inch diameter
plastic (or approved equal) pipe placed within the new sidewalk
and at least three inches beneath the top surface of the new
sidewalk. The plastic pipe shall be placed through the new curb,
with the outlet end of the pipe being a minimum of one inch above
the gutter or flow line. A coupling sleeve shall be placed in the curb
to accept the three-inch pipe. All joints shall be sealed with pipe
joint compound. Galvanized wire mesh is to be placed over the
plastic pipe for the full width of the sidewalk and at least two feet in
length and weighing the equivalent of 57 pounds per 100 square
feet. The wire mesh shall be placed one inch below the top surface
of the sidewalk.
B. If a suitable outlet cannot be achieved with a three-inch pipe, the
Borough may authorize an alternate means of discharge. In lieu of
placing plastic pipe through the sidewalk, the use of a diamond
plate trough or an acceptable equivalent will be allowed. The steel
plate shall be 1/4 inch thick and properly anchored. The trough
shall extend vertically downward for a variable depth to meet the
existing conditions. Final approval for the use of diamond plate
troughs shall be granted by the Public Works Inspector.
9. Handicap Ramps. Owners of property abutting a street shall construct
concrete ramps and crosswalks to make the transition from street to
sidewalk easily negotiable for handicapped persons. All ramps must be
a minimum of three feet in width at the street gutter line, exclusive of
curb and sidewalk tapers. Ramps shall be sloped flush with the street
surface. All such ramps shall be constructed or installed in accordance
with ADAAG Manual, Chapter 4.7, and PennDOT design specifications,
most recent edition.
10. Crossovers.
§ 21-404 EMMAUS CODE § 21-404
FWD:412
A. Crossovers for residences shall have a minimum thickness of six
inches of plain concrete. Crossovers for businesses and industries
shall have a minimum thickness of eight inches of concrete
reinforced with galvanized wire mesh weighing the equivalent of
57 pounds per 100 square feet. The top edge of the curb along the
crossover shall be 1 1/2 inches above the gutter line and 5 1/2
inches below the top of the adjacent curb.
B. The maximum width of any residential crossover shall not exceed
25 feet, including curb tapers. The maximum width of any
commercial crossover shall not exceed 40 feet, including curb
tapers. Borough Council may authorize crossovers exceeding the
widths specified in this paragraph.
C. Where more than one crossover is constructed on the same
property, they shall be at least 20 feet apart.
11. Tree Plates. When sufficient space cannot be provided for installation of
curb due to existing trees, steel curb plates shall be used. The plates
shall extend a minimum of seven inches below the street surface. The
outside face (street side) shall be flush with the outside face of the
adjacent curb. The ends of the top of the plate must be flush with and
anchored into the concrete curb.
12. Openings in Sidewalks. Square openings shall be formed around all
utility poles, fire hydrants, light standards, curb boxes or any other
major structure within the sidewalk. These openings shall provide a
minimum clearance of six inches outside of the structure within the
opening. 3/8 inch pre-molded expansion joint material shall be placed
around the entire opening for the full depth of the concrete. The
remaining opening shall be filled with concrete cast as a separate block.
The minimum openings shall be 24 inches by 24 inches, except for gas
and water curb boxes, which shall be 18 inches by 18 inches. Utility
poles shall be wrapped in styrofoam sil seal water curb boxes, which
shall be 18 inches by 18 inches. Utility poles shall be wrapped in
styrofoam sil seal a minimum of 1/4 inch thick for the full depth of the
concrete. All curb boxes shall be protected, flush and free of concrete.
13. Contraction and Construction Joints. Contraction joints shall be made in
the sidewalk at right angles to the curb at intervals of no more than five
feet. These contraction joints shall be a depth of one inch. Construction
joints shall be provided in all curbs at ten foot intervals and extending
the full depth of the curb. No construction joints may be placed in the
curb radius portion of any curbs.
14. Expansion Joints. Joints shall be placed in the sidewalk at right angles
to the curb not exceeding 30 feet, at all points of fixed restraint, at the
ends of all radii returns, at the intersection of two sidewalks, along the
entire curb, where a crossover joins the sidewalk and/or depressed curb
and as otherwise specified. An expansion joint shall be provided where
the sidewalk meets existing porches, steps, walls, walkways, slabs or
§ 21-404 FOREWORD § 21-404
FWD:413
permanent buildings. Unless otherwise specified, 3/8 inch pre-molded
bituminous expansion joint materials shall be used throughout. The
approved joint material, cut to the shape of the finished cross-sections,
shall extend from the surface thereof to the sub-grade for the full width
of the concrete.
15. Forms. All concrete installations shall be formed. Constructing curbs
and/or sidewalks without forms is prohibited. All forms shall be made of
steel or wood, and shall be smooth, free from warp and sufficiently rigid
to resist springing out of shape. All forms shall extend for the full depth
of the curb or sidewalk to be installed. Forms shall be firmly held in
place by stakes or rods and braces adequate in dimension and sufficient
in number to prevent movement and to withstand the pressure of the
concrete. All forms shall be thoroughly cleaned and oiled prior to
pouring concrete, and forms shall remain in place at least 12 hours
after completion of the pouring.
16. Replacing of Concrete. No concrete curb and/or sidewalk shall be
installed between October 31 and April 1. Any concrete poured when
the atmospheric temperature is less than 40° F. shall be in accordance
with PennDOT specifications, latest revision.
17. Proportioning of Concrete. All concrete shall be Class A concrete in
accordance with current PennDOT specifications. Concrete shall have
compressive strength of 3,500 PSI after 28 days of curing. Concrete
delivery slips are to be initialed by the Public Works Inspector and
attached to his copy of the permit.
18. Mixing of Concrete. All concrete shall be ready-mixed and shall meet
the current requirements of PennDOT specifications for "Ready-Mixed
Concrete."
19. Curing of Concrete. All concrete shall be cured by a method acceptable
to the Public Works Inspector and/or Borough Engineer.
20. Sidewalk Finish. All walking surfaces shall have a broom finish applied
transversely to the normal walking direction. The broom finish shall
provide a scoring of the concrete of not less than 1/16 inch in depth.
Steel or wood trowel finishes are not permitted. All sidewalk edges shall
be worked with an approved edging tool. Bituminous material of any
kind shall not be used as finished sidewalks or to patch, repair or seal
existing concrete sidewalks or crossovers.
21. Obstruction of Surface Drainage. No person shall fill the gutter flow
line, generally known as the gutter area, with any materials that will
block or divert the normal flow of surface water along established
grades and/or cause an obstruction or hazard.
22. Backfill. After the removal of forms, the curb and/or sidewalk shall be
backfilled completely.
§ 21-404 EMMAUS CODE § 21-404
FWD:414
A. The contractor shall place backfill behind the curb, consisting of
select soil material having no stones larger than two inches in
diameter. Backfill shall be brought to the top of the curb unless the
area is to be used as a sidewalk. If no sidewalk is to be placed
adjacent to the curb, the top four inches of backfill shall be free of
stones larger than 1/2 inch in diameter. The surface shall be raked
free of stones and seeded with approved grass seed.
B. The contractor shall place backfill in front of the curb using 2A
modified crushed stone, placed and compacted in six-inch layers to
the proposed street grade.
C. The Borough shall remove the top 2 1/2 inches of backfill and
replace it with asphalt pavement material thoroughly compacted,
conforming to the street grade. The Borough shall be reimbursed
by the contractor for work performed.
D. Any material used for backfill shall not be placed or stockpiled on
the street or public right-of-way. Stockpiling of stone will only be
allowed on streets scheduled for reconstruction.
23. Advance Notice for Inspection. Notice for any inspection shall be given
to the Public Works Inspector not less than 24 hours in advance. The
Public Works Inspector may order the removal of any work that is not in
accordance with the specifications herein.
24. Barricades.
A. The contractor shall adequately protect the work during
construction, as well as protect the public from accidents to
themselves or their property and/or unnecessary inconvenience
throughout the duration of the project. The contractor shall
furnish, erect and maintain at each work site, a minimum of two
approved warning devices and such additional warning devices as
directed by the Public Works Inspector or the Emmaus Police
Department. These devices shall consist of barricades, flashing
warning lights, steady burn lights, reflectors, and/or signs in
approved combinations. All barricades and signs shall be
reflectorized. Steady burn lights or flashing warning lights shall be
kept in operation from sunset until sunrise. Final approval of all
warning devices shall be the responsibility of the Public Works
Inspector. Approval of the devices does not absolve the contractor
of his responsibility if any vehicular or pedestrian accidents occur
while these devices are in service. All warning devices shall
conform to current PennDOT specifications.
B. If the contractor fails to place adequate work safety devices, the
Borough will charge the contractor for all costs associated with the
placement of safety devices.
25. Brick Sidewalk. Where brick sidewalk is approved, requirements for
excavation and base shall be as specified for concrete sidewalks herein.
§ 21-404 FOREWORD § 21-404
FWD:415
§ 21-405. Duties, Responsibilities and Disagreements. [Ord. 989, 1/
17/2005; as amended by Ord. 1046, 3/16/2009]
All work shall be governed by and conform to the directions and instructions
of the Public Works Inspector. Any conflict or dispute that arises over the
interpretation or application of this Part shall be referred to the Borough
Brick shall be wire cut and of good quality, tightly laid, with all
interstices filled with mortar. Lugged paving brick, cored brick, or brick
having recesses or openings shall not be used. Brick sidewalks shall
provide a uniform, smooth walking surface. All brick shall be laid evenly
in mortar and in a single course on a concrete base.
26. Signs. All street signs or similar signs located in the sidewalk area shall
have four inch SCHD 40 PVC pipe sleeves, the diameter of which shall
be able to accept the pole or the sign. The sleeves shall be a minimum of
nine inches long, flush with the concrete surface. Any sign that is not
installed as specified above will be reinstalled by the Borough of
Emmaus and all associated costs will be billed to the contractor in
accordance with the Borough fee schedule.
27. Utility Facilities in Sidewalk Areas.
A. No utility facility shall be placed in any sidewalk until a sidewalk
excavation permit is obtained from the Borough. Application for
such permit shall be made by the utility company in accordance
with the rules and regulations of this Part. Application shall be
made at least five days prior to the date of starting any work. There
shall be appended to each application a plan showing the outlines
of the property affected, existing culverts, existing driveways and
the location of the proposed facility. The Borough may specify any
changes or modification of any kind, which it deems necessary. The
Borough may approve the permit subject to any such alteration,
changes or modifications. Work shall commence within 60 days of
issuance of the permit and shall be completed within a reasonable
time.
B. When a new utility facility is installed in a sidewalk, the sidewalk
shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Public Works Inspector in
accordance with the provisions of this Part. Concrete shall be in
accordance with specifications of this Part.
C. The utility or its contractor shall repair or replace any sidewalk or
curb damaged as a result of the work.
D. The utility company making application shall provide the Borough
with a bond in the amount of $1,000 guaranteeing compliance with
the provisions of this Part. Said bond shall contain a warrant of
attorney authorizing the entry of judgment in the event said utility
does not comply. One bond shall be sufficient for one calendar year.
§ 21-404 EMMAUS CODE § 21-405
FWD:416
Engineer for a decision. The Borough Engineer's fees shall be paid 1/2 by
the property owner and/or contractor, and 1/2 by the Borough.
§ 21-406. Permits Required. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by
Ord. 1046, 3/16/2009]
It shall be the duty of every property owner or duly authorized
representative to make application to the Public Works Inspector's Office
for a curb or sidewalk permit, which may require a warrant of survey.
The application shall be delivered to the Borough Engineer, who shall be
required within 21 days, not including Saturdays, Sunday and holidays,
from the time of application to calculate the line and grade for the
construction. Work shall not commence until a warrant of survey (if
required) has been completed. Any misrepresentation or false statement
on any application for construction shall void said permit and no work
shall proceed until a new application for permit is applied for by the
contractor or property owner. If work is performed pursuant to a permit
obtained fraudulently, or by misrepresentation, the Public Works Inspector
may direct that the work be dismantled, and order that the applicant effect
an installation or work consistent with this Part.
§ 21-407. Inspection. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord.
1046, 3/16/2009]
All work done in accordance with this Part shall be subject to inspection
and approval of the Public Works Inspector. All handicap ramps are to be
constructed in accordance with the specifications of the most recent ADAAG
Manual for curb cut ramps or the most recent PennDOT specifications
for handicap ramps. In addition, recent specifications are attached hereto
and incorporated herein by reference (see diagram at end of this Part).
The Public Works Inspector and/or the Borough Engineer are hereby
empowered to order cessation of work in the event that it is being done in
violation of this Part. All owners subject to the provisions of this Part shall
cease work immediately upon receipt of oral or written notice by the Public
Works Inspector and/or the Borough Engineer.
§ 21-408. Penalties. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord. 1046,
3/16/2009]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000. Each day that
a violation continues constitutes a separate offense.
§ 21-409. Additional Regulations for Installation, Preservation and
Maintenance. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord. 1046, 3/16/
2009]
Emmaus Borough Council may by resolution set forth a plan for the further
development of the installation, preservation and maintenance of curb and
sidewalk within the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 21-405 FOREWORD § 21-410
FWD:417
§ 21-410. Guidelines/Criteria for Replacement of Curb and/or
Sidewalk. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord. 1046, 3/16/
2009]
§ 21-411. Appendix. [Ord. 989, 1/17/2005; as amended by Ord.
1046, 3/16/2009]
1. The factors that can be considered by the Public Works Inspector for
replacement of curb, sidewalk, handicap ramps and driveway
crossovers shall include, but are not limited to, the following:
A. Curb.
(1) One inch or more out of matching alignment with the adjacent
curb.
(2) One inch or more out of matching plumb or leaning curb face.
(3) Severe cracks or advanced deterioration of material as
determined by the Public Works Inspector.
(4) Improper depth of curb, less than 15 inches below street grade
when a public street is being rebuilt or overlaid.
B. Sidewalk.
(1) One inch or more out of matching elevation to an adjacent
curb.
(2) One inch or more out of matching elevation with the adjacent
block.
(3) Roof drains discharging onto sidewalk.
(4) Severe cracks or advanced deterioration of materials as
determined by the Public Works Inspector.
1. The following sketches pictorially describe certain portions of the
foregoing and are incorporated as part of this Part and are attached to
the appendix hereto:22
A. Guidelines for handicap ramps.
B. Plastic pipe drain in sidewalk area.
C. Diamond plate covered drainage in sidewalk area.
D. Steel tree plate details.
E. Typical section curb and sidewalk.
F. Expansion and contraction joint details.
22.Editor's Note: The sketches are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 21-410 EMMAUS CODE § 21-411
FWD:418
G. Driveway entrance and apron details.
H. Curb cut ramps.
§ 21-411 FOREWORD § 21-411
FWD:419
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 21-411 EMMAUS CODE § 21-411
FWD:420
Part 1
SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY, APPLICATION AND
INTERPRETATION
§ 22-101. Short Title. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
This Part shall be known as the Borough of Emmaus Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.
§ 22-102. Purpose. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
1. These regulations are adopted for the following purposes:
A. To protect and provide for the public health, safety, and general
welfare of the Borough.
B. To guide the future growth and development of the Borough, in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of the Borough.
C. To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy; to secure safety
from fire, flood, and other danger; and to prevent overcrowding of
the land and undue congestion of population.
D. To protect the character and social and economic stability of the
Borough and to encourage the orderly and beneficial development
of the Borough.
E. To protect and conserve the value of land throughout the Borough,
and the value of buildings and improvements upon the land and to
minimize the conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
F. To guide public and private policy and action in order to provide
adequate and efficient transportation, water supply, sewerage,
schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and other public
requirements and facilities.
G. To provide the most beneficial relationship between the uses of
land and buildings and the circulation of traffic within the Borough,
having particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in the
streets and highways, and the pedestrian traffic movements
appropriate to the various uses of land and buildings, and to
provide for the proper location and width of streets and building
lines.
H. To establish reasonable standards of design and procedures for
subdivision and resubdivisions, in order to further the orderly
layout and use of land; and to insure proper legal descriptions and
monumenting of subdivided land.
§ 22-101 FOREWORD § 22-102
FWD:421
§ 22-103. Authority. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
§ 22-104. Application of Regulations. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
I. To insure that public facilities are available and will have a
sufficient capacity to serve the proposed subdivision.
J. To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and ponds; to assure the
adequacy of drainage facilities; to safeguard the water table; and to
encourage the wise use and management of natural resources in
order to preserve the community and value of the land.
K. To preserve the natural beauty and topography of the Borough and
to ensure appropriate development with regard to these natural
features.
L. To provide for open spaces through efficient design and layout of
the land.
M. And finally, to ensure that documents prepared as part of a land
ownership transfer fully and accurately describe the parcel of land
being subdivided, and the new parcels thus created.
1. Authority of the Borough Council.
A. The Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus is vested by law
with the control of the subdivision of land and land development
within the Borough by Act 247 of 1968, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended. The Borough Council
shall retain the authority to approve all subdivision plans and land
development plans as required herein.
2. Authority of the Borough Planning Commission
A. The Planning Commission is hereby designated by the Borough
Council as an agency which shall review and make
recommendations on preliminary and final subdivision and land
development plans as required herein, prior to action by the
Borough Council, and, when provided by ordinance, make other
recommendations.
1. Subdivision Control
A. No subdivision, as herein defined, of any lot, tract or parcel of land
shall be effected and no street, alley, sanitary sewer, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main or other facilities in connection therewith,
shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public use or
travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings abutting or
to abut thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions of
this chapter. No lot in any subdivision may be sold, and no permit to
§ 22-102 EMMAUS CODE § 22-104
FWD:422
§ 22-105. Interpretation and Conflicts. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be
issued; and no building may be erected in a subdivision, unless and
until a subdivision plan has been approved and recorded; and until
the improvements required by the Borough Council in connection
therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as herein
provided in § 22-612.
2. Land Development Control
A. Land development, as herein defined, must comply with the
regulations contained herein. Such compliance shall include, but
not be limited to: the filing of preliminary and final plats, the
dedication and improvement of rights-of-way, streets and roads,
and the payment of fees and charges as established by the Borough
Council.
B. Land development plans shall indicate the location of each
structure and clearly define each unit and shall indicate public
easements, common areas, and improvements, all easements
appurtenant to each unit, and improvements to public rights-ofway.
Developments are subject to the zoning regulations as they
apply to use and density requirements, setbacks, parking and other
features, and shall be indicated on the land development plans.
1. Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
chapter, they shall be held to be minimum requirements for the
promotion of public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general
welfare.
2. Conflict with Public and Private Provisions.
A. Public Provisions. Where any provision of this chapter imposes
restriction different from those imposed by any other provision of
this chapter or any other ordinance, rule, or regulation, or other
provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or
impose higher standards shall control.
B. Private Provisions. This Chapter is not intended to abrogate any
easement, covenant or any other private agreement or restriction,
provided that where the provisions of this chapter are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations than such
easement, covenant, or other private agreement or restriction, the
requirements of this chapter shall govern. Where the provisions of
the easement, covenant or private agreement or restriction impose
duties and obligations more restrictive, or higher standards than
the requirements of these regulations, or the determinations of the
Borough Council in approving a subdivision or in enforcing this
chapter, and such private provisions are not inconsistent with this
§ 22-104 FOREWORD § 22-105
FWD:423
chapter or determinations thereunder, then such private provisions
shall be operative and supplemental to these regulations and
determinations made thereunder.
§ 22-105 EMMAUS CODE § 22-105
FWD:424
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 22-201. General Interpretation. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall for the purpose
of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated. The present tense shall
include the future, the singular number shall include the plural of the
singular, words used in the masculine gender shall include the feminine and
the neuter; the word "shall" is always mandatory, the word "may" is always
permissive.
§ 22-202. Specific Words and Phrases. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; and amended by Ord. 761, 2/3/
1992, § 1; and by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 1-3]
ALLEY — A minor way, whether or not legally dedicated, intended and used
primarily for vehicular service access to the rear of properties which abut
on a street, and not intended for the purpose of through vehicular traffic.
BLOCK — An area, divided into lots, and usually bounded by streets.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus,
Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof, including but not limited to, all manufactured
homes and trailers.
CARTWAY OR ROADWAY — The portion of a street or alley improved,
designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the sidewalk,
berm or shoulder.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of street center lines.
CONDOMINIUM — Ownership in common with others of a parcel of land
and certain parts of a building thereon which would normally be used by all
the occupants, together with individual ownership in fee of a particular unit
or apartment in such building or on such parcel of land and may include
dwellings, offices and other types of space in commercial and industrial
buildings or on real property.
COUNTY — The County of Lehigh, Pennsylvania.
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Lehigh/Northampton Joint
County Planning Commission.
CUL-DE-SAC — A minor street intersecting another street at one end and
terminated at the other by a vehicular turnaround.
§ 22-201 FOREWORD § 22-202
FWD:425
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also, the
material removed in excavation.
DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION (DEP) — The
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, its bureaus,
divisions, departments and/or agencies, as may from time to time be
established, or such Department or Departments as may in the future
succeed it.
DESIGNATED FLOODPLAIN AREAS — A relatively flat or low land area
adjoining a river, stream, or watercourse which is subject to partial or
complete inundation in a one-hundred-year flood as designated in the
Borough Zoning Ordinance as amended.
DETENTION POND — An area in which surface water runoff is temporarily
stored pending its release at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent or tenant with permission of such
landowner, who makes or causes any development of tract or parcel of land
or a lot.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, the
placement of manufactured homes, streets and other paving, utilities,
mining, dredging, filling, grading, excavation, or drilling operations, and the
subdivision of land.
DRAINAGE — The removal of surface water or groundwater from land by
drains, grading or other means, and includes control of runoff to minimize
erosion and sedimentation during and after construction or development.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or other
structure designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of carrying,
diverting or controlling surface water or groundwater.
DRAINAGE RIGHT-OF-WAY — The lands required for the installation of
storm water sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream
or watercourse for preserving the channel and providing for the flow of
water therein to safeguard the public against flood damage.
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular passageway providing access between a
street and a private parking area or private garage.
DWELLING — Any building which is designed for human living quarters,
but not including hotels, boarding houses, tourist cabins, motels and other
accommodations used for transient occupancy.
EASEMENT — A grant of limited use of private land for a public or quasipublic
purpose.
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer in Pennsylvania
designated by the Borough.
ENGINEERING SPECIFICATIONS — The engineering criteria of the
Borough regulating the installation of any improvement or facility. In the
§ 22-202 EMMAUS CODE § 22-202
FWD:426
absence of such Borough engineering criteria, the applicable standards
of the Lehigh County Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance shall
apply.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
EXCAVATION — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated or bulldozed. It shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped surface. It
shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. The difference in elevation
between a point on the original ground and a designated point of higher
elevation of the final grade. The material used to make fill.
FLOODPLAIN — The area along a natural watercourse which may from time
to time be overflowed by water therefrom.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas required to carry and discharge a flood of the one-hundred-year
magnitude.
GRADING AND DRAINAGE PLAN — A plan showing all existing ground
features and proposed grading, including existing and proposed surface
and subsurface drainage facilities, described by grades, contours, and
topography.
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical additions, installations, and changes
required to render land suitable for the use intended, including but not
limited to, grading, paving, curbing, street lights and signs, fire hydrants,
water mains, electric service, gas service, sanitary sewers, storm drains,
sidewalks, cross-walks, driveways, culverts, and street shade trees.
INTERIOR WALK — A right-of-way or easement for pedestrian use,
extending from a street into a block or across a block to another street.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot, or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more buildings or the division or allocation of land or
space between or among two or more existing or prospective occupants
by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups or other features.
A.
The term "land development" shall also include the plot plan for a
manufactured home park as defined in the Borough Zoning Ordinance,
and the said plot plan shall be drawn in the same manner as herein
provided for a Final Subdivision Plan, and shall include spaces for
approval by the Borough Engineer and the Borough Council, which
approvals shall be given prior to the issuance of a permit or recording.
B.
§ 22-202 FOREWORD § 22-202
FWD:427
LOT — A parcel of land having dimensions and area as required by this
chapter and having frontage upon a street as shown on a plat of record or
considered as a unit of property and described by metes and bounds.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their
intersection, the front of which shall be considered to be the frontage of
least dimension on a street, except that where any two frontages shall each
exceed 150 feet in length, either frontage may be designated as the "front"
of the lot.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — An interior lot which abuts streets in both the
front and rear.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot having side lot lines which do not abut on a street.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The distance between the side lot lines
measured at the building set-back line.
LOT, NON-CONFORMING — A lot of record at the time of the adoption of
this chapter, which by reason of area or dimension, does not conform to the
requirements of this chapter.
LOT OF RECORD — A lot described in a deed or shown on a plan of lots
which has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot extending between and having frontage
on an arterial street and a local access street, and with vehicular access
solely from the latter.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security, other than cash, which may
be accepted by the Borough for the maintenance of any improvements
required by this chapter.
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision not classified as a minor
subdivision.
MARKER — A wood or metal stake placed to designate the boundary and
corners of lots in the subdivision of land for the purpose of reference in land
and property survey and to facilitate the sale of lots.
MINOR SUBDIVISION — The subdivision of land into not more than two
parcels located on an existing improved street that does not involve:
Installation of improvements as required by this chapter; extension of
utilities; frontage on an arterial or collector street; adverse effect to the
development of the remaining parcel; adverse effect to adjoining properties;
and conflict with the Borough's Comprehensive Plan, Zoning Ordinance, any
portion of this chapter or other state, county or Borough ordinances, laws
or regulations.
MONUMENT — A concrete, stone, or other permanent object placed to
designate boundary lines, corners of property, and rights-of-way of streets
and utilities, for the purpose of reference in land and property survey.
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — Act of Assembly of July 31, 1968,
P.L. 805, as amended.
§ 22-202 EMMAUS CODE § 22-202
FWD:428
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely to
occur once every 100 years.
OWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including the
holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the owner, or other persons having a
proprietary interest in the land, shall be deemed to be an owner for the
purpose of this chapter.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be in lieu of
a requirement that certain improvements be made before the Borough
Council approve a final subdivision or land development plan, including
performance bonds, escrow agreements, and other similar collateral or
surety agreements.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, corporation, or other legally
recognized entity.
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan or land development
plan, prepared for official recording as required by statute, to define
property rights and proposed streets and other improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan or land development
plan, in lesser detail than a final plan, showing approximate proposed street
and lot layout as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final
plan.
PLAN, SKETCH — An informal plan, subdivision or land development plan,
not necessarily to scale, indicating salient existing features of a tract and its
surroundings and the general layout of the proposed subdivision.
PLAN, SOIL EROSION & SEDIMENTATION CONTROL — A plan for
controlling erosion and sediment during construction which shall provide all
steps, including scheduling, to assure erosion and sediment control during
all phases of construction, including final stabilization.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Emmaus.
PLAT — A map or plan of a subdivision or use indicating the location and
boundaries of individual properties.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — (a) parks, playgrounds, and other public areas; and
(b) sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal, and other publicly
owned or operated facilities.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days or less than 14 days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATION LAND — Land dedicated to the Borough or other entity
approved by the Borough for the use of the Borough's residents which
is suitable for active uses such as playing fields. Recreation land shall
§ 22-202 FOREWORD § 22-202
FWD:429
not include areas within the five-hundred-year floodplain, power line or
pipe line rights-of-way, road rights-of-way, buffer zones or storm water
management facilities. Recreation land shall not include areas
characterized by wetlands, hydric soils, slopes in excess of 5% or
woodlands.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
RESERVE STRIP — A narrow parcel of ground having inadequate area
for building purposes separating a street or a proposed street from other
adjacent properties.
RESIDENT PROPERTY OWNER — Any individual maintaining a voting
address in the Borough, within 1,000 feet of the proposed subdivision,
owning real estate in his own or joint names.
RE-SUBDIVISION — Any subdivision or transfer of land, laid out on a
plan which has been approved by the Borough Council which changes or
proposes to change property lines and/or public right-of-way not in strict
accordance with approved plan.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land legally dedicated for public purposes, including but
not limited to, a street, alley or interior walk.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge or rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a fall of rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs
off the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by moving wind, water, or gravity. Once this
matter is deposited, or remains suspended in water, it is usually referred to
as "Sediment."
SEPTIC TANK — A watertight tank in which raw sewage is broken down into
solid, liquid, and gaseous phases to facilitate further treatment and final
disposal.
SETBACK (BUILDING SETBACK LINE) — The line within a property
defining the required minimum distance between any structure and the
ultimate adjacent right-of-way, and the line defining side and rear yards
where required.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON SITE — A system of piping tanks or other
facilities serving a lot and collecting and disposing of sewage in whole or in
part into the soil.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PUBLIC — A sanitary sewage collection
method in which sewage is carried from the site by a system of pipes to a
central treatment and disposal plant.
SHOULDER — The portion of a roadway (cartway) between the curb or
gutter and the travelway intended for emergency and parking use.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The extent of unobstructed vision, in a horizontal or
vertical plane, along a street, as defined in section 504 of this chapter.
§ 22-202 EMMAUS CODE § 22-202
FWD:430
SLOPE — The face of an embankment of cut section; any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon. Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100
feet of horizontal distance.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
absorption capacity of soil to a specified depth in a given location for the
purpose of determining suitability of soil for on-site sewage disposal.
STREET — An existing or platted way dedicated for the use of the general
public, graded and paved or to be graded and paved, in order that the
general public has the right to pass and to use it at all times for all purposes
of travel, transportation or parking to which it is adapted, devoted, and not
otherwise restricted.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development,
provided, however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street
or easement of access or residential dwellings, shall be exempted. The term
"subdivision" includes land development, resubdivision and, as appropriate
in these regulations, shall refer to the process of subdividing land or to the
land subdivided.
SURVEYOR — A licensed surveyor registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land characterized as a depression used to
carry surface water runoff.
Local Access Streets are those used primarily to provide access to
abutting properties.
A.
Collector Streets are those which, in addition to giving access to
abutting properties, intercept local access streets and provide routes to
community facilities and to arterial streets.
B.
Arterial Streets are those serving large volumes of comparatively highspeed
and long-distance traffic, and include facilities classified as main
and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
C.
Marginal Access Streets are minor streets, parallel and adjacent to
arterial streets, providing access to abutting properties and control of
intersections with the arterial street.
D.
Half-Or Partial Street is a street generally parallel and adjacent to a
property line having a lesser right-of-way width than normally required
for satisfactory improvements and use of the street.
E.
§ 22-202 FOREWORD § 22-202
FWD:431
TOP SOIL — Surface soils and subsurface soils which normally are fertile
soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter of humus debris.
Top soil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer called the A Horizon.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building
or other improvement.
UNIT — A part of the property, structure or building designed or intended
for any type of independent use, which has direct exit to a public street or
way, or to an easement or right-of-way leading to a public street or way, and
includes a proportionate undivided interest in the common elements, which
is assigned to the property, structure or building.
WATER FACILITY — Any water works, water supply works, water
distribution system or part thereof, designed, intended or constructed to
provide or distribute potable water.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water, river, brook, creek, or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
§ 22-202 EMMAUS CODE § 22-202
FWD:432
Part 3
PROCEDURES
§ 22-301. General Procedure. [Ord. 551, 5/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 22-302. Fee Schedule. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 905, 5/19/2000, § 302]
1. Classification of Subdivision. Whenever any subdivision of land or land
development is proposed, before any contract is made for the sale of
any part thereof, and before any permit for the erection of a structure in
such proposed subdivision or land development shall be granted, the
Owner, or his authorized agent, shall apply for and secure approval of
such proposed subdivision or land development in accordance with the
following procedures for subdivision and land development.
2. Pre-Application Consultation. Prior to filing an application for approval
of a subdivision or land development within the Borough, the Owner or
his authorized agent shall meet with the Assistant Borough Manager/
Code Enforcement Officer for an official classification of his proposed
subdivision or land development. The Assistant Borough Manager/Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine whether the proposal shall be
classified as a minor subdivision, a major subdivision or a land
development. At this time, the Assistant Borough Manager/Code
Enforcement Officer shall advise the Owner or his authorized agent as
to which of the procedures contained herein must be followed.
3. Official Filing Date.
A. For the purpose of these regulations, the official filing date shall be
the date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next
following the date the application and plans are received in the
Municipal Building. Provided that should said regular meeting
occur more than 30 days following the submission of the
application, the official filing date shall be the 13th day following
the day the application has been submitted.
B. Upon receipt of an application for subdivision or land development
approval the Assistant Borough Manager/Code Enforcement
Officer shall affix to the application both the date of submittal and
the official filing date.
4. Lehigh/Northampton County Joint Planning Commission Review. All
plans shall be submitted to and reviewed by the Lehigh County
Planning Commission in accordance with its then prevailing rules and
regulations. The Borough shall forward to the subdivider a copy of any
report of the County Planning Commission.
1. All filing, inspection and engineering fees shall be submitted to the
Borough.
§ 22-301 FOREWORD § 22-302
FWD:433
§ 22-303. Minor Subdivision Procedure. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
2. Plan Filing Fee. A filing fee shall accompany the preliminary plan. No
application shall be accepted or acted upon unless payment is made to
the Borough. The Borough Council shall create by resolution a schedule
of fees to be paid by the subdivider or land developer to defray the cost
of administering and processing of plans. The schedule of fees may be
changed from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
3. Inspection and Engineering Fees.
A. The applicant shall pay the appropriate fees as fixed from time to
time by separate resolution of the Borough Council for the
following services:
(1) Reviewing the Plan's engineering details.
(2) Inspecting the layouts of the site for conformance to the survey
and plan.
(3) Reviewing the results of the soils tests.
(4) Preparing cost estimates of required improvements.
(5) Inspecting required improvements during installation.
(6) Final inspection on completion of installation of the required
improvements.
(7) All legal costs paid by the Borough to its Solicitor, or any legal
counsel, or any other professional representing the Borough,
for the cost of any legal work incurred by the Borough and
occasioned by the development seeking approval, shall be paid
by the applicant including, but not limited to, the drafting of
any agreements, deeds or easements and the legal review of
the project, plans, deeds, easements and descriptions.
B. An applicant shall, by filing a plan, be then obligated to pay the fees
herein provided.
C. Upon the filing of a plan, the applicant shall be obligated to pay the
Borough as an escrow for the aforementioned fees, an amount not
less than $3,000 to cover the Borough's inspection, engineering
and legal fees. Following the initial filing of the plan, said escrow
amount may be required to be replenished from time to time in like
amount should the initial escrow amount be exceeded.
1. Minor subdivision plans shall be initiated and submitted for review in
the form of a Final Plan as specified in § 22-403 and shall be otherwise
reviewed in accordance with the procedures and standards of § 22-304.
§ 22-302 EMMAUS CODE § 22-303
FWD:434
§ 22-304. Major Subdivision and Land Development Procedure.
[Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; amended
by Ord. 784, 10/4/1993, §§ 1, 2; by Ord. 905, 6/19/2000, § 304; and
by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
2. Additional Subdivision. Any additional subdivision of a tract from which
a minor subdivision has already been formed shall be deemed to be a
major subdivision and shall follow the procedure applying thereto.
1. Sketch Plan. Prospective subdividers and developers are strongly urged
to discuss possible development sites with the Planning Commission
prior to submission of a preliminary plan. A sketch plan shall be
presented for review not less than 10 days prior to the regular meeting
of the Planning Commission at which it is to be considered. Submission
of a sketch plan will not constitute a formal filing of a subdivision or
land development plan with the Borough Council. Sketch plans should
include those items listed in Part 4, Plan Requirements.
2. Preliminary Plan.
A. Submission of Preliminary Plans. A preliminary plan shall be
presented for review not less than 10 working days prior to the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission at which it is to be
considered.
(1) The preliminary plan and all information and procedures
relating thereto shall in all respects be in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this Part. It is the responsibility of the
subdivider or developer to coordinate his plans with the
respective private and public service agencies.
(2) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite fee
as set forth in § 22-302 of this Part and by not less than three
copies of all required material and not less than 22 prints of the
preliminary plan of the subdivision or development as required
by Borough resolution from time to time.
(3) The Assistant Borough Manager/Code Enforcement Officer
shall forward one copy of the preliminary plan prints and one
copy of the required material to the Lehigh/Northampton Joint
County Planning Commission and such other agencies as he
deems appropriate for review and comment.
(4) The Assistant Borough Manager/Code Enforcement Officer
shall forward the remaining copies of the preliminary plan
prints and required materials to the Planning Commission.
(5) When applicable, the application form shall be accompanied by
a Planning Module for Land Development, as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
B. Review of Preliminary Plans.
§ 22-303 FOREWORD § 22-304
FWD:435
(1) In cases where the subdivision or land development adjoins an
existing or proposed state highway or has proposed streets
entering on to state highways, the developer shall submit the
plans to the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation for
review.
(2) The Planning Commission will consider the plan to determine if
it meets the standards set forth in this Part and the Borough
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) The Planning Commission shall act on the Preliminary Plan
within 60 days of the official filing date, but in any event shall
act on the plan in time for the Borough Council to render their
decision within 90 days from the official filing date. In the
event that any variance from this chapter is requested by the
applicant or is deemed necessary for approval, the variance
and the reasons for its necessity shall be entered into the
records of the Borough Council.
C. Planning Commission Recommendation.
(1) The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the
Preliminary Plan shall be approved, approved with
modifications, or disapproved, and shall notify the Borough
Council in writing thereof, including, if disapproved, a
statement of reasons for such action.
(2) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall
consider the recommendations of the Borough Engineer,
Borough Staff, the Lehigh/Northampton County Joint Planning
Commission, interested residents, and the recommendations of
any agency or agencies from which a review was requested
under subsection 304(2)(A)(3) of this chapter.
D. Borough Engineer Review. All plans shall be reviewed by the
Borough Engineer. Approval shall not precede the transmission of
such plans to the Borough Council until the Borough Engineer
approves of said plans. Final plans to be recorded with the County
shall be signed by a professional engineer of the Borough
Engineer's office licensed in the Commonwealth before
recordation.
E. Resubmission of Preliminary Plans. A revised plan submitted after
disapproval shall be considered, and processed as a new plan
submission.
F. Approval of Preliminary Plans.
(1) The Borough Council shall act on the preliminary plan within
90 days of the official filing date. Failure to do so shall be
deemed an approval. Before acting on a preliminary plan, the
§ 22-304 EMMAUS CODE § 22-304
FWD:436
Borough Council may hold a hearing thereon after public
notice.
(2) The Borough Council shall notify the applicant of its decision to
approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove the
preliminary plan in writing. Such notice shall be given to the
applicant in person or mailed to him at his last known address
not later than 15 days following the decision. If the plan is
approved with conditions or disapproved, the Borough Council
shall specify in their notice the conditions which must be met
and/or the defects found in the plan, and the requirements
which have not been met, including specific reference to
provisions of any statute or ordinance which have not been
fulfilled.
(3) Approval of the preliminary plan shall constitute approval of
the subdivision or land development as to the character and
intensity of development, the arrangement and approximate
dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features. The
approval binds the subdivider or developer to the general
scheme of the subdivision shown, unless a revised preliminary
plan is submitted, and permits the subdivider to proceed with
final detailed design of improvements, to arrange for
guarantee to cover installation of the improvements, and to
prepare the final plan. Approval of the preliminary plan does
not authorize the sale of lots nor the recording of the
preliminary plan.
3. Final Plan.
A. Submission of Final Plans. A final plan shall be presented for review
not less than 10 working days prior to the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission at which it is to be considered.
(1) After the subdivider or developer has received official
notification from the Borough Council that the preliminary plan
has been approved, he must submit a final plan in accordance
with the provisions of Sec. 508 of the Municipalities Planning
Code.
(2) The final plan shall conform in all respects with the approved
preliminary plan. If it does not, the plan submitted shall be
considered as a revised preliminary plan and shall be
forwarded by the Borough Engineer to the Planning
Commission for review and recommendation as a preliminary
plan.
(3) The subdivider or developer must submit with the final plan a
guarantee for the installation of improvements which meets
the requirements of Part 6.
§ 22-304 FOREWORD § 22-304
FWD:437
(4) The application form shall be accompanied by the requisite
inspection and engineering fees as set forth in this section.
(5) Documented approval of the Planning Module for Land
Development by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection shall be a part of the requisite
materials accompanying the Final Plan submission.
(6) The subdivider or developer shall submit a reproducible
original of the plans, 22 prints of the final subdivision or land
development plans and at least three copies of all other
required information.
(7) Upon receipt of the final plan, the Assistant Borough Manager/
Code Enforcement Officer shall forward the original plans and
five copies of the plans and one copy of all the other material to
the Planning Commission for review and recommendation; one
copy of the plan and one copy of all other material to the Soil
Conservation Service for review and comments; one copy of
the plan and one of all other material to the Lehigh/
Northampton County Joint Planning Commission; one copy of
the plan to the Borough Engineer; and copies to such other
agencies whose recommendations would be pertinent to the
processing of the plan.
B. Review of Final Plans.
(1) The Planning Commission will review the plan and requisite
materials for compliance with the approved preliminary plan
and for conformance to the requirements of this chapter.
(2) The Planning Commission shall act on the final plan within 60
days of the official filing date.
C. Planning Commission Recommendation.
(1) The Planning Commission shall recommend whether the final
plan shall be approved, approved with modifications, or
disapproved, and shall notify the Borough Council in writing
thereof, including, if approved with modifications or
disapproved, a statement of reasons for such action.
(2) In making its recommendation, the Planning Commission shall
consider the recommendations of the Borough Engineer and
staff, the Lehigh/Northampton County Joint Planning
Commission, the Soil Conservation Service, PennDOT, and the
recommendations of any agency or agencies from which a
review was requested under subsection 304(3)(A)(7).
D. Borough Engineer Review. All plans shall be reviewed by the
Borough Engineer. Approval shall not precede the transmission of
such plans to the Borough Council until the Borough Engineer
§ 22-304 EMMAUS CODE § 22-304
FWD:438
approves of said plans. Final plans to be recorded with the County
shall be signed by a professional engineer of the Borough
Engineer's office licensed in the Commonwealth before
recordation.
E. Resubmission of Final Plans. A revised plan submitted after
disapproval shall be considered and processed as a new plan
submission.
F. Approval of Final Plans.
(1) The Borough Council will not take official action to approve a
Final Plan unless it is accompanied by a guarantee for the
installation of improvements which meet the requirements of
Part 6.
(2) The Borough Council shall take action within 90 calendar days
from the official filing date of the final plan. Failure to do so
shall be deemed an approval.
(3) The Borough Council shall notify the applicant in writing of its
decision to approve, approve with conditions, or disapprove,
the final plan. Such notice shall be given to the applicant in
person or mailed to him at his last known address not later
than 15 days following the decision. If the final plan is
disapproved, the Borough Council shall specify the defects
found in the plan and the requirements which have not been
met, including specific reference to the provisions of any
statute or ordinance which have not been fulfilled.
(4) If the final plan is approved subject to conditions, the Borough
Council shall not endorse the plan until all of the conditions
have been met.
(5) If the Borough Council approve the final plan or grant a
conditional approval, they shall set the amount of bonding or
other security necessary to guarantee the construction of
improvements and community facilities and shall state such
amount in the notice to the applicant.
G. Recording of Final Plans.
(1) Upon approval of the final plan, the subdivider or developer
shall prepare one transparent reproduction of the original final
plan on stable plastic base film and no less than four prints
thereof which shall be submitted to the Borough not later than
30 days after approval. These plans, upon satisfaction of all
conditions attached to the approval, will be signed by the
Borough Council. A copy of the signed final plan shall be
recorded in the office of the Lehigh County Recorder of Deeds
within 90 days after approval of the final plan or the approval
of the Borough Council shall be null and void. The final plan
§ 22-304 FOREWORD § 22-304
FWD:439
must be recorded before proceeding with the sale of lots or
construction of buildings.
(2) Recording the final plan shall be an irrevocable offer to
dedicate all streets and other public ways to public use, and to
dedicate or reserve all park reservations and other public
areas to public use unless reserved by the subdivider as
hereinafter provided. The approval of the final plan shall not
impose any duty upon the Borough Council or Borough
concerning maintenance or improvements by ordinance or
resolution.
(3) The subdivider shall place a notation on the final plan if there is
no offer of dedication to the public of streets and certain
designated public areas, in which event the title to such areas
shall remain with the Owner, and the Borough shall assume no
responsibility for improvement or maintenance thereof; which
fact shall be noted on the final plan.
§ 22-304 EMMAUS CODE § 22-304
FWD:440
Part 4
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 22-401. Sketch Plan. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
§ 22-402. Preliminary Plan. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986; and by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
1. A sketch plan may be submitted by the subdivider or developer as a
basis for informal discussion with the Planning Commission, which may
comment upon such sketch plan, but no approval or disapproval shall
be given.
2. Data furnished in a sketch plan shall be at the discretion of the
subdivider. For fullest usefulness, it is suggested that a sketch should
include the following information:
A. Tract boundaries.
B. Location within the Borough.
C. North point.
D. Streets on and adjacent to the tract.
E. Significant topographical physical features including floodplains if
any.
F. Proposed general street layout.
G. Proposed general lot layout, including location of proposed open
space and other preservation areas.
3. A subdivision sketch plan need not be to scale nor are precise
dimensions required.
1. The preliminary plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch.
2. The preliminary plan shall show or be accompanied by the following
information:
A. Proposed subdivision or land development name or identifying title.
B. Borough name.
C. North point, scale and date of preparation.
D. Name(s) and addresses of the owner(s) of the property, including
reference to deed book, volume and page of current legal owner.
E. Name of the registered engineer or surveyor or other person
responsible for the plan.
§ 22-401 FOREWORD § 22-402
FWD:441
F. Tract boundaries, with bearings and distances.
G. Existing contours at vertical interval of five feet or, in the case of
relatively level tracts, at such lesser interval as may be necessary
for satisfactory study and planning of the tract.
H. Datum to which contour elevations refer shall be U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey datum. (Borough will furnish elevations of nearest
know bench marks.)
I. All existing water courses, floodplains or tree masses and other
significant natural features.
J. All existing buildings, sewers, water mains, culverts, petroleum or
petroleum products lines, fire hydrants and other significant manmade
features.
K. All existing streets on or adjacent to the tract, including name,
right-of-way width and cartway width.
L. All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way, and the
purpose for which the easements or rights-of-way have been
established.
M. Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements; proposed lot lines with approximate dimensions and
areas of all lots; proposed minimum set-back line for each street;
playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use; proposed
street names; proposed watercourses and detention ponds;
proposed phasing of land development; typical section of all
streets.
N. Total acreage, number of lots, average lot size, density, open space
and existing zoning classification.
O. Names of owners of all adjoining properties and the names of all
abutting subdivisions.
P. A location map, at a scale of 400 feet to the inch, showing the
proposed development and adjoining areas, will be required.
Q. Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's
entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the prospective street
layout for the remainder.
R. Where applicable, a Plan Revision Module for Land Development
shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall by prepared in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The completed module
shall accompany the preliminary plan submission.
§ 22-402 EMMAUS CODE § 22-402
FWD:442
§ 22-403. Final Plan. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002; § 2]
S. When required by § 22-512 of this chapter, a proposed soil erosion
and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted.
T. When required, the information required by § 22-513 of this
chapter, which may be a separate plan, shall be submitted.
U. Block for signatures of the reviewing agency membership and date
of recommendation, as per example in Appendix A.
V. Block for signatures of the Borough Council and date of approval,
as per example in Appendix A.
W. Land development plans shall show building locations and parking
areas in addition to the above information.
X. A letter from the subdivider specifically requesting any waiver from
the regulations herein established and citing the reasons for same.
1. Final plans shall be on sheets 18 inches by 24 inches. Where necessary
to avoid sheets larger than the size prescribed, final plans shall be
drawn in two or more sections. The plan shall be drawn and annotated
in accordance with the "Subdivision Plan Form" shown as Appendix A
hereto. The final plan shall be at a scale of not more than 100 feet to the
inch.
2. The final plan shall include or be accompanied by the following:
A. Subdivision name or identifying title.
B. Borough name.
C. North point, scale, date of preparation, and date of preliminary
plan approval.
D. Name and address of the record owner and subdivider or land
developer, including reference to deed book, volume and page of
current legal owner.
E. Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan.
F. Tract boundaries with bearings and distances.
G. All existing streets and driveways on or adjacent to the tract,
including name, right-of-way width, cartway width, street lines, lot
lines, rights-of-way, easements and areas dedicated or proposed to
be dedicated to public use.
H. Sufficient data, including bearing and length, to locate every street,
lot, easement, right-of-way and boundary line upon the ground.
§ 22-402 FOREWORD § 22-403
FWD:443
I. The length of all straight lines, radii, lengths of curves and tangent
bearings for each street.
J. All dimensions and angles or bearings of the lines of each lot and of
each lot proposed to be dedicated to public use.
K. The proposed building set-back line for each street and the
proposed placement of each building, except placement for singlefamily
dwellings.
L. Location and width of all rights-of-way, easements, and the purpose
for which the rights-of-way and easements were established.
M. Location of all sanitary and storm sewer easements, and location of
all watercourses and detention ponds, whether public or private.
N. All dimensions shall be shown in feet and hundredths of a foot.
O. Lots within a subdivision shall be numbered and their area shown
within the lot boundaries; house numbers, as assigned by the
Borough, shall also be shown therein.
P. Typical section for all proposed streets.
Q. Permanent reference monuments shall be shown on the plan, thus
and designated existing or proposed.
R. Names of the adjoining subdivisions shall be shown.
S. Names of the owners of any adjoining unplotted land shall be
shown.
T. An approval block providing for the signatures of the reviewing
agency and the Borough Council and the date of approval, as per
example in Appendix A.
U. An appropriate statement signed by owner unequivocally
indicating his intention either: (a) to dedicate for public use all
streets, roads, easements and rights-of-way so intended and
designated; or (b) to reserve as private any streets, roads,
easements or rights-of-way intended not to be dedicated for public
use.
V. A statement of acknowledgment in legal form, executed by a
Notary, stating that the subdivider is the Owner or equitable Owner
of the land proposed for subdivision, and that the subdivision as
shown on the final plan is the act and deed of the subdivider and
that it is desired to record the same.
W. A copy of the sewage "Plan Revision Module for Land
Development" or other equivalent documentation approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection in compliance with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act.
§ 22-403 EMMAUS CODE § 22-403
FWD:444
3. Improvement and Construction Plan.
A. The improvement construction plan(s) shall be at any of the
following scales:
Horizontal Vertical
50 feet/inch 5 feet/inch or 10 feet/inch
40 feet/inch 4 feet/inch
100 feet/inch 10 feet/inch
B. It shall show the following:
(1) Subdivision name or identifying title.
(2) North point, scale and date.
(3) Name of the owner of record, the subdivider, and telephone
numbers.
(4) Name and seal of the registered professional engineer or
surveyor responsible for the plan.
(5) Center line of streets with bearings, distances, curve data,
sight distances and stations corresponding to the profile.
(6) Right-of-way and curb lines of streets with radii at
intersections.
(7) Beginning and end of proposed construction of streets.
(8) Tie-ins by courses and distances to intersection of all public
roads with their names and widths.
(9) Location of all monuments with reference to them.
(10) Property lines and ownership of abutting properties.
(11) Location and size of all drainage structures, public utilities,
street name signs, and shade trees.
(12) Location and size of storm and/or sanitary sewer lines with
stations corresponding to the profile.
(13) Location of storm and/or sanitary sewer manholes or inlets
with grade between and elevation of flow line and top of each
manhole or inlet.
(14) Property lines and ownership, with details of easements where
required.
(15) Beginning and end of proposed construction of storm and/or
sanitary sewer.
(16) Location of storm and/or sanitary sewer laterals, Ys, etc.
§ 22-403 FOREWORD § 22-403
FWD:445
(17) Location of all other drainage facilities and public utilities.
(18) Profile of existing ground surface along center line of street.
(19) Proposed center line grade of streets with percent of grade on
tangents and elevations at 50 feet intervals, including grades
at intersections, control points, etc.
(20) Vertical curve data of streets, including length and elevations
and sight distance as required by Engineer.
(21) Profile of existing ground surface with elevations at top of
manholes or inlets.
(22) Profile of storm drain or sewer, showing size of pipe, grade,
cradle (if any), manhole or inlet locations, elevations at flow
line.
4. Grading and Drainage Plan, prepared in accordance with Sections 505
and 507 of this chapter.
5. Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan when required by § 22-512
of this chapter.
6. When required, the information required by § 22-513 of this chapter,
which may be a separate plan, shall be submitted.
7. A copy of final deed restrictions or protective covenants.
8. A copy of any and all proposed written easements or deeds to be
granted, including but not limited to, storm drainage easements,
recreation easements or dedication, or agreements to pay a fee in lieu
thereof, and sanitary sewer easement.
9. Written agreement of land developer or subdivider in a form approved
by the Borough Council including: an agreement to construct in form
and substance agreeable to the Borough required improvements
including but not limited to streets, curbs, sidewalks, and storm
drainage facilities.
10. An approved Department of Environmental Protection Planning Module
where on-lot sewage disposal systems or community treatment systems
are proposed, or written proof of the Department of Environmental
Protection' approval for the extension of existing sanitary sewer
service.
11. If required, a Highway Occupancy Permit or review and written
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
12. Approval by the U. S. Postal Service of street names.
13. Plans of bridges and other improvements shall contain sufficient
information to provide complete working plans for the proposed
construction.
§ 22-403 EMMAUS CODE § 22-403
FWD:446
§ 22-404. As-Built Plans. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
The subdivider or developer will furnish the Borough with as-built plans for
sanitary sewer systems and storm sewer systems within the subdivision or
land development.
14. Typical cross-section of streets showing:
A. Right-of-way width and location and width of paving.
B. Type, thickness and crown of paving.
C. Type and size of curb.
D. Grading of sidewalk area.
E. Location, width, type, and thickness of sidewalks.
F. Typical location of sewers and utilities with sizes.
§ 22-403 FOREWORD § 22-404
FWD:447

Part 5
GENERAL DESIGN PRINCIPLES
§ 22-501. Application. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
The following principles, standards and requirements will be applied by the
Borough Council and Planning Commission to evaluating plans for proposed
subdivision or land developments. The standards and requirements outlined
herein shall be considered minimum standards and requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Where
literal compliance with the standards herein specified is clearly impractical,
the Borough Council may modify or adjust the standards to permit
reasonable utilization of property while securing substantial conformance
with the objectives of this chapter.
§ 22-502. Land Requirements. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; and as amended by Ord. 803, 9/19/1994, § 1;
and by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 3]
1. Land shall be suited to the purposes for which it is to be subdivided or
developed.
2. Land which is unsuitable for development because of hazards to life,
safety, health, or property, shall not be subdivided or developed until
such hazards have been eliminated or unless adequate safeguards
against such hazards are provided for in the Subdivision or Land
Development Plan. Land included as having unsuitable characteristics
would be the following:
A. Land located in a floodplain subject to flooding or which has a high
ground water table.
B. Land which, if developed, will create or aggravate a flooding
condition upon other land.
C. Land subject to subsidence.
D. Land subject to underground fires.
E. Land containing significant areas of slopes greater than 10%.
F. Land which, because of topography or means of access, is
considered hazardous by the Borough Council.
G. Land which is subject to ground pollution or contamination.
3. Proposed subdivisions of land developments shall be coordinated with
existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community as a whole may
develop harmoniously.
4. Proposed land uses shall conform to the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
§ 22-501 FOREWORD § 22-502
FWD:449
§ 22-503. Street System. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
5. The Borough of Emmaus Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] has recently
added §§ 27-503, 27-517 and 27-518. Those standards are hereby
incorporated herein and made part of this chapter under this section
will be part of any review process for subdivision and land development,
as the same may be applicable.
1. Proposed streets shall be properly related to such street plans or parts
thereof as have been officially prepared and adopted by the Borough
and shall be coordinated with existing or proposed streets in adjoining
subdivisions or land developments.
2. Proposed streets shall further conform to such county and state road
and highway plans as have been prepared, adopted or filed as
prescribed by law.
3. Streets shall be related to the topography so as to produce usable lots
and acceptable grades.
4. Access shall be given to all lots and portions of the tract in the
subdivisions or land development and to adjacent unsubdivided
territory unless the topography clearly indicates that such connection is
not feasible. Streets giving such access shall be improved to the limits
of the subdivision or land development and shall be improved to
Borough specifications. Reserve strips and land-locked areas shall not
be created.
5. Streets shall be laid out to preserve the integrity of their design. Local
access streets shall be laid out to discourage their use by through traffic
and, where possible, arterial streets shall be designed for use by
through traffic.
6. Where the proposed subdivision or land development contains or is
adjacent to an existing or proposed arterial street or a highway
designated as a Limited Access Highway by the appropriate highway
authorities, provisions shall be made for marginal access streets at a
distance acceptable for the appropriate use of the land between the
arterial street or Limited Access Highway and the marginal access
streets. The Borough Council may also require rear service areas,
double frontage lots, or such other treatment as will provide protection
for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with
primary streets, and separation of local and through traffic.
7. Half or partial streets will not be permitted in new subdivisions or land
developments except where essential to reasonable subdivision or
development of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and
standards of this chapter and where, in addition, satisfactory assurance
for dedication of the remaining part of the street can be secured.
§ 22-502 EMMAUS CODE § 22-503
FWD:450
§ 22-504. Street Design. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
8. Wherever a tract to be subdivided or developed borders an existing half
or partial street, the entire street shall be shown on the plan.
9. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as stubs (with adequate
turning capability) to permit future street extension into adjoining
tracts, or when designed as culs-de-sac.
10. New reserve strips, including those controlling access to streets, shall
be forbidden.
11. Where adjoining areas are not subdivided, the arrangement of streets
in a proposed subdivision or land development shall be made to provide
for the proper projection of streets into the unsubdivided land.
12. Street names shall be coordinated with existing or platted street names,
and if a new street is a continuation of or is aligned with an existing or
platted street, it shall bear the same name as the existing or platted
street.
13. No street shall be laid out or opened which extends to or crosses any
boundary between the Borough and any other municipality except with
the specific approval of the Borough Council and upon such condition as
the Borough Council may impose. If the street is proposed to serve a
commercial area, an industrial area or a residential area of 50 dwelling
units or more, located in another municipality, the street shall not be
approved unless the area is also served by a street in the other
municipality and unless the relevant traffic facilities of the Borough are
adequate to handle the anticipated volume.
14. All streets shall have a uniform width throughout their respective
Lengths except where otherwise required by the Borough Council
pursuant to Subsection 2.C. of § 22-504.
1. Street Classification.
A. Three functional classifications are hereby established for the
streets and roads in Borough:
(1) Arterial. This classification includes highways which provide
intra-county or inter-municipal traffic of substantial volumes
where the average trip lengths are usually five miles or
greater. Generally, these highways should accommodate
operating speeds of 35 to 55 miles per hour.
(2) Collector. This classification is intended to include those
highways which connect local access highways to arterial
highways. They may serve intra-county and intra-township
traffic. They may serve as traffic corridors connecting
residential areas with industrial, shopping and other service.
§ 22-503 FOREWORD § 22-504
FWD:451
They may penetrate residential areas. Generally, these
highways will accommodate operating speeds of 35 miles per
hour.
(3) Local Access. This classification is intended to include streets
and roads that provide direct access to abutting land and
connections to higher classes of roadways. Traffic volumes will
be low and travel distances generally short. These streets and
roads should be designed for operating speeds of 25 miles per
hour or under.
2. Right-of-Way Widths.
A. Minimum widths for each type of public street shall be as follows:
Type of Street
Right-of-Way
Width Cartway Width
Arterial 80' to 120' 46'
Collector 60' 34'
Local Access 50' 33'
B. Where a proposed subdivision abuts or contains an existing public
street or road having a right-of-way width less than would be
required if said street or road were created under this chapter,
sufficient additional width for right-of-way shall be provided and
dedicated to meet the foregoing standards.
C. Additional right-of-way and cartway widths may be required by the
Borough Council to promote public safety and convenience when
special conditions require it and to provide parking space in areas
of intensive use.
3. Cul-de-sac Streets.
A. Cul-de-sac streets, whether permanent or temporary, shall be
provided at the closed end with a turnaround having a minimum
radius to the edge of the finished street or curb line of not less than
50 feet.
B. Unless future extension is clearly impractical or undesirable, the
turnaround right-of-way shall be placed adjacent to a property line
and a right-of-way of the same width as the street shall be carried
to the property line in such a way as to permit future extension of
the street into the adjoining tract. At such time as such a street is
extended, the overage created by the turnaround outside the
boundaries of the extended street shall revert in ownership to the
property owners fronting on the cul-de-sac turnaround.
C. Commercial and industrial culs-de-sac shall be reviewed for
adequacy by the Borough Engineer. His recommendations will be
§ 22-504 EMMAUS CODE § 22-504
FWD:452
given to the Borough Council who shall have final authority in this
matter.
D. Permanent cul-de-sac streets shall be kept to a minimum and shall
not exceed 600 feet in length.
4. Street Alignment.
A. Whenever street lines are deflected by more than 5°, connection
shall be made by horizontal curves.
B. The minimum radius at the center line for horizontal curves on
collector and arterial streets shall be 300 feet, and for local streets
the minimum radius shall be 100 feet.
C. On local access streets, the minimum tangent between reverse
curves shall be at least 100 feet; on collector and arterial streets,
the minimum tangent shall be at least 250 feet.
D. Minimum vertical sight distance measured four feet above grade
shall be 300 feet for collector and arterial streets and 100 feet for
local access streets.
5. Street Grades.
A. The minimum grade on all streets shall be three-fourth 0.75%.
B. The maximum grade on collector or arterial streets shall be 7% and
on local access streets 10%.
C. Vertical curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding 1% and
shall provide proper sight distances as specified herein above.
6. Street Intersections.
A. Local streets shall not intersect with collector or arterial streets on
the same side at intervals of less than 800 feet as measured from
center line to center line.
B. The distance between center lines of streets opening onto the
opposite side of a proposed or existing street shall be not less than
150 feet unless the streets are directly opposite each other.
C. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be avoided. Where this proves impossible, such
intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
D. Streets shall be all laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. Local streets shall not intersect collector or arterial streets
at an angle of less than 75°. The intersection of two local streets
shall not be at an angle of less than 60°.
§ 22-504 FOREWORD § 22-504
FWD:453
E. Minimum curb radius at the intersection of two local streets shall
be at least 20 feet; and minimum curve radius at an intersection of
a local street and a collector or arterial street shall be at least 25
feet.
F. There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections clear
sight triangles of 75 feet in all directions measured along the
center line from the point of intersection. Nothing which obstructs
the vision of a motorist shall be permitted in this area.
G. Intersections shall be designed with a flat grade wherever
practical. Where the grade of any street at the approach to an
intersection exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having a
grade of not greater than 4% for a distance of 25 feet measured
from the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
7. Pavement Design.
A. All components of the pavement structure shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Specifications, Form 408.
B. Minimum Requirements. The following shall be considered to be
minimum standards for street construction in Borough:
Alternates
Streets Type
Local Access
Streets
Collector and
Arterial
Flexible
Pavements
Surface ID-2 1-1/2" 1 - 1/2"
Base
Subbase
Bituminous 4" 6"
6" (if req.)
Surface
Base
Subbase
ID-2
Crushed
Aggregate
(regular or
dense grade)
3"
5"
3"
10"
6" (if req.)
Surface
Base
Subbase
ID-2
Modified Stone
Aggr.
3"
8"
6" (if req.)
3"
10"
9" (if req.)
8. Alleys and Driveways.
A. Alleys are prohibited in residential developments.
§ 22-504 EMMAUS CODE § 22-504
FWD:454
§ 22-505. Curbs and Sidewalks. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 575, 11/17/1986]
§ 22-506. Stormwater Drainage. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
B. Driveways serving properties located adjacent to an intersection
shall be offset from the intersection of the curb line a distance not
less than the required setback dimension.
1. Curbs. Curbs and sidewalks must follow the rules and regulations
established in Ordinance 550 [Chapter 21, Part 4] and all amendments
added thereto.
1. Lots shall be laid out and graded to provide positive drainage away
from buildings. The Borough Council may require a Grading and
Drainage Plan for individual lots indicating a buildable area within each
lot, complying with the setback requirements, for which positive
drainage is assured.
2. No person, corporation, or other entity shall block, impede the flow of,
alter, construct any structure, or deposit any material or thing, or
commit any act which will affect normal or flood flow in any communal
stream or water course without having obtained prior approval from
the Borough or Department of Environmental Protection, whichever is
applicable.
3. Where a subdivision or land development is traversed by a natural
watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage easement or right-ofway
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse and of
such width as will be adequate to preserve natural drainage.
4. The Borough will assure that all permanent streams, not under the
jurisdiction of other official agencies, are maintained open and free
flowing.
5. The subdivider or developer, and each person, corporation, or other
entity which makes any surface changes shall be required to:
A. Collect on-site surface runoff and dispose of it to the point of
discharge into the common natural watercourse of the drainage
area.
B. Design drainage facilities to handle runoff from upstream areas,
assuming full development of those areas, based upon the
Comprehensive Plan for Borough.
C. Design, construct, and/or install such drainage structures and
facilities as are necessary to prevent erosion damage to the
subdivision or land development, adjacent property and
downstream property. Such structures and facilities shall
§ 22-504 FOREWORD § 22-506
FWD:455
satisfactorily convey such surface waters to the nearest practical
street, storm drain, detention pond, or natural water course.
6. Storm sewers, culverts, and related installations shall be provided to
permit unimpeded flow of natural water courses, to drain all low points
along streets, and to intercept storm water runoff along streets at
intervals reasonably related to the extent and grade of the area
drained.
7. Storm sewers, as required, shall be placed in front of the curb or curb
line when located in a street right-of-way. When located in undedicated
land, they shall be placed within an easement not less than 15 feet wide,
as approved by the Borough Engineer, who may require additional
width of easement as circumstances warrant.
8. Street drainage will not be permitted to cross intersections or the
crown of the road.
A. Maximum spacing of street inlets shall not exceed 600 feet.
B. All street inlets shall be PennDOT Type C or M. Inlet tops shall be
cast in place reinforced concrete or precast concrete.
C. All culvert ends shall be provided with either reinforced concrete
headwalls or pipe and sections.
D. Minimum pipe size shall be fifteen-inch diameter.
E. When material for storm drain systems is not specified, PennDOT
specifications will govern.
9. All springs and sump pump discharges shall be collected so as not to
flow in the streets.
10. Stabilized outlets shall be provided for footer drains, floor drains, and
downspouts.
11. The Soils Cover Complex Method of the Soil Conservation Service of the
U. S. Department of Agriculture shall be used as the primary means of
estimating stormwater runoff.
12. The Rational Method may be used for analysis of storm sewer systems
and for stormwater management facilities in minor subdivisions.
13. Where the estimated runoff based upon the above methods is doubtful,
several recognized methods should be studied and compared.
14. The minimum design criteria shall be a ten-year storm. Higher
frequency conditions shall be used in sensitive areas and where an
overflow would endanger public or private property.
15. Runoff calculations must include complete hydrologic and hydraulic
design and analysis of all control facilities.
§ 22-506 EMMAUS CODE § 22-506
FWD:456
§ 22-507. Lot Grading for Subdivisions and Land Developments.
[Ord. 551, 6/7/1975; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
16. Control Facilities.
A. Permanent control measures/facilities shall be designed to assure
that the maximum rate of stormwater runoff is not greater after
development than prior to development for a ten-year storm
frequency. More stringent criteria may be required in sensitive
areas where storm water problems presently exist.
B. Control Facilities shall be designed to meet, as a minimum, the
design standards and specifications of the "Erosion and
Sedimentation Control Handbook for Lehigh County."
(1) Detention ponds may be waived by the Borough Council on the
recommendation of the Borough Engineer at sites in close
proximity to the major streams. This is to facilitate drainage
prior to stream flooding.
(2) In areas underlain with limestone geology, ponds shall be
limited to the detention (dry) type unless the developer can
show a special need for a retention pond, in which case it shall
have a lining. Detention ponds shall be prohibited in areas of
known sinkholes unless the pond is lined. If a sinkhole develops
in a pond or channel before acceptance by the municipality, a
lining shall be required.
(3) Any ponds with slopes steeper than three to one shall be
fenced with a six-foot fence with a type subject to the approval
of the municipality.
C. A maintenance program for control facilities must be included as
part of the Grading and Drainage Plan.
(1) Maintenance during development activities of a project shall
be the responsibility of the contractor, developer, and owner.
(2) Arrangement for maintenance of permanent control facilities
after completion of development activities shall be made
before approval of final plans is given by the Borough Council.
(a) In cases where permanent control facilities are owned by
an entity, it shall be the responsibility of that entity to
maintain control facilities (e.g., homeowner's association).
In such cases a legally binding agreement between the
owner and the Borough shall be made providing for
maintenance of all permanent erosion control facilities,
including the inspection by the Borough.
§ 22-506 FOREWORD § 22-507
FWD:457
1. Blocks and lots shall be graded to provide proper drainage away from
buildings and to prevent the collection of storm water in pools.
Minimum 2% slopes away from structures shall be required.
2. Lot grading shall be of such design as to carry surface waters to the
nearest practical street, storm drain, or natural water course. Where
drainage swales are used to deliver surface waters away from
buildings, their grade shall not be less than 1% nor more than 4%. The
swales shall be sodded, planted or lined as required. A Grading and
Draining Plan shall be required for all subdivisions and land
developments, except minor subdivisions.
3. No final grading shall be permitted with a cut face steeper in slope than
two horizontal to one vertical except under one or more of the following
conditions:
A. The material in which the excavation is made is sufficiently stable
to sustain a slope of steeper than two horizontal to one vertical, and
a written statement of a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, to that effect is submitted to the Borough Engineer and
approved by him. The statement shall state that the site has been
inspected and that the deviation from the slope specified
hereinbefore will not result in injury to persons or damage to
property.
B. A concrete or stone masonry wall constructed according to sound
engineering standards for which plans are submitted to the
Borough Engineer for review and approval is provided.
4. No final grading shall be permitted which creates any exposed surface
steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical except under one or
more of the following conditions:
A. The fill is located so that settlement, sliding or erosion will not
result in property damage or be hazardous to adjoining property,
streets, alley, or buildings.
B. A written statement from a civil engineer, licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and experienced in erosion
control, certifying that he has inspected the site and that the
proposed deviation from the slope specified above will not
endanger any property or result in property damage, is submitted
to and approved by the Borough Engineer.
C. A wall is constructed to support the face of the fill.
5. The top or bottom edge of slopes shall be a minimum of three feet from
property or right-of-way lines of street or alleys in order to permit the
normal rounding of the edge without encroaching on the abutting
property. All property lines, where walls or slopes are steeper than one
horizontal to one vertical and five feet or more in height shall be
§ 22-507 EMMAUS CODE § 22-507
FWD:458
§ 22-508. Blocks and Lots. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
protected by a protective fence no less than three feet in height
approved by the Borough Engineer.
6. All lots must be kept free of any debris or nuisances whatsoever.
1. The length, width, shape, and design of blocks shall be determined with
due regard to the provision of adequate sites for buildings of the type
proposed, to the land use and/or zoning requirements of the Borough,
the topography of the land being subdivided, and the requirements for
safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
2. Unless the topography of the land being subdivided or the existing
pattern of development in the immediately adjacent area shall be
otherwise than herein required, the following minimum standards for
the design and size of blocks and lots shall prevail:
A. Blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet in length, nor be less than 500
feet in length.
B. Residential blocks shall generally be of sufficient depth to
accommodate two tiers of lots, except where reverse frontage lots
bordering an arterial or collector street are used, or where due to
the contour of the land, or the necessary layout of the subdivision,
there is insufficient depth between intersecting streets for such
two tier design.
C. Crosswalks or interior pedestrian walks shall be required in blocks
exceeding 1,000 feet in length to provide for pedestrian circulation
or access to community facilities. Such walks shall be paved for
width of not less than four feet, shall be located in easements not
less than 10 feet in width, and shall, insofar as possible, be located
in the center of any such block.
D. Blocks for commercial and industrial areas may vary from the
elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires other treatment. In such cases, off-street parking for
employees and customers shall be provided along with safe and
convenient limited access to the street system. Space for off-street
loading shall also be provided with limited access to the street
system. Extension of streets, railroad access right-of-way, and
utilities shall be provided as necessary.
E. Lot lines intersecting street lines shall be substantially at right
angles or radial to street lines.
F. Lots shall, in general, front on a street which has already been
dedicated to the Borough, or which the subdivider or developer
proposes to dedicate to the Borough in connection with approval of
the final plan. In commercial or industrial subdivisions or land
§ 22-507 FOREWORD § 22-508
FWD:459
§ 22-509. Development on Private Streets Discouraged. [Ord. 551,
6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 22-510. Open Space, Lot Siting, Planting and Beautification for
Subdivision and Land Developments. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
developments where access is proposed to be provided by private
streets within the subdivision or land development, this
requirement may be waived by the Borough Council.
G. The Borough shall assign house numbers to each lot within a
subdivision.
H. Minimum lot sizes shall be in accordance with the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
I. Remnants of land, smaller than required for a lot, shall not be
permitted within any subdivision. Such remnants shall be
incorporated in existing or proposed lots, or dedicated to public use
if acceptable to the Borough Council.
J. Double frontage lots are prohibited except in accordance with
§ 22-508.2.B. above.
K. No residential lots shall be created which front upon an arterial or
collector street, as defined in § 22-504.A herein.
1. It is the policy of this Borough that all subdivided lands shall have
immediate access to a public street. Because of unique property
configuration and location, this Borough recognizes the need for limited
exceptions to the foregoing general policy.
2. No subdivision will be approved on a private street or road if more than
two lots already front on such street or road or if after subdivision more
than two lots will front on such private street or road.
1. In order to promote the highest environmental quality possible, the
degree to which the applicant of a subdivision or land development plan
has preserved existing salient natural features and land forms intrinsic
to the site, shall be assessed. Terms of approval of a plat may be subject
to the manner in which the layout or design of the plan has preserved
existing natural features, such as, but not limited to, trees, wooded
areas and water course.
2. Open space. Where the applicant is offering for dedication, or is
required by ordinance to establish a reservation of open space or
preserve an area of scenic or historic importance, a "limit of work,"
which will confine excavation, earth moving procedures and other
changes to the landscape, may be required to ensure preservation and
prevent despoilation of the character of the area in open space.
§ 22-508 EMMAUS CODE § 22-510
FWD:460
§ 22-511. Contribution for Recreation Purposes. [Ord. 551, 6/7/
1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; and amended by Ord. 761,
2/3/1992, §§ 2-4; by Ord. 783, 10/4/1993, §§ 1, 2; and by Ord. 876, 3/
15/1999]
3. Tree preservation. Whenever possible, trees shall not be removed
unless they are located within the proposed street right-of-way, within
the proposed building area, or within utility locations and equipment
access areas. In areas where trees are retained, the original grade level
shall be maintained, if possible, so as not to disturb the trees.
4. Topsoil preservation. All of the topsoil from areas where cuts and fills
have been made should be stockpiled and redistributed uniformly after
grading. All areas of the site shall be stabilized by seeding or planting
on slopes of less than 10% and shall be stabilized by sodding on slopes
10% or more and planted in ground cover on slopes 20% or greater.
5. Landscaping. For all multi-family, apartment, office, commercial, and
industrial subdivisions or land developments, a landscaping plan shall
be provided and shall include sufficient plantings for the required open
space, planting strips, screenings, formal gardens, shade trees and
natural barriers.
6. Buffer planting requirements. Buffer Yard requirements should be as
specified in the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
7. Preserved landscaping. When there is a conscientious effort to preserve
the existing natural integrity and character of a site and where such
preservation effectuates areas of woodland and trees comparable to
required planting improvements, i.e., landscaping and buffer screening,
the plan may be received in lieu of additional landscaping
requirements.
8. Trees. The planting of trees within the street right-of-way line shall not
be permitted. The planting of any trees within the private property of
each residential lot shall be at the discretion of the property owner or
developer.
9. Watercourse Protection. Where a subdivision or land development is
traversed by a natural watercourse, there shall be provided a drainage
easement or right-of-way conforming substantially with the line of such
watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to preserve natural
drainage. Such easement shall be in addition to the open space
required in Sec. 510.2.
1. Areas meeting the criteria for recreation lands as set forth in Part 2,
"Definitions," shall be offered for dedication to the Borough, subject to
the approval of the Borough Council. A minimum of 1,100 square feet
per lot or dwelling unit shall be offered (the land required for recreation
space per dwelling unit under the Borough of Emmaus Parks,
§ 22-510 FOREWORD § 22-511
FWD:461
§ 22-512. Erosion and Sediment Control. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002,
§ 2]
Recreation and Open Space Plan). Borough Council shall consider the
offer relative the following factors:
A. The suitability of the size, shape and landform of the tract for
appropriate recreational facilities.
B. Accessibility.
C. Conformity with the parks and recreation element of the
Comprehensive Plan.
D. Ability of nearby recreation facilities to serve the subdivision and
land development.
E. If land is not suitable, Council would then impose the cash in lieu
provision as stated in § 22-511, subsection (2).
2. Cash in lieu of recreation land dedication may be offered, subject to the
approval of the Borough Council, as follows:
A. The cash in lieu shall be $1,000 per lot or dwelling unit (the
estimated value of 1,100 square feet of recreation land) or such
other amount that the Borough Council may adopt by ordinance as
shall be in effect at the time of payment.
B. The use of the monies shall be restricted to the purchase of lands or
for recreation or open space accessible to the subdivision or land
development, the improvement of said areas, the construction of
recreational facilities, parks and other related capital expenditures,
as recommended in the Borough's Park and Recreation Plan.
C. The monies shall be deposited in an interest bearing, separate trust
account established for this purpose by Borough Council.
D. Cash in lieu of recreation land dedication shall be deemed as an
improvement and subject to the provisions of Section 509 and
subsequent sections of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.
3. Planned residential developments pursuant to Chapter 17 of the
codified ordinances of the Borough of Emmaus are exempt.
4. All subdivisions and land developments proposing the creation of any
new residential dwelling units would be eligible for a one dwelling unit
exemption, said exemption applying to a dwelling unit existing on the
property prior to the proposal to create any new residential dwelling
units only. The fee for the recreation is due and payable upon
application for the buildings permits.
§ 22-511 EMMAUS CODE § 22-512
FWD:462
1. General Purpose.
A. The Borough Council finds that the minimization of erosion and
control of sedimentation in connection with land development and
subdivision are in the public interest, affecting public health, safety
and welfare, and therefore those regulations governing erosion
control and sedimentation control are necessary for the Borough.
B. No changes shall be made in the contour of the land, no grading,
excavating, removal or destruction to the topsoil, trees or other
vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time
that a plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been
processed with and reviewed by the Borough Engineer and/or
Lehigh County Soil and Water Conservation District, or there has
been a determination by the above entities that such plans are not
necessary.
C. No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved unless:
(1) there has been an Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan
approved by the Borough Council that provides for minimizing
erosion and sedimentation consistent with this section, and an
improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited
with the Borough in the form of an escrow guarantee which will
ensure installation and completion of the required improvements;
or (2) there has been a determination by the Borough Council that a
plan for minimizing erosion and sedimentation is not necessary.
D. Where not specified in this chapter, measures used to control
erosion and reduce sedimentation shall as a minimum meet the
standards and specifications of the Soil Conservation Service. The
Borough Engineer, or other officials as designated, shall ensure
compliance with the appropriate specifications, copies of which are
available from the Soil and Water Conservation District.
2. Performance Principles. The following measures are effective in
minimizing erosion and sedimentation and shall be included where
applicable in the control plan:
A. Stripping of vegetation, regrading, or other development shall be
done in such a way that will prevent all but minor erosion.
B. Development plans shall preserve salient natural features, keep
cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential and
adequately handle the volume and velocity of surface water runoff.
C. Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected,
and supplemented.
D. The disturbed area and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a
practical minimum.
§ 22-512 FOREWORD § 22-512
FWD:463
E. Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable.
F. Temporary vegetation and/or mulching shall be used to protect
exposed critical areas during development.
G. The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion control and
drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development.
H. Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the increased
runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development. Where necessary, the rate of surface water
runoff will be structurally retarded.
I. Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the disturbed
area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt
traps, or similar measures.
3. Grading for Erosion and Other Environmental Controls. In order to
provide suitable sites for building and other uses, improve surface
drainage, and control erosion, the following requirements shall be met:
A. Streets shall be improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently
possible condition as one of the first items of work done on a
subdivision or development. The wearing surface shall be installed
in accordance with this section and as approved in the Final Plan.
B. Provisions shall be made to prevent surface water from damaging
the cut face of excavations or the sloping surfaces of fills, by
installation of temporary or permanent drainage across or above
these areas.
C. Fill shall be placed and compacted so as to minimize sliding or
erosion of the soil.
D. Fills placed adjacent to watercourses shall have suitable protection
against erosion during periods of flooding.
E. During grading operations, necessary measures for dust control
will be exercised.
F. Grading equipment will not be allowed to enter into flowing
streams. Provisions will be made for the installation of temporary
or permanent culverts or bridges.
4. Responsibility.
A. Whenever sedimentation damage is caused by stripping vegetation,
grading or other development, it shall be the collective
responsibility of the land developer and subdivider, and of the
contractor, person, corporation and other entity causing such
sedimentation to remove it from all adjoining surfaces, drainage
§ 22-512 EMMAUS CODE § 22-512
FWD:464
§ 22-513. Floodplain Area Regulations. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as
amended by Ord. 564, 6/20/1977; and as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 2, 3]
systems and watercourses and to repair any damage at his expense
as quickly as possible.
B. Maintenance of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities
during the construction and development period is the
responsibility of the land developer or subdivider.
C. It is the responsibility of any developer or subdivider, and any
person, corporation, or other entity doing any act on or across a
communal stream, watercourse or swale, or upon the floodplain or
right-of-way, to maintain as nearly as possible in its present state
the stream, watercourse, swale, floodplain or right-of-way during
the pendency of the activity to return it to its original or equal
condition after such activity is completed.
D. The subdivider or land developer shall provide and install, at his
expense, in accordance with Borough requirements, all drainage
and erosion control improvements (temporary and permanent)
shown on the Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.
5. Compliance with Regulations and Procedures.
A. The Borough Council, in their consideration of all preliminary plans
of subdivision and land development, shall condition its approval
upon the execution of erosion and sediment control measures as
contained in these Sections hereof.
B. The installation and design of the required erosion and sediment
control measures shall be in accordance with standards and
specifications of the Lehigh County Soil and Conservation District.
6. Stream Channel Construction. Stream channel construction on
watersheds with drainage areas in excess of 1/2 square mile, or in those
cases where downstream hazards exist, will conform to criteria
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environment
Protection.
1. Purpose. The specific purposes of these special provisions are:
A. To regulate the subdivision or development of land within any
Designated Floodplair. Area in order to promote the general health,
welfare, and safety of the community.
B. To require that each subdivision lot in floodplain areas be provided
with a safe building site with adequate access; and that public
facilities which serve such uses be designed and installed to
preclude flood damage at the time of initial construction.
§ 22-512 FOREWORD § 22-513
FWD:465
C. To prevent individuals from buying lands which are unsuitable for
use because of flooding by prohibiting the improper subdivision or
development of unprotected lands within the designated floodplain
districts.
2. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. To the extent that this section
imposes greater requirements or more complete disclosure than any
other provisions of this chapter, in any respect, or to the extent that the
provisions of this section are more restrictive than such other
provisions, it shall control such other provisions of this chapter.
3. Disclaimer of Borough Liability. The grant of a permit or approval of a
plan for any proposed subdivision or land development to be located
within any Designated Floodplain Area shall not constitute a
representation, guarantee, or warranty of any kind by the Borough or
by any official or employee thereof of the practicability or safety of the
proposed use, and shall create no liability upon the Borough, its
officials, employees or agents.
4. Application Procedures and Requirements.
A. Pre-Application Procedures.
(1) Prior to the preparation of any plans, it is suggested that
prospective developers consult with the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection concerning soil
suitability when on-site sewage disposal facilities are
proposed.
(2) Prospective developers shall consult the Soil Conservation
Service representative concerning erosion and sediment
control and the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed
development. At the same time, a determination should be
made as to whether or not any flood hazards either exist or will
be created as a result of the subdivision or development.
B. Preliminary Plan Requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the preliminary plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
(1) Name of engineer, surveyor, or other qualified person
responsible for providing the information required in this
section.
(2) A map showing the location of the proposed subdivision or land
development with respect to any Designated Floodplain Area,
including information on, but not limited to, the one-hundredyear
flood elevations, boundaries of the Floodplain Area or
areas, proposed lots and sites, - fills, flood or erosion protective
facilities, and areas subject to special deed restrictions.
§ 22-513 EMMAUS CODE § 22-513
FWD:466
(3) Where the subdivision or land development lies partially or
completely within any Designated Floodplain Area, or where
the subdivision of land development borders on a Floodplain
Area, the preliminary plan map shall include detailed
information giving the location and elevation of proposed
roads, public utilities, and building sites. All such maps shall
also show contours at intervals of five feet, and shall identify
accurately the boundaries of the Floodplain Areas.
(4) Such other information as is required by this Subdivision
Ordinance.
C. Final Plan Requirements. The following information shall be
required as part of the final plan and shall be prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor:
(1) All information required for the submission of the preliminary
plan incorporating any changes requested by the Borough
Council.
(2) A map showing the exact location and elevation of all proposed
buildings, structures, roads, and public utilities to be
constructed within any Designated Floodplain Area. All such
maps shall show contours at intervals of five feet within the
Floodplain Area and shall identify accurately the boundaries of
the floodplain areas.
(3) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the
Department of Environmental Protection, and any other
Commonwealth agency, or local municipality where any
alteration or relocation of a stream or watercourse is proposed.
In addition, documentation shall be submitted indicating that
all affected adjacent municipalities have been notified in
advance of the proposed alteration or relocation. The
Department of Community Affairs, and the Federal Insurance
Administration shall also be notified in advance of any such
proposed activity, and proof of such notification shall be
submitted in advance of the Planning Commission meeting at
which such plan is to be considered.
5. Design Standards and Improvements in Designated Floodplain Areas.
A. General.
(1) Where not prohibited by this or any other laws or ordinances,
land located in any Designated Floodplain Area may be platted
for development with the provision that the developer
construct all buildings and structures to preclude flood
damage in accordance with this and any other laws and
ordinances regulating such development.
§ 22-513 FOREWORD § 22-513
FWD:467
(2) No subdivision or land development, or part thereof, shall be
approved if the proposed development or improvements will
individually or collectively, increase the one-hundred-year
flood elevation more than one foot at any point.
(3) Building sites for residences or any other type of dwelling or
accommodation shall not be permitted in any floodway area.
Sites for these uses may be permitted outside the floodway
area in a Floodplain Area if the lowest floor (including
basement) is elevated to the Regulatory Flood Elevation. If fill
is used to raise the elevation of a site, the fill area shall extend
laterally for a distance of at least 15 feet beyond the limits of
the proposed structures and access shall meet the
requirements of § 22-513.5.C hereinbelow.
(4) Building sites for structures or buildings other than for
residential uses shall not be permitted in any floodway area.
Sites for such structures or buildings outside the floodway in a
Floodplain Area shall be protected as provided for in
§ 22-513.5.A.(3) above. However, the Borough Council may
allow the subdivision or development of areas or sites for
commercial and industrial uses at an elevation below the
Regulatory Flood Elevation if the developer otherwise protects
the area to that height or assures that the buildings or
structures will be floodproofed to the Regulatory Flood
Elevation.
(5) If the Borough Council determines that only a part of a
proposed plat can be safely developed, it shall limit
development to that part and shall require that development
proceed consistent with this determination.
(6) When a developer does not intend to develop the plat himself
and the Borough Council determines that additional controls
are required to insure safe development, they may require the
developer to improve appropriate deed restrictions on the
land. Such deed restrictions shall be inserted in every deed and
noted on every recorded plat.
B. Drainage Facilities.
(1) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The
system shall insure drainage at all points along streets, and
provide positive drainage away from buildings and on-site
waste disposal sites.
(2) Plans shall be subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
The Borough Council may require a primary underground
system to accommodate frequent floods and a secondary
surface system to accommodate larger, less frequent floods.
Drainage plans shall be consistent with local, county and
§ 22-513 EMMAUS CODE § 22-513
FWD:468
§ 22-514. Landscaping General Requirements. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989,
§ 1]
regional drainage plans. The facilities shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Streets and Driveways. The finished elevation of proposed streets
and driveways shall not be more than the one foot below the
Regulatory Flood Elevation. Profiles and elevations of streets and
driveways to determine compliance with this requirement and as
required by other provisions of this Subdivision Ordinance shall be
submitted with the final plan. Drainage openings shall be sufficient
to discharge flood flows without unduly increasing flood heights.
D. Sewer Facilities. All sanitary sewer systems located in any
Designated Floodplain Area, whether public or private, shall be
flood proofed up to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
E. Water Facilities. All water systems located in any Designated
Floodplain Area, whether public or private, shall be flood proofed
up to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
F. Other Utilities and Facilities. All other public or private utilities and
facilities, including gas and electric, shall be elevated or flood
proofed up to the Regulatory Flood Elevation.
1. General Conditions.
A. All future major subdivisions and land developments within the
Borough of Emmaus shall comply with the following landscape
ordinance, §§ 22-514 through 22-519, § 22-528, and PennDOT
Specifications and Standards.
B. Street trees, buffer yards, and other required planting shall be in
accordance with other sections of this amendment to the
subdivision and land development ordinance and shall supersede
any references to landscaping, buffering and street trees in any
other existing ordinances.
C. Street trees and other required plant material shall not be planted
until the finished grading of the subdivision or land development
has been completed.
D. Plans for proposed planting shall be reviewed by the Borough
Planning Commission and approved by the Borough Council.
E. All required planting shall be guaranteed for a period of 12 months
from the date of planting and shall be alive and healthy as
determined by the Borough at the end of the guaranteed period.
Should a disagreement arise as to whether the planting is alive and
§ 22-513 FOREWORD § 22-514
FWD:469
healthy, a qualified nurseryman shall be retained by the Borough at
the expense of the developer to make a final determination.
F. Where planting is required, it shall be assured by financial security
posted with the governing body in an amount equal to the
estimated cost of trees and shrubs and planting. Such guarantee
shall be released only after passage of the second growing season
following planning.
G. The developer shall be responsible for plant material provided in
accordance with § 22-528(2) for a period of 12 months. Any such
tree that dies within the time period shall be removed, including
the stump, and replaced by a tree or shrub, similar in size and
species, at the expense of the developer.
H. All mechanical and electrical equipment not enclosed in a structure
shall be fully and completely screened from view from any point in
a manner compatible with the architectural and landscaping style
of the remainder of the lot. Such screening shall be subject to site
plan review by the Borough Planning Commission and approval by
Borough Council.
2. Existing Vegetation.
A. In cases where natural features existing on the site duplicate or
essentially duplicate the requirements of the street tree, buffering,
or landscaping provisions of this Part, these requirements may be
waived by the Borough Council.
B. All subdivisions and land developments shall be laid out in such a
manner as to preserve the healthy trees on the site. If trees greater
than eight inches in caliper are removed, they shall be replaced by
trees of 3 1/2 inches minimum caliper which appear on the
recommended plant list as found in § 22-518(5).
C. During the construction of any site, trees and shrubs, as defined
herein, shall be protected by fencing to insure that there is no
encroachment within the area of their dripline by changing grade,
trenching, stockpiling of building materials or topsoil, or the
compaction of the soil and roots by any motor vehicle unless the
following regulations are met:
(1) The area of dripline of any tree or group of trees may be
encroached up to a maximum of 1/3 of the total area of the
dripline provided that an equivalent proportion of the canopy is
removed by pruning by a trained arborist.
(2) The grade of land within the entire area of dripline shall not be
raised more than six inches unless tree wells are constructed
around each trunk or group of trunks and aeration pipes are
extended out to the edge of the dripline.
§ 22-514 EMMAUS CODE § 22-514
FWD:470
(3) Tree wells are to be constructed on uncemented stone, or any
other suitable material. Such walls shall be a minimum of three
feet in diameter or one foot in diameter for each inch in caliper
measured 12 inches above natural ground level, whichever is
greater.
(4) Retaining walls are to be constructed around each tree or
group of trees immediately after any grade is lowered within
the area of the dripline.
D. If any plant material is to be moved, it must be done in accordance
with the specifications set forth by the American Association of
Nurserymen.
E. All diseased or dead trees shall be promptly removed from the site.
3. Nursery Stock Specifications.
A. Name of Plants. Shall agree with the nomenclature of "Standard
Plant Names" as adopted by American Joint Committee on
Horticulture Nomenclature, 1942 edition; size and grading
standards shall conform to those specified by the American
Association of Nurserymen in the latest edition of the "U.S.D.A.
Standards of Nursery Stock ."
B. Quality. All plants shall be typical of their species or variety; they
shall have normal, well developed branches and vigorous fibrous
root systems. All plants shall be nursery grown unless otherwise
stated; they shall have been growing under the same climate
conditions as the Borough for at least two years prior to date of
planting. All plants which are found unsuitable in growth or
condition or which are not true to name shall be removed and
replaced with acceptable plants.
C. Measurements. Plants shall be measured as they stand in their
natural position. Stock furnished shall be a fair average of the
minimum sizes specified or of the range given in the "U.S.D.A.
Standards of Nursery Stock." Larger plants cut back to sizes
specified shall be accepted.
D. Preparation of Plants. All precautions customary in good trade
practice shall be taken in preparing plants for moving. All balled
and burlapped plants shall be dug to meet or exceed the "U.S.D.A.
Standards of Nursery Stock."
E. Delivery. Plants shall be packed, transported and handled with
utmost care to insure adequate protection against injury.
F. Where, in order to achieve the effect established in the planting
plan, uniformity of the plant material is desired, the plant material
shall be of the same size and age, of the same cultivar, and obtained
from the same nursery.
§ 22-514 FOREWORD § 22-515
FWD:471
§ 22-515. Detention Basin Plantings. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989, § 1]
§ 22-516. Parking Facilities. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989, § 1]
1. As a general standard, one tree shall be planted per each 45 linear feet
of the perimeter. It is preferred, however, that this required number of
trees be planted in an informal arrangement if possible. Approved trees
for the perimeter of detention basins shall include the following:
Acer rubrum - Red Maple
Liquidambar styraciflua - Sweet Gum
Nyssa sylvatica - Black Gum
Salix species - Willow
1. Screen planting shall be provided along each perimeter of a parking
area. No less than 10% of a proposed parking area must consist of
buffer areas and islands and must be landscaped and continually
maintained.
2. Any area for off-street parking or for display; storage, sale, or
movement of three or more motor vehicles shall be enclosed, except at
entrances or exits, by a compact evergreen hedge not less than four
feet in height.
3. Where a planted screen is proposed, it shall incorporate the planting of
staggered and overlapping evergreen and deciduous shrubs of such
species and size as will produce within two growing seasons (May
through September) after planting a screen at least four feet higher
than the elevation of the adjacent parking area, and of such density as
will obscure 75% of the light emitted from automobile headlights on the
premises throughout the full course of the year. Where the adjacent
land elevation is higher than the parking area elevation, trees and
shrubs shall be at least two feet in height, satisfaction of the four-foot
requirement notwithstanding. These provisions shall not, however,
interfere with the maintenance of clear sight lines at intersections.
Where such screening is required, it shall be assured by a performance
guarantee posted with the governing body in an amount equal to 20% of
the estimated cost of the plantings. Such guarantee shall be released
only after passage of the second growing season following planting.
4. Parking areas of a twenty-vehicle capacity shall be separated from one
another by planting strips not less than 10 feet in width.
5. All parking areas shall have at least one tree of two-and-one-half-inch
caliper minimum for every five parking spaces in single bays and one
tree of two-and-one-half-inch caliper minimum for every 10 parking
spaces in double bays. Trees shall be planted in such a manner to afford
maximum protection from the sun for parked vehicles. A minimum of
(10% of any parking lot facility over 2,000 square feet in gross area
shall be devoted to landscaping, inclusive of required trees.
§ 22-515 EMMAUS CODE § 22-516
FWD:472
§ 22-517. Multiple Family Developments. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989, § 1]
§ 22-518. Street Trees. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989, § 1]
6. Plantings shall be able to survive soot and gas fumes. Trees which have
low-growing branches, gum or moisture which may drop on vehicles,
blossoms, thorns, seeds, or pods which may clog drainage facilities
shall be avoided. The plantings chosen should be of sufficient size to be
effective the first year they are planted.
7. For recommended plants see § 22-519, Subsection 5.
1. For all multifamily developments, the following minimum landscaping
shall be provided either on lot or within the general open space in
addition to all other required street tree, parking and buffer
requirements. Any combination of the following shall be required for
each dwelling unit:
Either: one two-inch-caliper shade tree; or
one four-foot to five-foot evergreen tree, or
two flowering trees; or eight two-foot to three-foot
shrubs
1. General Requirements.
A. Street trees and associated planting shall be required for any
subdivision or land development as part of the design and
construction of:
(1) New streets;
(2) New sidewalks or pedestrian ways;
(3) Existing streets, sidewalks, pedestrian ways, highways, bicycle
or other trails or pathways when they abut or lie within the
subdivision or land development; and
(4) Access driveways to residential developments serving greater
than four dwelling units.
B. Trees shall be placed in such a position as to minimize conflict with
overhead utilities.
C. Plant material shall not at maturity obstruct the necessary visibility
of traffic control signs or signals, nor obstruct visibility at street
intersections or driveway entrances.
D. Plant material shall be selected to minimize future maintenance
costs, including but not limited to considerations of pruning, tree
removal and sidewalk repair.
§ 22-516 FOREWORD § 22-518
FWD:473
E. Plant material shall not interfere with underground utilities or
stormwater management facilities.
F. Plant material shall be adaptable to the specific planting site and to
achieve the specified design objectives of the plan.
G. Plant material shall be spaced to permit the healthy growth of each
plant.
H. Plant material shall attempt to mitigate adverse microclimate
conditions.
2. Quantity.
A. Street trees generally shall be at intervals not to exceed 25 feet
along the street right-of-way as part of a residential or nonresidential
subdivision or land development, with trees alternating
from side to side 50 feet maximum spacing on any one side, or as
otherwise specified by the Planning Commission.
B. An equivalent number may be planted in an informal arrangement.
3. Location.
A. Street trees shall be planted opposite each other but shall
alternate.
B. At intersections, trees shall be located no closer than 30 feet from
the intersection of the curb.
C. Street trees shall not be closer than:
(1) Six feet from the edge of any sidewalks or curb;
(2) Ten feet from the edge of any uncurbed cartway or one-story
building; or
(3) Fifteen feet from any overhead utility lines or two- or more
story building;
(4) A minimum of one foot off a public street right-of-way or 10 feet
off a public sewer or water line unless approved by Borough
Council.
4. Size.
A. Tree caliper at time of planting, as measured six inches above
ground level, shall be no less than 2 1/2 inches in both residential
and nonresidential areas.
5. Approved Plant Material. The following plant material is approved for
use within the Borough, provided that the specific site is suitable:
A. Large Trees.
§ 22-518 EMMAUS CODE § 22-518
FWD:474
§ 22-519. Buffer Yards. [Ord. 717, 9/5/1989, § 1]
(1) Acer rubrum — Red Maple.
(2) Acer saccharum — Sugar Maple.
(3) Fraxinus americana — White Ash.
(4) Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata — Green Ash.
(5) Gleditsia tricanthos inermis — Thornless Honey.
(6) Liquidambr styraciflua — Sweet Gum.
(7) Phellodendron amurense —Amur Cork Tree.
(8) Plantanus acerifolia — London Plane Tree.
(9) Quercus alba — White Oak.
(10) Quercus Borealis — Red Oak.
(11) Quercus Coccinea — Scarlet Oak.
(12) Tilia - Linden — All species hardy to the area.
(13) Zelkova serrata — Japenese Zelkova.
B. Small Trees.
(1) Acer ginnala — Amur Maple.
(2) Cornus Florida — Flowering Dogwood.
(3) Crataegus phaenopyrum — Washington Hawthorn.
(4) Gingko Biloba — Gingko (male only).
(5) Prunus Kwanzan — kwanzan Cherry.
(6) Pyrus calleryana Bradford — Callery Pear.
(7) Sophora japonica — Japenese Pagodatree.
**Upon approval of the Borough, other species may be
utilized.
6. All plant material shall conform to the general specifications listed in
§ 22-528, Subsection 6.
1. Buffer yards are required along two different land uses and along the
rear of reverse frontage lots as specified in the Zoning Ordinance either
as buffer or screening requirements. Walls, ornamental structures,
appropriate plantings, or a combination of these, not less than four feet
in height, may be used subject to the specific land use areas involved as
noted in the Zoning Ordinance and approved by Borough Council.
§ 22-518 FOREWORD § 22-519
FWD:475
2. All plant material used shall be a minimum height of four feet at the
time of planting and shall usually be planted in a staggered
arrangement in order to provide an immediate effect.
3. Deciduous and semi-deciduous plants may be used with evergreens to
provide color, and a softer, more interesting and natural effect.
4. The applicant shall not be required to provide a buffer yard should
existing planting, topography, or man-made structures be deemed
acceptable for screening purposes by Borough Council .
5. The following are plant materials and sizes recommended for buffer
yards and screening purposes. The Borough may permit other planting
types if they are hardy to the area, are not subject to blight or disease,
and are of the same general character and growth habit as those listed
below. All planting material shall meet the standards of the American
Association of Nurseryman.
A. Canopy Tree (one-and-one-half inch caliper).
(1) Acer ginnala — Amur Maple.
(2) Acer rubrum — Red Maple.
(3) Acer saccharum — Sugar Maple.
(4) Fagus grandifolia — American Beech.
(5) Fagus sylvatica — European Beech.
(6) Fraxinus americana — White Ash.
(7) Fraxinus pennsylvania lanceolata — Green Ash.
(8) Gingko Biloba — Gingko (male only).
(9) Gleditsia tricanthos inermis — Thornless Honey.
(10) Liquidamber styraciflua — Sweet Gum.
(11) Phellodendron amurense — Amur Cork Tree.
(12) Plantanus acerifolia — London Plane Tree.
(13) Quercus alba — White Oak.
(14) Quercus Borealis — Red Oak.
(15) Quercus Coccinea — Scarlet Oak.
(16) Sophora japonica — Japenese Pagodatree.
(17) Tilia - Linden — All species hardy to the area.
(18) Zelkova serrata — Japenese Zelkova.
§ 22-519 EMMAUS CODE § 22-519
FWD:476
B. Flowering Trees.
(1) Amelanchier canadensis — Shade 5-6 feet blow Serviceberry.
(2) Cornus Florida — Flowering Dogwood; 5-6 feet.
(3) Cornus Kousa — Kousa Dogwood; 5-6 feet.
(4) Cornus mas — Carnelian Cherry; 5-6 feet.
(5) Crataegus phaenopyrum — Washington Hawthorn; 5-6 feet.
(6) Magnolia soulangeana — Saucer Magnolia; 5-6 feet.
(7) Malus baccata — Siberian Crab; 1 1/4-1 1/2" caliper.
(8) Malus f1oribunda — Japanese Flowering Crab; 1 1/4-1 1/2"
caliper.
(9) Malus hopa — Hopa Red Flowering Crab; 1 1/4-1 1/2" caliper.
(10) Prunus Kwanzan — Kwanzan Cherry; 1 1/4-1 1/2" caliper.
(11) Prunus yedoensis — Yoshino Cherry; 1 1/4-1 1/2"caliper.
(12) Pyrus calleryana Bradford — Callery Pear; 1 1/4-1 1/2" caliper.
C. Evergreens.
(1) Ilex opaca — American Holly.
(2) Picea abies — Norway Spruce.
(3) Picea omorika — Serbian Spruce.
(4) Picea pungens — Colorado Spruce and Blue Spruce.
(5) Pinus nigra — Austrian Pine.
(6) Pinus strobus — White Pine.
(7) Pseudotsuga mensiesii — Douglas Fir.
(8) Tsuga canadensis — Canada Hemlock.
D. Hedge.
(1) Cragaegus intricata — Thicket Hawthorn; 3-4 feet.
(2) Forsythia intermedia — Border Forsythia; 4-5 feet.
(3) Rhamnus frazula columnaris — Tallhedge buckthorn; 3-4 feet.
(4) Syringa chinensis — Chinese Lilac; 3-4 feet.
(5) Syringa vulgaris — Common Lilac; 4-5 feet.
(6) Euonymus alatus — Winged Euonymus; 3-4 feet.
§ 22-519 FOREWORD § 22-519
FWD:477
E. Hedgerow.
(1) Crataegus crus-galli — Cockspur Thorn; 3-4 feet.
(2) Crataegus phanenopyrum -- Washington Hawthorn; 3-4 feet.
(3) Elaeagnus angustifolia — Russian Olive; 4-5 feet.
(4) Euonymus alatus — Winged Euonymus; 3-4 feet.
(5) Viburnum sieboldi — Siebold Viburnum; 4-5 feet.
(6) Viburnum tomentosum — Doublefile Viburnum; 4-5 feet.
F. Evergreen Shrubs.
(1) Juniperus virginiana — Upright Juniper; 4-5 feet.
(2) Pyracantha laland — Laland Firethorn; 5-6 feet.
(3) Taxus capitata — Upright Yew; 2 1/2-3 feet.
(4) Taxus hicksi — Hicks Yew; 2 1/2-3 feet
(5) Thuja occidentalis — American Arborvitae; 4-5 feet.
G. Deciduous Shrubs.
(1) Euonymus alatus — Winged Euonumus; 3-4 feet.
(2) Hamamelis vernalis — Vernal Witch Hazel; 4-5 feet.
(3) Hamamelis virginiana — Common Witch Hazel; 4-5 feet.
(4) Ilex verticillata — Winterberry; 4-5 feet.
(5) Rhamnus frangula — Glossy Buckthorn; 4-5 feet.
(6) Viburnum dentatum — Arrowood Viburnum; 4-5 feet.
(7) Viburnum lantana — Wayfaring tree Viburnum; 4-5 feet.
6. All plant material shall conform to the general specifications listed in
§ 22-528, Subsection 6.
§ 22-519 EMMAUS CODE § 22-519
FWD:478
Part 6
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT
§ 22-601. General Requirements. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The following improvements shall be installed by the subdivider. The final
plan shall not be approved until final detailed design of the improvements
is approved and the improvements are installed or security to the Borough
Council is provided.
§ 22-602. Streets. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
Streets shall be brought to the grades and dimensions drawn on plans,
profiles, and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by
the Borough Engineer. The subdivider must install the required utilities and
provide, where necessary, adequate subsurface drainage for the streets.
The streets shall be designed and constructed to the standards set forth in
§§ 22-503 and 22-504 of this chapter.
§ 22-603. Curbs and Sidewalks. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Curbs and sidewalks shall be provided in accordance with the standards set
forth in § 22-505 of this chapter.
§ 22-604. Sewers. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
§ 22-605. Water. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
1. Public Sewer Systems. When the subdivision or land development is to
be provided with a complete sanitary sewer system connected to a
public sanitary sewer system, a statement of approval from the
engineer of the sewerage system to which it will be connected shall be
submitted to the Borough Council. Where required, DEP Planning
Module approval shall also be obtained for final plan approval.
2. Private Sewer Systems. When a complete private sanitary sewer system
using a treatment plant is to be provided, a statement shall be
submitted to the Borough Council from the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection certifying that a permit has been issued by
the appropriate agency approving the proposed facilities. Adequate
security for the maintenance of such plant shall be furnished to the
Borough.
1. Provision of System. The subdivision or land development shall be
provided with a complete water main supply system which shall be
connected to a municipal water supply or with a community water
§ 22-601 FOREWORD § 22-605
FWD:479
§ 22-606. Storm Drainage. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
A storm drainage system shall be provided in accordance with the standards
as set forth in § 22-506 of this chapter.
§ 22-607. Utilities. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
§ 22-608. Monuments and Markers. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
supply approved by the engineer of the applicable water utility
company and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection with satisfactory provision for the maintenance thereof;
except that, when such municipal or community water supply system
is not available, each lot in a subdivision shall be capable of being
provided with an individual water supply system in accordance with
minimum standards approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
2. Plans. The plans for the installation of the mains of a water supply
system shall be prepared for the subdivision or land development with
the cooperation of the applicable water supply agency and approved by
its engineer. A statement of approval from the engineer of the water
supply agency to which the subdivision or land development will be
connected, shall be submitted to the Borough Council. Upon the
completion of the water supply system, one copy of each of the plans for
such system shall be filed with the Borough.
3. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be provided as an integral part of any
public water supply system. The Borough Fire Chief or Fire Official
shall be consulted to determine the location of proposed fire hydrants.
1. Easements for utilities shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
2. To the fullest extent possible, easements for public utilities shall be
centered on or adjacent to rear or side lot lines.
3. Telephone, electric, T.V. Cable and such other utilities shall be either
pole mounted or installed underground and shall be provided within the
street right-of-way or easements to be dedicated for such utilities, and
in accordance with plans approved by the Borough Council and the
applicable utility company. Underground installation of the utility
distribution and service lines shall be completed prior to street paving
and gutter, curbing, and sidewalk installation.
4. Street lighting shall consist of along street public pole lighting or shall
be provided by private on-lot post lighting, or a combination thereof as
determined by the Planning Commission.
§ 22-605 EMMAUS CODE § 22-608
FWD:480
§ 22-609. Other Improvements. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 22-610. Time Limits. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
All improvements shall be installed according to a time schedule which shall
be approved by the Borough Council.
§ 22-611. Inspection. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
At the time each improvement is to be installed and upon its completion,
the subdivider shall notify the Borough Council so that adequate inspections
can be made. The inspection will be made by the proper Borough official or
Borough Engineer. All costs of undertaking the inspection will be borne by
the subdivider.
§ 22-612. Guarantees. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
1. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone at least six inches by six
inches by 30 inches and marked on top with a copper or brass dowel.
They shall be set at the intersection of lines forming angles in the
boundaries of the subdivision and at the intersection of street lines.
Markers shall be iron pipes or brass 30 inches by 3/4 inch diameter and
set at all points where lines or lines and curves intersect.
2. Monument replacement. Any monuments or markers that are removed
must be replaced by a registered land surveyor at the expense of the
person responsible for the removal.
1. Shade trees shall be provided as specified in § 22-510.8 of this chapter.
2. Street name signs conforming to Borough specifications shall be
provided and installed by the subdivider or developer at all street
intersections.
3. Open space shall be provided as specified in § 22-510.2 of this chapter.
4. Other improvements to promote public safety and health as required by
the Borough Council as a condition of approval.
1. The applicant shall agree in writing in a form provided by the Borough
that he will construct or install and maintain until dedication all of the
improvements required herein or required as a condition of approval of
the final plan in accordance with the governing specifications and
within the specified time limits.
2. As a condition for approval of a Final Plan, the applicant shall deposit
with the Borough financial security in an amount sufficient to cover the
costs of the required improvements in accordance with Section 509 of
§ 22-608 FOREWORD § 22-612
FWD:481
the Municipalities Planning Code. In cases where development is
projected over a period of years, the Borough Council may authorize
submission of Final Plan by sections or stages of development subject to
such requirements or guarantees as to improvements in future sections
or stages of development as it finds essential for the protection of any
finally approved section of the development.
3. Release from Improvement Bond. The security for improvements
deposited as aforesaid may be released in accordance with Section 509
of the Municipalities Planning Code.
4. If the subdivider or developer does not satisfactorily construct or install
all of the improvements included within the agreement referred to in
§ 22-612.1 hereof, the Borough Council shall institute appropriate legal
or equitable proceedings to enforce the bond or other security referred
to in § 22-612.2 hereof, or if no bond or other security is enforceable or
if the proceeds thereof are insufficient to pay the cost of completing the
construction or installation of such improvements or the cost of making
repairs or corrections thereto, to collect the same from the subdivider
or developer. The Borough Council at their option, may also proceed to
complete such improvements or make repairs and corrections thereto
prior to receiving the cost thereof from the surety on the bond, from the
other security, or from the subdivider or developer. All funds recovered
from the surety, from other security, or from the subdivider or developer
shall be used solely for such improvements and not for any other
Borough purpose.
§ 22-612 EMMAUS CODE § 22-612
FWD:482
Part 7
MANUFACTURED HOME PARKS
§ 22-701. Grant of Power. [Ord. 551, 5/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 1]
Provisions regulating manufactured home parks as set forth in this Part are
those pursuant to Section 501 of the Municipalities Planning Code.
§ 22-702. Purpose, Authority and Jurisdiction. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976;
as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/
2002, § 1]
The purpose, authority and jurisdiction for land development as a
manufactured home park are the same as contained in Part 1 of this chapter.
§ 22-703. General Procedure and Plan Requirements. [Ord. 551, 6/
7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by Ord.
940, 1/7/2002, § 1]
The General Procedure and Plan Requirements for land developments as
a manufactured home park shall be in accordance with the requirements
contained in Parts 3 and 4 of this chapter.
§ 22-704. Design Standards. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
The arrangements and other design standards of streets, easements, blocks,
lots, stormwater management, erosion and sedimentation control, and
floodplain regulations shall be in accordance with the requirements
contained in Part 5 of this chapter, and the Borough Zoning Ordinance.
§ 22-705. Improvements and Construction Requirements. [Ord.
551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; as amended by
Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 1]
In a manufactured home park all improvements, construction requirements,
and engineering specifications for the improvements required, shall be
provided in accordance with Part 4 and Part 6 of this chapter.
§ 22-706. Fees. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/17/
1986; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 1]
The fee schedule for filing, inspection and engineering fees for land
development as a manufactured home park shall be in accordance with the
requirements contained in Part 3, § 22-302, of this chapter.
§ 22-701 FOREWORD § 22-706
FWD:483

Part 8
ADMINISTRATION
§ 22-801. Waiver of Provisions. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
§ 22-802. Reconsideration. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any subdivider aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
Borough Council, may request and receive opportunity to appear, present
additional relevant information and request reconsideration of the original
finding, decision or recommendation.
§ 22-803. Records. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
1. Where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter will result in unreasonable hardship, the
Borough Council may make such reasonable waiver thereof in
accordance with modern and evolving principles of site planning and
land development which are not contrary to the public interest and so
that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed and substantial justice
done.
2. Application for any waiver shall be submitted in writing by the applicant
at the time the preliminary plat is filed with the Borough. The
application shall state fully the ground and all facts relied upon by the
applicant.
3. Wherever a waiver is requested by the applicant, the Borough Council
shall refer the matter to the Planning Commission for its review. The
Planning Commission shall study the request, make findings, record the
findings in its minutes, and submit the findings to the Borough Council.
1. The Borough shall keep a record of its findings, decisions, and
recommendations relative to all subdivision plans filed with it for
review.
2. All such records shall be public records.
§ 22-801 FOREWORD § 22-803
FWD:485

Part 9
PENALTIES
§ 22-901. Penalties. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
1. Any person, partnership, or corporation who or which being the Owner
or agent of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall lay out, construct, open
or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
improvements for public use, travel or other purposes or for the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, or who rules,
transfers or agrees or enters into an agreement to sell any land in a
subdivision or land development whether by reference to or by other
use of a plat of such subdivision or land development or erects any
building thereon, unless and until a final plat has been prepared in full
compliance with provisions of this chapter and of the regulations
adopted hereunder and has been recorded as provided herein, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, such person, or
the members of such partnership, or the officers of such corporation, or
the agent of any of them, responsible for such violation, pay a fine not
exceeding $300 per lot or parcel or per dwelling within each lot or
parcel. All fines collected for such violations shall be paid over to the
Borough.
2. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or
other document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferer from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
§ 22-901 FOREWORD § 22-901
FWD:487

Part 10
VALIDITY
§ 22-1001. Validity. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provision thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision of
the court shall not affect or impair any of the remaining sections, clauses,
sentences, parts of provision of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Borough Council that this chapter would have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional section, clause, sentence, part or
provision had not been included herein.
§ 22-1001 FOREWORD § 22-1001
FWD:489

Part 11
REPEALER, SEVERABILITY, EFFECTIVE DATE
§ 22-1101. Repealer. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances which are inconsistent herewith are
hereby repealed. The following ordinances or parts thereof are specifically
repealed:
§ 22-1102. Severability. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
If any sentence, clause, section, or part of this chapter is for any reason
found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality,
illegality or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of the remaining
provisions, sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared as the intent of the Borough Council of the Borough that this
chapter would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or
invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof not been included herein.
§ 22-1103. Effective Date. [Ord. 551, 6/7/1976; as revised by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
This Chapter shall become effective on November 17, 1986.
§ 22-1101 FOREWORD § 22-1103
FWD:491
Chapter 23
SWIMMING POOLS
(Reserved to accommodate future ordinances)
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 22-1103 EMMAUS CODE § 22-1103
FWD:492
Part 1
REAL ESTATE TRANSFER TAX
§ 24-101. Short Title. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 1]
This Part shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Borough.
§ 24-102. Authority. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 2]
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough, regardless of where the documents making the transfer are made,
executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements on such transfer took
place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," 72
P.S. § 8101 et seq.
§ 24-103. Definitions. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 3]
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
Commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title of
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 24-102.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business of agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
§ 24-101 FOREWORD § 24-103
FWD:493
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing, and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half-blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole-blood.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person" as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
B.
§ 24-103 EMMAUS CODE § 24-103
FWD:494
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
§ 24-104. Imposition of Tax; Interest. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 1019, 12/4/2006, §§ 1-4]
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consist of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against real estate:
Provided, That where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under clause (A) or (B), the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
1. Imposition of Tax. The Borough of Emmaus adopts provisions of Article
XI-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a Realty Transfer Tax
as authorized under that Article subject to the rate limitations therein.
§ 24-103 FOREWORD § 24-104
FWD:495
§ 24-105. Exempt Parties. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 5]
The United States, the Commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this Part. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall not,
however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 24-106. Excluded Transactions. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 6]
The tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1% of the
value of the real estate represented by any document recorded with
regard to the transfer of realty.
2. Administration. The tax imposed under subsection .1 and all applicable
interest and penalties shall be administered, collected, and enforced
under the Act of December 31, 1965, (P.L. 1257, No. 511) as amended,
known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that if the correct
amount of the tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely
payment, the Borough of Emmaus, pursuant to § 1102-D of the Tax
Reform Code Of 1971, 72 P.S. § 8102-D, authorizes and directs the
Department of Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
determine, collect and enforce the tax, interest and penalties.
3. Interest. Any tax imposed under subsection .1 that is not paid by the
date that the tax is due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on
delinquent municipal claims under the Act of May 16, 1923, P.L. 207,
No. 153), 53 P.S. § 7101, et seq., as amended, known as "The Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act." The interest rate shall be 10% per annum.
1. The tax imposed by § 24-104 shall not be imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the Commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed or confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax
claim bureau sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
§ 24-104 EMMAUS CODE § 24-106
FWD:496
E. A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
covenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is, due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister, and between a grandparent and
grandchild or the spouse of such grandchild, except that a
subsequent transfer by the grantee within one year shall be subject
to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the recorder of deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer (i) for no or nominal actual consideration between
principal and agent or straw party; or (ii) from or to an agent or
straw party where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no
tax would be imposed under this Part.
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired
by the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there
is a rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of
the grantee in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an
exemption from taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this Part.
§ 24-106 FOREWORD § 24-106
FWD:497
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and (ii) the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, (68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)) and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax is $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
2. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the Statement of
§ 24-106 EMMAUS CODE § 24-106
FWD:498
§ 24-107. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and
Members, Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof. [Ord.
676, 3/2/1987, § 7]
Except as otherwise provided in § 24-106, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this section,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders and shareholders.
§ 24-108. Acquired Company. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 8]
§ 24-109. Credits Against Tax. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 9]
Value. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement of
Value may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural
gas or minerals, the Statement of Value may be limited to an
explanation of the reason such document is not subject to tax under this
Part.
1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this Part.
3. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 24-106 FOREWORD § 24-109
FWD:499
§ 24-110. Extension of Lease. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 10]
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 24-111. Proceeds of Judicial Sale. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 11]
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid, and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff, or other
officer, conducting said sale, shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 24-112. Duties of Recorder of Deeds. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 12]
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as a consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
3. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of the tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
1. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, (P.L.
40, No. 21), the recorder of deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Borough
based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from the Borough.
2. In order to ascertain the amount of the taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the recorder shall not
§ 24-109 EMMAUS CODE § 24-112
FWD:500
§ 24-113. Statement of Value. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 13]
Every document lodged with or presented to the recorder of deeds for
recording, shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax
under this Part. A copy of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Statement
of Value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this Part.
§ 24-114. Civil Penalties. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 14]
§ 24-115. Lien. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 15]
The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements
or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying, being situated, wholly or
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
3. On or before the tenth of each month, the recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The 2% commission shall be paid to
the county.
4. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the recorder shall rerecord the deed or
record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the state
and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
1. If any part of any underpayment of taxes imposed by this Part is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
2. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this Part on
the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is due
to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the amount of
such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an additional
5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during which such
failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 24-112 FOREWORD § 24-115
FWD:501
in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands, tenements,
hereditaments or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed
and levied by this Part, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this Part is due and payable, and continue until discharged by payment, or
in accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal
or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Lehigh County, in accordance
with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S.
§ 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 24-116. Enforcement. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 16]
All taxes imposed by this Part together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 24-117. Regulations. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 17]
The Recorder of Deeds of Lehigh County is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this Part.
§ 24-118. Severability. [Ord. 676, 3/2/1987, § 18]
If any sentence, clause, section or part of this Part is for any reason found
to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality
or invalidity shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this Part. It is hereby declared as
the intent of the Borough Council that this Part would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part
thereof not been included herein.
§ 24-115 EMMAUS CODE § 24-118
FWD:502
Part 2
EARNED INCOME TAX
§ 24-201. Definitions. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011, § 1]
ARTICLE XIII TAX OFFICER — The tax officer authorized by the Borough to
collect income taxes levied prior to January 1, 2012.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other undertaking of
an unincorporated nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for
profit whether by a person, partnership, association or any other entity.
BUSINESS ENTITY — A sole proprietorship, corporation, joint-stock
association or company, partnership, limited partnership, limited liability
company, association, business trust, syndicate or other commercial or
professional activity organized under the laws of this Commonwealth or any
other jurisdiction.
CERTIFIED PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT OR PUBLIC ACCOUNTANT — A
certified public accountant, public accountant or firm, as provided for in the
Act of May 26, 1947 (PL. 318, No. 140), known as the "CPA Law."
CLAIM — A written demand for payment made by a tax officer or tax
collection district for income taxes collected by another tax officer or tax
collection district.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint-stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any
other state, territory, foreign country or dependency. The term shall include
an entity which is classified as a corporation for federal income tax
purposes.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Community and Economic
Development of the Commonwealth.
DOMICILE — The place where a person lives and has a permanent home
and to which the person has the intention of returning whenever absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed place
of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent rather than
transitory. Domicile is the voluntarily fixed place of habitation of a person,
not for a mere special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of
making a permanent home, until some event occurs to induce the person to
adopt some other permanent home. In the case of a business, domicile is
that place considered as the center of business affairs and the place where
its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — The compensation as required to be reported to or
as determined by the Department of Revenue under § 303 of the Act of
March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and
rules and regulations promulgated under that Section. Employee business
expenses as reported to or determined by the Department of Revenue
under Article III of the Tax Reform Code of 1971 shall constitute allowable
§ 24-201 FOREWORD § 24-201
FWD:503
deductions in determining earned income. The term does not include offsets
for business losses. The amount of any housing allowance provided to a
member of the clergy shall not be taxable as earned income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX — The tax levied by the
Borough on earned income and net profits.
EMPLOYER — A person, business entity or other entity, employing one
or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation.
The term includes the Commonwealth, a political subdivision and an
instrumentality or public authority of either. For purposes of penalties under
this Part, the term includes a corporate officer.
INCOME TAX — Except as set forth in § 511(b) of the Local Tax Enabling
Act P.L. 1257, Act 511 of 1965, as amended (hereinafter the "LTEA"), 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511 (b), an earned income and net profits tax, personal income tax or
other tax that is assessed on the income of a taxpayer levied by the Borough
under the authority of this act or any other act.
JOINT TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — An entity formed by two or more
tax collection committees for the purpose of income tax collection in more
than one tax collection district.
LTEA — The Pennsylvania Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L. 1257, Act 511 of
1965, as amended.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business, other
than a corporation, as required to be reported to or as determined by the
Department of Revenue under § 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6,
No. 2), 72 P.S. § 7303, known as the "Tax Reform Code of 1971," and rules
and regulations promulgated under that Section. The term does not include
income under any of the following paragraphs:
NONRESIDENT — A person or business domiciled outside the Borough
levying the tax.
NONRESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Borough on
nonresidents.
Income that:
(1) Is not paid for services provided.
(2) Is in the nature of earnings from an investment.
A.
Income that represents:
(1) Any gain on the sale of farm machinery.
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes.
(2)
(3) Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of a farm.
B.
§ 24-201 EMMAUS CODE § 24-201
FWD:504
OFFICIAL REGISTER — The part of the tax register that includes
withholding tax rates as provided in § 511(a)(3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511(a)(3).
PERSON — A natural person.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
PRIVATE AGENCY — A business entity or person appointed as a tax officer
by a tax collection committee.
PUBLIC AGENCY — Any and all public bodies, authorities, agencies,
instrumentalities, political subdivisions, intermediate units, councils,
boards, commissions or similar governmental entities.
RESIDENT — A person or business domiciled in the Borough levying the
tax.
RESIDENT TAX — An income tax levied by the Borough.
RESIDENT TAX OFFICER — The tax officer administering and collecting
income taxes for the tax collection district in which a taxpayer is domiciled.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAX BUREAU — A public nonprofit entity established for the administration
and collection of taxes.
TAX COLLECTION COMMITTEE — The committee established to govern
the Lehigh Tax Collection District for the purpose of income tax collection.
The term shall include a joint tax collection committee.
TAX COLLECTION DISTRICT — The Lehigh Tax Collection District
established under § 504 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.504.
TAX OFFICER — A political subdivision, public employee, tax bureau,
county, except a county of the first class, or private agency which
administers and collects income taxes for one or more tax collection
districts. Unless otherwise specifically provided, for purposes of the
obligations of an employer, the term shall mean the tax officer for the tax
collection district within which the employer is located, or, if an employer
maintains workplaces in more than one district, the tax officer for each such
district with respect to employees principally employed therein.
TAX RECORDS — Tax returns, supporting schedules, correspondence with
auditors or taxpayers, account books and other documents, including
electronic records, obtained or created by the tax officer to administer or
collect a tax under this Part. The term includes documents required by
§ 509(e) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.509(e). The term "electronic records"
includes data and information inscribed on a tangible medium or stored in
an electronic or other medium and which is retrievable in perceivable form.
TAX REGISTER — A database of all county, municipal and school tax rates
available on the internet as provided in § 511(a)(1) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511(a)(1).
TAXABLE INCOME — Includes:
§ 24-201 FOREWORD § 24-201
FWD:505
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this Part to file a return
of an income tax or to pay an income tax.
WITHHOLDING TAX — An income tax levied by a political subdivision under
the authority of this Part or any other ordinance, or any other tax levied
by a municipality or school district for which employer withholding may be
required under this Part.
§ 24-202. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011, § 2]
§ 24-203. Declaration and Payment of Tax. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011,
§ 3]
In the case of an earned income and net profits tax, earned income and
net profits.
A.
In the case of a personal income tax, income enumerated in § 303 of the
act of March 4, 1971 (PL. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code of
1971," 72 P.S. § 7303, as reported to and determined by the Department
of Revenue, subject to correction for fraud, evasion or error, as finally
determined by the Commonwealth.
B.
1. The tax levied under this Part is a continuation of a tax previously
described in the above-referenced "whereas" clauses. The tax
previously imposed and continued under this Part is a tax for general
revenue purposes of 1.0%, and is hereby imposed as follows:
A. Earned income, as defined by this Part, received by residents of the
Borough, on or after January 1, 2012.
B. Earned income, as defined by this Part, received by nonresidents of
the Borough for work done or services performed or rendered in
the Borough on or after January 1, 2012.
C. Net profits, as defined by this Part, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by
residents in the Borough.
D. Net profits, as defined by this Part, earned on or after January 1,
2012, of businesses, professions, and other activities conducted by
nonresidents in the Borough.
2. The tax levied under subsection .1.A and .1.B herein shall relate to and
be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions, and other
compensation paid by an employer or on its behalf to any person who is
employed by or renders services to him. The tax levied under
subsection .1.C and .1.D herein shall relate to and be imposed on the
net profits of any business, profession, or enterprise carried on by any
person as owner or as proprietor, either individually or in association
with some other person or persons.
1. Application.
§ 24-201 EMMAUS CODE § 24-203
FWD:506
A. Income taxes shall be applicable to taxable income earned or
received based on the method of accounting used by the taxpayer
in the period beginning January 1, of the current year and ending
December 31, of the current year, and the tax shall continue in
force on a calendar year or taxpayer fiscal year basis, without
annual reenactment, unless the rate of the tax is subsequently
changed.
B. For a taxpayer whose fiscal year is not a calendar year, the tax
officer shall establish deadlines for filing, reporting and payment of
taxes which provide time periods equivalent to those provided for a
calendar year taxpayer.
C. Partial Domicile. The taxable income subject to tax of a taxpayer
who is domiciled in the Borough for only a portion of the tax year
shall be an amount equal to the taxpayer's taxable income
multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the number of
calendar months during the tax year that the individual is domiciled
in the Borough and the denominator of which is 12. A taxpayer shall
include in the numerator any calendar month during which the
taxpayer is domiciled for more than half the calendar month. A day
that a taxpayer's domicile changes shall be included as a day the
individual is in the new domicile and not the old domicile. If the
number of days in the calendar month in which the individual lived
in the old and new domiciles is equal, the calendar month shall be
included in calculating the number of months in the new domicile.
D. Declaration and Payment. Except as provided in subsection .1.B,
taxpayers shall declare and pay income taxes as follows:
(1) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding
year, make and file with the resident tax officer, a final return
showing the amount of taxable income received during the
period beginning January 1, of the current year and ending
December 31, of the current year, the total amount of tax due
on the taxable income, the amount of tax paid, the amount of
tax that has been withheld under § 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512, and the balance of tax due. All amounts reported
shall be rounded to the nearest whole dollar. At the time of
filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the resident tax
officer the balance of the tax due or shall make demand for
refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Every taxpayer is
required to file a final return showing the amount of earned
income received even if no payment is due and owing.
(2) Every taxpayer making net profits shall, by April 15, of the
current year, make and file with the resident tax officer a
declaration of the taxpayer's estimated net profits during the
period beginning January 1, and ending December 31, of the
current year, and shall pay to the resident tax officer in four
equal quarterly installments the tax due on the estimated net
§ 24-203 FOREWORD § 24-203
FWD:507
profits. The first installment shall be paid at the time of filing
the declaration, and the other installments shall be paid on
or before June 15, of the current year, September 15, of the
current year and January 15, of the succeeding year,
respectively.
(3) Any taxpayer who first anticipates any net profit after April 15,
of the current year shall make and file the declaration required
on or before June 15, of the current year, September 15, of the
current year or December 31, of the current year, whichever
date next follows the date on which the taxpayer first
anticipates such net profit, and shall pay to the resident tax
officer in equal installments the tax due on or before the
quarterly payment dates that remain after the filing of the
declaration.
(4) Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15, of the succeeding
year, make and file with the resident tax officer a final return
showing the amount of net profits earned or received based on
the method of accounting used by the taxpayer during the
period beginning January 1, of the current year, and ending
December 31, of the current year, the total amount of tax due
on the net profits and the total amount of tax paid. At the time
of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay to the resident
tax officer the balance of tax due or shall make demand for
refund or credit in the case of overpayment. Any taxpayer may,
in lieu of paying the fourth quarterly installment of the
estimated tax, elect to make and file with the resident tax
officer on or before January 31, of the succeeding year, the final
return. Every taxpayer is required to file a return showing the
amount of net profits earned or received even if no payment is
due and owing.
(5) The Department, in consultation with the Department of
Revenue, shall provide by regulation for the filing of adjusted
declarations of estimated net profits and for the payments of
the estimated tax in cases where a taxpayer who has filed the
declaration required under this subsection anticipates
additional net profits not previously declared or has
overestimated anticipated net profits.
(6) Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December
31, of the current year, shall, within 30 days after the
discontinuance of business, file a final return as required under
this paragraph and pay the tax due.
(7) Every taxpayer who receives any other taxable income not
subject to withholding under § 512 (3) of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.512 (3), shall make and file with the resident tax officer
a quarterly return on or before April 15, of the current year,
June 15, of the current year, September 15, of the current year,
§ 24-203 EMMAUS CODE § 24-203
FWD:508
§ 24-204. Withholding and Remittance. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011, § 4]
and January 15, of the succeeding year, setting forth the
aggregate amount of taxable income not subject to withholding
by the taxpayer during the three month periods ending March
31, of the current year, June 30, of the current year, September
30, of the current year, and December 31, of the current year,
respectively, and subject to income tax, together with such
other information as the Department may require. Every
taxpayer filing a return shall, at the time of filing the return,
pay to the resident tax officer the amount of income tax due.
In accordance with criteria established by the Department, the
tax officer may waive the quarterly return and payment of the
income tax and permit a taxpayer to file the receipt of taxable
income on the taxpayer's annual return and pay the income tax
due on or before April 15, of the succeeding year.
1. For taxable years commencing on and after January 1, 2012, income
taxes shall be withheld, remitted and reported as follows:
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse, or other place of business within the tax collection
district which employs one or more persons, other than domestic
servants, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation,
who has not previously registered, shall, within 15 days after
becoming an employer, register with the tax officer the name and
address of the employer and such other information as the officer
may require.
B. An employer shall require each new employee to complete a
certificate of residency form, which shall be an addendum to the
Federal Employee's Withholding Allowance Certificate (Form W-4).
An employer shall also require any employee who changes their
address or domicile to complete a certificate of residency form. The
certificate of residency form shall provide information to help
identify the political subdivision where an employee lives and
works. Forms of certificate of residency may be obtained by an
employer from the Department upon request by an employer.
C. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch,
warehouse or other place of business within a tax collection district
that employs one or more persons, other than domestic servants,
far a salary, wage, commission or other compensation, shall at the
time of payment, deduct from the compensation due each employee
employed at such place of business the greater of the employee's
resident tax or the employee's nonresident tax as released in the
official register under § 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.511.
D. Except as set forth in paragraph .E, within 30 days following the
end of each calendar quarter, every employer shall file a quarterly
return and pay the amount of income taxes deducted during the
§ 24-203 FOREWORD § 24-204
FWD:509
preceding calendar quarter to the tax officer for the place of
employment of each employee. The form shall show the name,
address and Social Security number of each employee, the
compensation of the employee during the preceding three-month
period, the income tax deducted from the employee, the political
subdivision imposing the income tax upon the employee, the total
compensation of all employees during the preceding calendar
quarter, the total income tax deducted from the employees and
paid with the return and any other information prescribed by the
Department.
E. Notwithstanding paragraph .D, the provisions of this paragraph
shall apply if an employer has more than one place of employment
in more than one tax collection district. Within 30 days following
the last day of each month, the employer may file the return
required by paragraph .D and pay the total amount of income taxes
deducted from employees in all work locations during the
preceding month to the tax officer for either the tax collection
district in which the employer's payroll operations are located or as
determined by the department. The return and income taxes
deducted shall be filed and paid electronically. The employer must
file a notice of intention to file combined returns and make
combined payments with the tax officer for each place of
employment at least one month before filing its first combined
return or making its first combined payment. This paragraph shall
not be construed to change the location of an employee's place of
employment for purposes of nonresident tax liability.
F. Any employer who, for two of the preceding four quarterly periods,
has failed to deduct the proper income tax, or any part of the
income tax, or has failed to pay over the proper amount of income
tax as required by paragraph .C to the tax collection district, may
be required by the tax officer to file returns and pay the income tax
monthly. In such cases, payments of income tax shall be made to
the tax officer on or before the last day of the month succeeding the
month for which the income tax was withheld.
G. On or before February 28, of the succeeding year, every employer
shall file with the tax officer where income taxes have been
deducted and remitted pursuant to paragraph .C:
(1) An annual return showing, for the period beginning January 1,
of the current year and ending December 31, of the current
year, the total amount of compensation paid, the total amount
of income tax deducted, the total amount of income tax paid to
the tax officer and any other information prescribed by the
Department.
(2) An individual withholding statement, which may be integrated
with the Federal Wage and Tax Statement (Form W-2), for each
employee employed during all or any part of the period
§ 24-204 EMMAUS CODE § 24-204
FWD:510
§ 24-205. Powers and Duties of Tax Officer. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011,
§ 5]
beginning January 1, of the current year and ending December
31, of the current year, setting forth the address and Social
Security number, the amount of compensation paid to the
employee during the period, the amount of income tax
deducted, the amount of income tax paid to the tax officer,
the numerical code prescribed by the department representing
the tax collection district where the payments required by
paragraphs .D and .E were remitted and any other information
required by the department. Every employer shall furnish one
copy of the individual withholding statement to the employee
for whom it is filed.
H. Any employer who discontinues business prior to December 31, of
the current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of
business, file returns and withholding statements required under
this section and pay the income tax due.
I. Except as otherwise provided in § 511 of the LTEA, 53 P.S.
§ 6924.511, an employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits
to make the deductions required by this subsection shall be liable
for payment of income taxes which the employer was required to
withhold to the extent that the income taxes have not been
recovered from the employee. The failure or omission of any
employer to make the deductions required by this section shall not
relieve any employee from the payment of the income tax or from
complying with the requirements for filing of declaration and
returns.
1. Tax Collection. In addition to any other power and duty conferred upon
a tax officer in this Part or by law, it shall be the duty of the tax officer:
A. To collect, reconcile, administer and enforce income taxes imposed
on residents and nonresidents in the Borough included in the tax
collection district.
B. To receive and distribute income taxes and to enforce withholding
by employers located in the tax collection district.
C. To receive income taxes distributed by tax officers for other tax
collection districts.
D. To distribute income taxes to the Borough as required by § 513 of
the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.513.
E. To comply with all regulations adopted by the Borough under this
Part and all resolutions, policies and procedures adopted by the tax
collection committee.
§ 24-204 FOREWORD § 24-205
FWD:511
F. To invest all income taxes in the custody of the tax officer in
authorized investments, subject to the approval of the tax
collection committee. The tax officer shall observe the standard of
care that would be observed by a prudent person dealing with
property of another.
For the purposes of this paragraph, the term "authorized
investment" shall include all of the following:
(1) Short-term obligations of the United States Government or its
agencies or instrumentalities which are backed by the full faith
and credit of the United States or are rated in the highest
category by a nationally recognized statistical rating
organization.
(2) Deposits in savings accounts, time deposits, share accounts or
certificates of deposit of institutions, insured by the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union
Share Insurance Fund, or their successor agencies, to the
extent that the accounts are insured and, for the amount above
the insured maximum, that collateral, free from other liens, for
the amount is pledged by the depository institution.
(3) Deposits in investment pools established by the State
Treasurer or established by local governments pursuant to 53
Pa.C.S.A., Ch. 23, Subchapter A (relating to intergovernmental
cooperation) and related statutes, provided that the
investment pools are rated in the highest category by a
nationally recognized statistical rating organization.
(4) Repurchase agreements which are fully collateralized by
obligations of the United States Government or its agencies or
instrumentalities, which are free from other liens and backed
by the full faith and credit of the United States or are rated in
the highest category by a nationally recognized statistical
rating organization.
G. To distribute income generated from investments authorized under
paragraph .F as determined by the tax collection committee.
2. Monthly Reports. The tax officer shall, within 20 days after the end of
each month, provide a written report, on forms prescribed by the
Department, to the secretary of the tax collection committee and to the
Secretary of the Borough for which taxes were collected during the
previous month. The report shall include a breakdown of all income
taxes; income generated from investments under subsection 1.F,
penalties, costs and other money received, collected, expended and
distributed for each political subdivision served by the tax officer and of
all money distributed to tax officers for other tax collection districts.
3. Overpayments. A tax officer shall refund, under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8425
(relating to refunds of overpayments) and § 8426 (relating to interest on
§ 24-205 EMMAUS CODE § 24-205
FWD:512
overpayment), on petition of and proof by the taxpayer, income taxes
paid in excess of income taxes rightfully due.
4. Bonds. Prior to initiating any official duties, each tax officer shall give
and acknowledge a bond to the appointing tax collection committee as
follows:
A. The tax collection committee shall fix the amount of the bond in an
amount equal to the maximum amount of taxes that may be in the
possession of the tax officer at any given time or an amount
sufficient, in combination with fiscal controls, insurance and other
risk management and loss prevention measures used by the tax
collection district, to secure the financial responsibility of the tax
officer in accordance with guidelines adopted by the department.
The amount of the bond shall be revised annually by the tax
collection committee based upon the annual examination required
under § 505(h) of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.505(h).
B. Each bond shall be joint and several, with one or more corporate
sureties, which shall be surety companies authorized to do business
in this Commonwealth and licensed by the Insurance Department.
C. Each bond shall be conditioned upon the completion of all of the
following by the tax officer's employees and appointees:
(1) The faithful execution of all duties required of the tax officer.
(2) The just and faithful accounting or payment over of all moneys
and balances paid to, received or held by the tax officer by
virtue of the office in accordance with law.
(3) The delivery of all tax records or other official items held in
right as the tax officer to the tax officer's successor in office.
D. Each bond shall be taken in the name of the tax collection district
and shall be for the use of the tax collection district appointing the
tax officer, and for the use of any other political subdivision or tax
collection district for which income taxes shall be collected or
distributed in case of a breach of any conditions of the bond by the
acts or neglect of the principal on the bond.
E. The tax collection committee or any political subdivision may sue
upon the bond for the payment or distribution of income taxes.
F. Each bond shall contain the name of the surety company bound on
the bond.
G. The tax collection committee may, upon cause shown and due
notice to the tax officer and the tax officer's sureties, require or
allow the substitution or the addition of a surety company
acceptable to the tax collection committee for the purpose of
making the bond sufficient in amount, without releasing the
§ 24-205 FOREWORD § 24-205
FWD:513
sureties first approved from any accrued liability or previous action
on the bond.
H. The tax collection committee shall designate the custodian of the
bond.
I. The tax officer shall file copies of all bonds in effect with the
Borough.
J. A copy of all bonds in effect shall be made available upon request
and at no cost to the Department or to a tax collection district or
political subdivision seeking payment or distribution of income
taxes authorized by this Part.
5. Records. It shall be the duty of the tax officer to keep a record showing
the amount of income taxes received from each taxpayer or other tax
officer, the date of receipt, the amount and date of all other moneys
received or distributed and any other information required by the
department. All tax records shall be the property of the Borough and
the tax collection district in which the taxes were collected. The tax
collection district and tax officer shall retain all tax records as directed
by the tax collection committee and, when applicable, in accordance
with retention and disposition schedules established by the Local
Government Records Committee of the Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission under 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 13 Subchapter F (relating
to records). Tax records under this subsection may be retained
electronically as permitted by law.
6. Employer and Taxpayer Audits.
A. In order to verify the accuracy of any income tax declaration or
return or, if no declaration or return was filed, to ascertain the
income tax due, the tax officer and the tax officer's designated
employees may examine or audit the records pertaining to income
taxes due of any of the following:
(1) An employer.
(2) A taxpayer.
(3) A person whom the tax officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer.
B. The examination or audit conducted by the tax officer and the tax
officer's designated employees shall conform to the requirements
set forth in the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421
et seq.
C. Every employer and taxpayer or other person whom the tax officer
reasonably believes to be an employer or taxpayer shall provide to
the tax officer and the tax officer's designated employees the
means, facilities and opportunity for the examination and
investigation authorized under paragraph .A.
§ 24-205 EMMAUS CODE § 24-205
FWD:514
D. For purposes of this subsection, the term "records" shall include
any books, papers and relevant federal or state tax returns and
accompanying schedules, or supporting documentation for any
income taxable under this Part.
7. Exchange of Information.
A. The tax officer shall ensure that the tax collection district enters
into an agreement with the Department of Revenue for the
exchange of information as necessary for the collection of income
taxes.
B. The Department of Revenue may enter into agreements with each
tax collection district and shall establish procedures under which
tax collection, filing and other taxpayer and locality information in
its custody will be made available to tax officers for purposes of
collection, reconciliation and enforcement no later than one year
after the deadline for filing returns for the tax year in question.
8. Actions for Collection of Income Taxes. The tax officer may file an action
in the name of the Borough for the recovery of income taxes due to the
Borough and unpaid. Nothing in this subsection shall affect the
authority of the Borough to file an action in its own name for collection
of income taxes under this Part. This subsection shall not be construed
to limit a tax officer, a tax collection district or the Borough from
recovering delinquent income taxes by any other means provided by
this Part. Actions for collection of income taxes shall be subject to the
following:
A. Except as set forth in the ensuing paragraphs .B or .D, an action
brought to recover income taxes must be commenced within three
years of the later of the date:
(1) The income taxes are due.
(2) The declaration or return has been filed.
(3) Of a redetermination of compensation or net profits by the
Department of Revenue.
B. If there is substantial understatement of income tax liability of 25%
or more and there is no fraud, an action must be commenced within
six years.
C. Except as set forth in the ensuing paragraph .D.(2), (3), or (4), an
action by a tax officer for recovery of an erroneous refund must be
commenced as follows:
(1) Except as set forth in the following subparagraph (2), within
two years after making the refund.
§ 24-205 FOREWORD § 24-205
FWD:515
(2) If it appears that any part of the refund was induced by fraud
or misrepresentation of material fact, within five years after
making the refund.
D. There is no limitation of action if any of the following apply:
(1) A taxpayer fails to file a declaration or return required under
this Part.
(2) An examination of a declaration or return or of other evidence
in the possession of the tax officer relating to the declaration or
return reveals a fraudulent evasion of income taxes.
(3) An employer has deducted income taxes under § 512 of the
LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, and has failed to pay the amount
deducted by the tax officer.
(4) An employer has intentionally failed to make deductions
required by this Part.
9. Interest and Penalties.
A. Except as provided in the following paragraph .B, if the income tax
is not paid when due, interest at the rate the taxpayer is required to
pay to the Commonwealth under § 806 of the act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176), known as the Fiscal Code, 72 P.S. § 806, on the
amount of the income tax, and an additional penalty of 1% of the
amount of the unpaid income tax for each month or fraction of a
month during which the income tax remains unpaid shall be added
and collected but the amount shall not exceed 15% in the
aggregate. Where an action is brought for the recovery of the
income tax, the taxpayer liable for the income tax shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection, interest and penalties.
B. The Department may establish conditions under which a tax officer,
with the concurrence of the tax collection committee, may abate
interest or penalties that would otherwise be imposed for the
nonreporting or underreporting of income tax liabilities or for the
nonpayment of income taxes previously imposed and due if the
taxpayer voluntarily files delinquent returns and pays the income
taxes in full.
C. The provisions of paragraph .B shall not affect or terminate any
petitions, investigations, prosecutions or other proceedings
pending under this Part, or prevent the commencement or further
prosecution of any proceedings by the proper authorities for
violations of this Part. No proceedings shall, however, be
commenced on the basis of delinquent returns filed pursuant to
subsection .8 if the returns are determined to be substantially true
and correct and the income taxes are paid in full within the
prescribed time.
§ 24-205 EMMAUS CODE § 24-205
FWD:516
10. Fines and Penalties for Violations.
A. Any taxpayer who fails, neglects or refuses to make any declaration
or return required by this Part, any employer who fails, neglects or
refuses to register, keep or supply records or returns required by
§ 512 of the LTEA, 53 P.S. § 6924.512, or to pay the income tax
deducted from employees, or fails, neglects or refuses to deduct or
withhold the income tax from employees, any taxpayer or employer
who refuses to permit the tax officer appointed by a tax collection
committee or an employee or agent of the tax officer to examine
books, records and papers, and any taxpayer or employer who
knowingly makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return, or
attempts to do anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of
the amount of income in order to avoid the payment of income
taxes shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $2,500 for each offense and reasonable costs, and in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment for not
more than six months.
B. Any employer required under this Part to collect, account for and
distribute income taxes who willfully fails to collect or truthfully
account for and distribute income taxes, commits a misdemeanor
and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$25,000 or to imprisonment not exceeding two years, or both.
C. The penalties imposed under this subsection shall be in addition to
any other costs and penalties imposed by this Part.
D. The failure of any person to obtain forms required for making the
declaration or returns required by this Part shall not excuse the
person from making the declaration or return.
11. Costs. The tax officer shall be entitled to impose and collect the
reasonable costs incurred to provide notices of delinquency or to
implement similar procedures utilized to collect delinquent taxes from a
taxpayer as approved by the tax collection committee. Reasonable costs
collected may be retained by the tax officer. An itemized accounting of
all costs collected shall be remitted to the tax collection committee on
an annual basis.
12. Appeals and Tax Officer Actions. A determination of the tax officer
relating to the assessment, collection, refund, withholding, remittance
or distribution of income taxes may be appealed to the appeals board
established by the tax collection committee by a taxpayer, employer,
political subdivision or another tax collection district pursuant to the
provisions of § 505(j) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.505(j). Pursuant to
§ 505(k) of Act 32, 53 P.S. § 6924.505(k), any dispute among the
affected parties involving a 10% or greater deviation from taxes
received in the previous tax year shall be subject to mandatory
mediation in accordance with regulations and guidelines adopted by
the Department. A dispute involving less than a 10% threshold may be
§ 24-205 FOREWORD § 24-205
FWD:517
§ 24-206. Compensation of Income Tax Officer. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/
2011, § 6]
The tax officer shall receive such compensation for his services and
expenses as determined by the tax collection committee. At the discretion
of the tax collection committee, the tax officer may be permitted to withhold
the amount of the tax officer's compensation from income taxes collected if
the monthly reports required by § 509(b) of the LTEA, submitted by the tax
officer include an accounting for all compensation withheld.
§ 24-207. Applicability. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011, § 7]
the subject of voluntary mediation in accordance with regulations and
guidelines adopted by the Department.
13. Confidentiality.
A. General Rule. Any information gained by a tax officer or any
employee or agent of a tax officer or of the tax collection committee
as a result of any declarations, returns, investigations, hearings or
verifications shall be confidential tax information.
B. Prohibited Conduct. It shall be unlawful, except for official
purposes or as provided by law, for the Commonwealth, the
Borough, tax collection committee member, tax officer or employee
or agent of a tax officer or tax collection committee to do any of the
following:
(1) Divulge or make known confidential tax information.
(2) Permit confidential tax information or a book containing an
abstract or particulars of the abstract to be seen or examined
by any person.
(3) Print, publish or otherwise make known any confidential tax
information.
C. Penalties. A person who violates paragraph .B commits a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $2,500 or to imprisonment
for not more than one year, or both. If the offender is a member of
the tax collection committee, the member shall be removed from
the tax collection committee. If the offender is an employee of a tax
collection committee or the Borough the employee shall be
discharged from employment. The offender shall pay the costs of
prosecution.
1. The tax imposed by this Part shall not apply:
A. To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the
Borough to impose the tax herein provided under the Constitution
§ 24-205 EMMAUS CODE § 24-207
FWD:518
§ 24-208. Effective Date, Repealer, Conflict. [Ord. 1079, 7/18/2011,
§ 9]
of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. To institutions or organizations operated for public, religious,
educational, or charitable purposes, to institutions or organizations
not organized or operated for private profit, or to trusts and
foundations established for any of the said purposes.
2. This Section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax source from his employees
and paying the amount collected to the tax officer under the provisions
of § 24-204 of this Part.
1. The provisions of this Part shall take effect on January 1, 2012, and shall
apply to earned income and net profits received or earned income and
net profits earned or made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and
each year thereafter without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax
is subsequently changed. Changes in the rate of tax shall become
effective on the date specified in the Ordinance.
2. Nothing contained herein shall be considered to repeal by implication
or otherwise the provisions of any earned income tax ordinance(s)
previously enacted or adopted on as it may apply to earned income and
net profits of taxpayers prior to the effective date of this Part, which
shall remain in full force and effect with respect to such earned income
and net profits.
3. Subject to valid enactment of this Part without appeal, all provisions of
any prior ordinance or parts thereof inconsistent herewith are hereby
modified, amended, and repealed by the provisions of this Part, which
shall thereafter govern the taxation of such earned income and net
profits.
4. This Part is enacted under authority of the LTEA, and all provisions
thereof that relate to a tax on earned income or net profits are
incorporated into this Part. Any future amendments to the LTEA that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this Part upon the effective date of such
amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this Part, to the
maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
§ 24-207 FOREWORD § 24-208
FWD:519

Part 3
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE TAX
§ 24-301. Definitions. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 1]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for the
purpose of this Part, the meaning herein indicated:
AMUSEMENT GAME — Any mechanical, electric, or electronic device used
as designed to be operated for entertainment as a game by the insertion of
a piece of money, coin, token or other article, or by paying money to have
it activated. Provided: that it shall not include any gambling device or any
mechanism that has been judicially determined to be a gambling device.
DEVICE — Any juke box and/or mechanical amusement device taxable
under this Part.
JUKE BOX — Any music vending machine upon which the insertion of a coin,
slug, token, plate, disc, or key into any slot, crevice, or other opening, for
the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a juke box,
which, upon insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, or disc, may be operated
for use as a game, entertainment, or amusement.
PERSON — Natural person, firm, association, co-partnership, or
corporation (except such corporations as are exempt from taxation under
the Act of Assembly of December 31, 1965, No. 511, and its amendments.
§ 24-302. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 2]
The following taxes are imposed for general Borough purposes:
On each mechanical amusement device or amusement game installed for
use or available for rental within the Borough - $50 per calendar year or
portion thereof.
On each juke box installed for use or available for rental within the Borough
- $25 per calendar year or portion thereof.
The taxes charged in this section can be changed from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council of Emmaus.
§ 24-303. Payment of Tax. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 3]
The taxes imposed under this Part shall be payable to the Borough of
Emmaus by the person operating or managing any device subject to such
tax, unless such tax shall first be paid by the person owning or leasing such
device. In the case of any device installed for use or available for rental on
or before January 3, 1983, such tax shall be payable on or before February
7, 1983, and annually thereafter so long as the device remains installed or
available for rental. In the case of any such device installed for use after
January 3, 1983, such tax shall be payable at the time of installation or first
§ 24-301 FOREWORD § 24-303
FWD:521
rental and thereafter on or before January 3 of each year as long as the
device remains installed or available for rental. Any taxes payable under
this Part after the first day of January of any year shall be at a quarterly
prorated charge of the rates as specified in § 24-302 hereof. No deduction or
refund of any tax under this Part shall be granted in the case of any device
destroyed, stolen, sold, or otherwise disposed, of any payment of said tax.
§ 24-304. Certificates. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 4]
The Borough Manager shall procure, at the expense of the Borough, a
sufficient number of certificates on each of which the following information
shall be printed or inserted in ink or by typewriter: the name of the
Borough, the number of the certificate, the name and address of the person
paying the tax, the year for which the tax shall have been paid, the date
on which the tax shall have been paid, and type of device for which the tax
shall have been paid.
Whenever any tax shall have been paid under this Part, the Borough
Manager shall prepare in duplicate a certificate. The original of such
certificate shall be given to the person paying the tax and shall be kept
available for inspection on the premises by any authorized representative of
the Borough. The duplicate shall be kept on file by the Borough Manager.
In the case of the loss, defacement, or destruction of any original certificate,
the person to whom such certificate was issued shall apply to the Borough
Manager, who may issue a new certificate upon payment of a fee of $5, and
who shall amend the duplicate of the certificate first issued in case that a
new certificate has been issued.
§ 24-305. Confidentiality of Information. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 5]
Any information gained by the Borough Manager or any other official or
agent of the Borough as a result of any returns, investigations, or
verifications required or authorized by this Part shall be confidential, except
for official purposes, and except in accordance with proper judicial order,
or as otherwise provided by law. Any disclosure of any such information,
contrary to the provisions of this section, shall constitute a violation of this
Part.
§ 24-306. Tax Penalties. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, §§ 6, 7]
1. If any tax imposed in pursuance of this Part shall not be paid when due,
a penalty of 10% of the amount of tax due and unpaid shall be added
thereto, plus costs of prosecution and/or collection.
2. All taxes levied by this Part, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Borough Solicitor as other debts of like amount are
recovered.
§ 24-303 EMMAUS CODE § 24-307
FWD:522
§ 24-307. Violation Penalties. [Ord. 648, 2/7/1983, § 8; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
Any person convicted before the appropriate authority of violating or failing
to carry out any of the provisions or requirements of this Part or of
neglecting, failing, or refusing to furnish correct and complete reports or
returns or to pay over any tax levied by this Part at the time required or
of knowingly making any incomplete, false, or fraudulent returns; or for
attempting to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed by this Part, shall be liable to a fine or penalty
not exceeding $300 for each and every offense, and the costs of prosecution
thereof, and/or imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days. All fines
and penalties shall be paid to the Borough of Emmaus.
Provided: that such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this Part.
§ 24-307 FOREWORD § 24-307
FWD:523

Part 4
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 24-401. Authority of Enactment. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 1]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., as hereinafter
amended, supplemented, modified or re-enacted by the General Assembly
of Pennsylvania, and shall take effect January 1, 2008.
§ 24-402. Definitions. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 2]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
COMPENSATION — Salaries, wages, commissions, tips, bonuses, fees,
gross receipts, or any other earned income.
EMMAUS BOROUGH — The area within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Emmaus.
EMPLOYER — Any person, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, governmental
agency, or any other body engaged in business or situated in the Borough,
employing one or more employees engaging in the occupation other than
domestic servants.
MILITARY SERVICE-CONNECTED DISABILITY — A military serviceconnected
disability declared by the United States Veterans' Administration
or its successor to be a total 100% permanent disability.
OCCUPATION — Any livelihood, job, trade, profession, business or
enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or other, for which
monetary compensation is received or charged.
RESERVE UNIT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve,
United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this Part. The
pro rata share of the tax assessed on a person for a payroll period shall be
determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services tax levied
for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods established by the
employer for the calendar year.
TAX COLLECTOR — An agency or person designated by Borough Council to
collect the local services tax.
TAXPAYER — Any natural person liable for the tax levied by this Part.
§ 24-403. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 3]
A tax for general revenue purposes, in the amount of $52, is hereby imposed
upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the Borough in the
§ 24-401 FOREWORD § 24-403
FWD:525
year after the effective date of this Part, and in each following calendar year.
Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any length of time in
any calendar year beginning with the year as of the effective date of this
Part, shall pay the tax in accordance with the provisions hereof; provided,
the tax hereby levied shall not be imposed upon any natural person whose
total income during the taxable year is less than $12,000. Also exempted
from the imposition of tax hereby levied are any person who have been
declared as having a military service-connected permanent disability, and
any person who serves as a member of an armed forces reserve unit and
is called to active duty during the taxable year. A person seeking to claim
an exemption from the tax levied herein may annually file an exemption
certificate with the Borough and with the person's employer affirming that
the person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate is filed. The exemption certificate
will be provided through the person's employer for the fiscal year for which
the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax hereby levied.
§ 24-404. Collection Through Employers. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007,
§ 4]
1. Each employer shall register with the tax collector the employer's
name, address and other information the tax collector may require
within 15 days after the effective date of this Part or within 15 days
after first becoming an employer.
2. For each taxpayer employed for any length of time after the effective
date of this Part and on or before March 31 of the current tax year, each
employer shall deduct that pro rata portion of the full tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer on the form prescribed by the tax
collector and pay to the tax collector said amount deducted on or before
April 30 of the current tax year. The tax shall be deducted and collected
on a pro rata basis and paid to the tax collector on a quarterly basis. For
each taxpayer for whom no prior deduction has been made, who is
employed after the effective date of this Part and in any of the three
month periods ending June 30, September 30, and December 31 of the
current tax year, each employer shall deduct that pro rata portion of the
full tax from compensation payable to the taxpayer, file a return on a
form prescribed by the tax collector, and pay said collector that portion
of the full amount of the taxes deducted, on or before July 31, or
October 31, of the current tax year, or January 31 of the following year,
respectively.
3. Any employer who discontinues business or ceases operation before
December 31 of any year during which this tax is in effect, shall file the
return hereinabove required and pay the tax to the tax collector, within
15 days after discontinuing business or ceasing operations.
4. The failure of any employer to deduct the tax shall not relieve the
employee from the duty to file a return and pay the tax. Any employer
who fails to deduct the tax as required by this section, or who fails to
§ 24-403 EMMAUS CODE § 24-404
FWD:526
§ 24-405. Direct Payment Taxpayers. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 5]
Every taxpayer who is self-employed or whose tax for any other reason
is not collected under § 24-404 of this Part shall file a return on a form
prescribed by the tax collector and shall pay that portion of the full amount
of the tax herein levied to said collector on a quarterly basis. Each taxpayer
who first becomes subject to the tax after the effective date of this Part,
and on or before March 31 of the current tax year, shall file a return and
pay that portion of the full amount of the tax on or before April 30 of the
current tax year, and shall file a return and pay the remaining portions of
the full tax each following quarter of that tax year. Each such taxpayer who
first becomes subject to the tax after March 31 of the current tax year, shall
file a return and pay that portion of the full tax on or before July 31 of the
current tax year, and on or before October 31 of the current tax year, and
on or before January 31 of the following year, whichever of such payment
dates first occurs at least 30 days after the taxpayer becomes subject to the
tax.
§ 24-406. Nonresident Taxpayers. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 6]
Both residents and non resident taxpayers shall, by virtue of engaging in an
occupation within the Borough, be subject to the tax and the provisions of
this Part.
§ 24-407. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007,
§ 7]
The tax collector shall collect and receive the taxes, interest, fines and
penalties imposed by this Part, and shall maintain records showing the
amounts received and the dates such amounts were received. The tax
collector shall prescribe and issue all forms necessary for the
administration of the tax and may adopt and enforce regulations relating to
any matter pertaining to the administration of this Part. The tax collector
and/or agent designated by him/her may examine the records of any
employer and/or supposed employer or of any taxpayer in order to ascertain
the tax due or verify the accuracy of any return. Every employer or
supposed employer and every taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall give the
pay such tax to the tax collector, shall be liable for such tax in full,
without deduction of the commission hereinafter provided, as though
the tax had originally been levied against such employer.
5. As to employees who present official receipts evidencing prior payment
of the tax imposed hereby either directly or by collection through
employers, the employer shall not deduct the tax but shall maintain
adequate records concerning such employees.
6. Each employer may deduct and retain a commission equal to 2% of the
total amount of tax collected through the employer pursuant to this
section, or on any delinquent amount collected and paid over to the tax
collector.
§ 24-404 FOREWORD § 24-407
FWD:527
tax collector and any agent designated by him/her all means, facilities and
opportunity for the examinations hereby authorized.
§ 24-408. Collection. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 8]
The tax collector shall by written notice and demand, and subsequently by
suit if necessary, collect and recover the taxes, interest, costs and penalties
due under this Part and unpaid. If for any reason any tax is not paid when
due, interest at the rate of 6% per year on the amount of the unpaid taxes,
and an additional penalty of 10% on the amount due. Upon presentation of a
written notice and demand for payment from the tax collector, the taxpayer
or employer must pay or deduct and pay over to the tax collector within 60
days from the notice. Whenever suit is brought for the recovery of unpaid
tax, the taxpayer shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection as
well as for interest and penalties. The tax collector may accept payment
under protest of the tax claim by the Borough in any case where any person
disputes the claim for the tax. If a court of competent jurisdiction thereafter
decides that there has been an overpayment to the taxpayer, the taxpayer
shall refund the amount of the overpayment to the person who paid under
protest. Any action instituted for such judicial determination shall be filed
within two years of the last day of the period for which the tax is disputed
or claim made. All refunds shall be made in conformity with the procedure
prescribed by the Borough Council.
§ 24-409. Penalties. [Ord. 1031, 10/15/2007, § 9]
Any employer or taxpayer who makes a false or untrue statement on any
return required by this Part, who refuses inspection of his records in his
custody or control setting forth his employee subject to this tax, who fails
or refuses to file a return required by this Part, or who violates any other
provisions of this Part, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to be
pay a fine no more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
§ 24-407 EMMAUS CODE § 24-409
FWD:528
Part 5
PER CAPITA TAX
§ 24-501. Authority for Enactment. [Ord. 325, 2/20/1956; as
amended by Ord. 504, 12/26/1973; and as revised by Ord. 675, 11/
17/1986]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. §§ 6901 et seq. (1982) as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 24-502. "Resident" Defined. [Ord. 325, 2/20/1956; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
The word "resident" as used in this Part shall mean every adult 18 years or
older who lives within the Borough.
§ 24-503. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 325, 2/20/1956; as revised by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; by Ord. 687, 11/16/1987; and by Ord. 944, 12/
27/2001]
Every resident shall pay $10 for the present calendar year and each year
hereafter.
§ 24-504. Collection. [Ord. 325, 2/20/1956; as revised by Ord. 675,
11/17/1986]
All taxes, interests, costs and penalties imposed by this Part shall be
collected by the Borough tax collector.
§ 24-501 FOREWORD § 24-504
FWD:529

Part 6
(RESERVED)
§ 24-601. (Reserved).
§ 24-601 FOREWORD § 24-601
FWD:531

Part 7
TAX COLLECTOR
§ 24-701. Tax Collector. [Ord. 742, 1/21/1991, § 1]
The Borough Council of Emmaus hereby appoints the locally-elected Tax
Collector as the Municipal Officer authorized to provide tax certifications
upon request by the public, and hereby authorizes said Tax Collector to
assess, collect and retain, as compensation for providing such service, such
fee as is determined by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 24-701 FOREWORD § 24-701
FWD:533

Part 8
TAXPAYER BILL OF RIGHTS
§ 24-801. Definitions. [Ord. 879, 3/1/1999, § 1]
For purposes of this Part, the terms "eligible tax" and "taxpayer" shall have
the same meanings as provided in 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8422.
§ 24-802. Disclosure Statement. [Ord. 879, 3/1/1999, § 2]
§ 24-803. Requests for Information. [Ord. 879, 3/1/1999, § 3]
1. The Borough Solicitor is hereby authorized and directed to prepare a
disclosure statement in accordance with the provisions of 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8423(a) and this Part. All Borough employees and agents who contact
any taxpayer (orally or in writing) regarding the assessment, audit,
determination, review or collection of an eligible tax shall either:
A. Hand deliver or mail a copy of the disclosure statement to the
taxpayer.
B. Give the notice set forth in 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8423(b) (orally or in
writing, depending on the method of contacting the taxpayer).
1. Response. A taxpayer must respond to a request for information (within
the meaning of 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8424(a)) within 30 calendar days after the
date of the request, unless a longer period of time is specifically set
forth in the request.
2. Verification. All responses to requests for information shall be
accompanied by a statement that the information presented is true,
correct, and complete to the best of the taxpayer's knowledge,
information and belief, subject to the penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904
(relating to unsworn falsifications to authorities).
3. Extensions. If a taxpayer believes that there is a good reason why he/
she will be unable to respond to a request for information by the
deadline (or by the end of any previously granted extension), he/she
may request a reasonable extension. The request must be directed to
the Borough Manager (or his/her delegate), and may be made either by
phone, in writing, or in person to the Office of the Borough Manager.
The Borough must receive the request no later than 15 calendar days
before the deadline for the response (or, if later within five calendar
days after the taxpayer receives the request for information). The
Borough Manager may grant a reasonable extension if he/she feels the
taxpayer has a good reason for it. If the taxpayer is not satisfied with
the decision of the Borough Manager, the taxpayer may appeal the
decision to Borough Council by filing a petition for reconsideration
under § 24-804 of this Part.
§ 24-801 FOREWORD § 24-803
FWD:535
§ 24-804. Administrative Appeals. [Ord. 879, 3/1/1999, § 4]
4. Action Against Taxpayer. The Borough shall take no lawful action
against a taxpayer for any tax and for any tax period for which a request
for information to the taxpayer is outstanding until the expiration of the
applicable response period, including extensions.
1. Petition for Reassessment. Any taxpayer who desires to challenge or
dispute any assessment or determination by the Borough of am eligible
tax against the taxpayer, and of any interest or penalties on an eligible
tax, must file a written petition for reassessment with the Borough
Council within 90 days after the date the assessment notice was mailed
to the taxpayer.
2. Petition for Refund. Any taxpayer who believes he/she overpaid any
eligible tax and is entitled to a refund, may file a written petition for
refund with the Borough Council. The petition must be filed no later
than the following deadlines, even if the taxpayer has filed a request for
a refund with the tax collector and not yet received a response:
A. If a return or report is required for the particular tax, the deadline
is the later of:
(1) Three years after the due date of the return or report
(including extensions); or
(2) One year after the actual payment of the tax.
B. If no return or report is required, the deadline is the later of
(1) Three years after the due date for payment of the tax; or
(2) One year after the actual payment of the tax.
3. Petition for Reconsideration. Any taxpayer who desires to appeal a
decision of the Borough Manager denying or limiting the taxpayer's
request for an extension of time to respond to a Borough request for tax
information must file a written petition for reconsideration with the
Borough Council within five days after the date of the Borough
Manager's decision.
4. Requirements for Petitions. A petition under this section need not be in
any particular form, but must include a concise statement of all the
reasons supporting the application. A petition for reassessment or
reconsideration must also include a copy of the assessment or decision
being appealed. A petition is considered "filed" on the date it is
delivered to the office of the Borough Manager, or the date that the
letter/envelope transmitting it (and bearing sufficient postage) is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service for delivery to the
Office of the Borough Manager.
5. Review by Council. A petition under this section shall be considered by
Borough Council in executive session. Borough Council shall not
§ 24-803 EMMAUS CODE § 24-804
FWD:536
§ 24-805. Compliance with the Act. [Ord. 879, 3/1/1999, § 5]
All Borough officers, agents and employees who have any responsibility for
the audit, assessment, determination or administration of an eligible tax,
including persons having any contact with taxpayers in that regard, shall
familiarize themselves with the requirements of the Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8421-8438 and this Part, and shall comply with
them at all times.
conduct a formal hearing, and no stenographic or other record shall
be made of the executive session. The process shall be a "review
and decision" under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8430(2) and not a "hearing and
decision." However, the taxpayer shall be given the opportunity,
personally or through counsel, to present relevant, nonrepetitious
evidence, without regard to formal rules of evidence, and to present
argument in support of the taxpayer's position. Borough officers,
employees, or agents may also present evidence and argument in
support of the assessment or decision, or in opposition to the relief
requested. Cross-examination shall only be permitted in the discretion
of Borough Council.
6. Decision. Borough Council shall render a decision on a petition and mail
a written decision to the taxpayer within 60 calendar days after the date
a complete and accurate Petition is received by the Borough. The
decision need not contain any findings of fact or conclusions of law. If
Borough Council fails to act within that time, the Petition shall be
deemed approved.
§ 24-804 FOREWORD § 24-805
FWD:537

Part 9
INSTALLMENT PAYMENT OF REAL ESTATE TAXES
§ 24-901. Installment Payment of Real Estate Taxes. [Ord. 1043, 12/
15/2008]
1. Real estate taxes levied against a resident in the Borough of Emmaus
shall be due and payable to the tax collector as follows:
A. Real estate taxes pertaining to a calendar year, beginning with
2009, shall be due and payable, either in full or by installment
payments in the manner set forth herein.
B. In the event that a resident taxpayer desires to pay his or her real
estate taxes on an installment basis, the first such payment without
any discount will be due on or before May 31 of the calendar year;
with the second payment without any discount being due on or
before July 31 of the calendar year; and the third payment without
any discount shall be due on or before September 30 of the
calendar year.
C. Only homesteads are eligible to make installment payments.
D. Should a resident taxpayer fail to make an installment payment by
the designated date as set forth herein, a penalty of 10% shall be
added to the payment that is due and owing, which shall then be
collected by the tax collector.
E. Should a resident taxpayer fail to pay on the installment basis on
the first date provided herein, his or her taxes shall become due
and payable in full and shall be collected as provided by law,
subject to any discounts and penalties provided under the law.
2. The provisions of this Part shall become effective on and be applicable
to the Borough of Emmaus real estate tax levied by the Borough Council
beginning with the calendar year 2009, and continuing each year
thereafter.
§ 24-901 FOREWORD § 24-901
FWD:539

Part 10
BUSINESS PRIVILEGE TAX
§ 24-1001. Definitions. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § I]
BOROUGH — Borough of Emmaus.
BUSINESS — Engaging in any manner of commerce for gain or profit,
or engaging in any occupation, trade, profession, business, vocation or
commercial activity for gain or profit. An entity that is registered under
the Internal Revenue Code as a Section 501(c)(3) nonprofit corporation and
any local, state, or federal government or any agency thereof shall not be
considered a business for the purposes of this Part.
TAX COLLECTOR — The Tax Collector elected to serve the Borough of
Emmaus.
§ 24-1002. Determination of Applicability of Business Privilege Tax.
[Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § II]
Any business, person, partnership, corporation, or other legally recognized
entity that advertises an address or telephone number located in the
Borough or which maintains a place of business within the Borough,
whether such business is at a fixed commercial location, or is a homebased
business or occupation, shall be deemed to be doing business within
the Borough for the purposes of this Part, but any person or entity that
believes that it is not so engaged may appeal to the Borough Council for
a determination of its status. A temporary, seasonal, or itinerant business
shall not be responsible for paying the business privilege tax.
§ 24-1003. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § III]
For the tax year beginning January 1, 2010, and each year thereafter, every
entity that is doing business in the Borough of Emmaus shall be responsible
to pay a business privilege tax as set forth in this Part, and shall follow all
registration requirements as set forth in this Part.
§ 24-1004. Registration Required. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § IV]
1. Every business, as defined herein, shall complete a registration form in
the form as prepared by the Borough, and shall file the form in the
Office of the Borough Manager. A business need only complete one
form, which form shall remain on file in the Office of the Borough
Manager, and need not be renewed on an annual or any other basis. The
business shall notify the Borough if it changes its address within the
Borough or moves out of the Borough.
2. If the Borough Council learns of any entity doing business in the
Borough without having registered as required by this section, it shall
forward the name and address of the entity to the Tax Collector, who
shall add the business to the database of businesses in the Borough,
§ 24-1001 FOREWORD § 24-1004
FWD:541
§ 24-1005. Amount; Time of Payment. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § V]
§ 24-1006. Powers and Duties of Tax Collector. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/
2010, § VI]
and shall ascertain and collect such business privilege tax that should
have been paid.
3. If the Tax Collector learns of any entity doing business within the
Borough without having registered with the Tax Collector, then the Tax
Collector shall transmit the name and address of the entity to the
Borough Council, which shall direct the Tax Collector to add the
business to the database of businesses in the Borough.
1. Every entity engaging in a business that makes such entity obligated to
pay the business privilege tax shall pay the tax for the tax year
beginning January 1, 2010, and each year thereafter in the amount of
$150. The business privilege tax shall be due on or before April 1 of
each calendar year, and bills for the tax shall be mailed by the Tax
Collector to the taxpayer at least 60 days to pay the tax before the due
date.
2. If a business opens or otherwise begins operating during a calendar
year, the business shall not be obligated to pay a business privilege tax
for the calendar year in which it commenced operations, but shall be
obligated to pay the tax for the next calendar year and every year
thereafter.
1. The Tax Collector shall collect and receive the taxes, fines, and
penalties imposed by this Part. The Tax Collector shall keep records of
all amounts received from each person paying the tax, including the
date of such receipt.
2. If the Tax Collector is not satisfied with the return and payment of tax
made by any taxpayer under the provisions of this Part, the Tax
Collector is authorized to and empowered to make a determination of
the tax due based upon the facts contained in the return or upon any
information in the Tax Collector's possession or that shall come into the
Tax Collector's possession, and for this purpose the Tax Collector is
authorized to examine the books, papers and records of any such
person to verify the accuracy of any return or payment made under the
provisions thereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed by this
Part have been paid. The Tax Collector is hereby authorized and
directed to make and keep such records, prepare such forms, make
such regulations and take such other measures as may be necessary or
convenient to carry this Part into effect. For such services, the Tax
Collector shall receive a fee of 3% of the taxes collected.
3. If any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer shall neglect or refuse to make
any return and payment of tax by the due date stated herein, or if, as a
result of an investigation by the Tax Collector, a return is found to be
§ 24-1004 EMMAUS CODE § 24-1006
FWD:542
§ 24-1007. Collection; Interest; Nonpayment of Tax. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/
2010, § VII]
§ 24-1008. Disposition of Funds. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § VIII]
All taxes, interest, and penalties collected or received under the provisions
of this Part shall be paid into the treasury for the Borough for the use of the
Borough as it sees fit.
§ 24-1009. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 1064, 1/4/2010, § IX]
Any person, entity, business, profession or anyone else who is obligated to
pay the business privilege tax pursuant to this Part, or any officer, agent,
or employee thereof who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this Part or any regulation or requirement made
pursuant thereto and authorized thereby shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and pay the costs of prosecution
for each offense, to be collected as other fines and costs are by law
collectible. Any fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this Part.
incorrect, the Tax Collector shall estimate the tax due by such entity
and determine the amount due for taxes, penalties and interest thereon.
1. All taxes due and unpaid under this Part shall be collected by the Tax
Collector as other delinquent personal taxes are now collected.
2. All taxes due under this Part shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per
month or fractional part of a month, from the day they are due and
payable until paid. If any taxpayer shall neglect of refuse to make any
return or payment by the due date as herein required, an additional
10% of the amount of the tax shall be added by the Tax Collector and
collected pursuant to this Part.
§ 24-1006 FOREWORD § 24-1009
FWD:543
Chapter 25
TREES
§ 24-1009 EMMAUS CODE § 24-1009
FWD:544
Part 1
SHADE TREE ORDINANCE
§ 25-101. Definitions. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
For the purpose of this Part, the following terms shall have the following
meanings:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Borough of Emmaus Shade Tree
Commission.
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Emmaus,
Pennsylvania.
COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Emmaus, Pennsylvania.
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Public Works of the Borough.
DESIGNEE — Individual designated by the Commission to perform
ministerial acts on behalf of the Commission and pursuant to this Part.
DIRECTOR — The Director of the Department of Public Works of the
Borough.
MANAGER — The Manager of the Borough or his/her designee.
NEW TREE — Any tree planted by the Borough in a public right-of-way,
except a replacement tree.
NOTICE — Either the publication in a newspaper of general circulation
once a week for two consecutive weeks, or written notification sent by first
class mail to property owners immediately affected, or notification posted
on the affected tree. Notice of public hearings shall be published and sent
to affected property owners within 30 calendar days of the hearing date.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind and includes the plural of each.
PUBLIC TREE — Any tree with a portion of the trunk located in a public
right-of-way.
REPLACEMENT TREE — A tree planted in a location formerly occupied by
another tree, in a public area.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area defined on the official Borough map for the
roadway corridor.
TREE DRIP LINE — A line derived by the horizontal line extending along a
radius from the trunk of a tree to the outermost tips of branches.
TREE PROTECTION ZONE — The three-dimensional area within the drip
line, a column extending from the crown to the root system of each public
tree.
WORK DAYS — Monday through Friday, excluding legal holidays when
Borough offices are closed.
§ 25-101 FOREWORD § 25-102
FWD:545
§ 25-102. Shade Tree Commission. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
1. Responsibilities. The Commission shall have the following
responsibilities:
A. The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of the
shade trees in and upon the highways, streets, alleys and all rightof-
ways within the Borough, and tree branches that extend over
and above such areas or that pose a safety hazard to the use of such
public areas.
B. The Commission shall advise the Director on the planting,
maintenance and removal of trees. Such advice may include:
(1) Recommendations of tree species for public areas.
(2) Recommendations for controlling diseases and pest damaging
trees.
(3) Recommendations for tree maintenance.
(4) Recommendations for a public education/information program
concerning the importance and care of trees.
(5) Recommendations on Departmental rules and regulations
pertaining to tree planting, maintenance and removal.
C. The Commission, in conjunction with the Department, shall
prepare for Council's approval a plan for street trees in the
Borough. This plan should include an inventory of existing trees,
listing species and location. In addition, the plan should include
suggested policies for the planting and maintenance of trees,
including suitable species for various environments and spacing of
trees. The plan may also identify locations for new plantings,
desirable species changes, etc. Once approved by Council,
selection and planting of new trees should generally be in accord
with said plan. The plan shall be periodically reviewed as the
Commission deems necessary.
D. The Commission may, with the approval of Council, solicit and
accept grants and contributions on behalf of the Borough. All funds
obtained by the Commission shall be expended for the specific
purpose or under the stipulations set by the contributor or the
Commission with specific approval of Council.
E. The Commission or its designee shall be responsible for issuing
permits (consistent with § 25-106 of this Part) regarding property
owners' requests to plant, prune, or remove trees within the rightof-
way.
F. The Commission may review land development plans to determine
the impact of such plans on public trees and to make
recommendations on steps needed to mitigate said impact.
§ 25-102 EMMAUS CODE § 25-102
FWD:546
Preliminary or Final Plans. The Planning Commission shall forward
one copy of any preliminary or final land development plan to the
Commission for review. The Commission will then provide written
comments to the Planning Commission concerning the affect of
said land development plan on any public tree(s).
G. In the event a zoning permit application may impact an existing
street tree, the Commission shall review the said zoning permit
application.
Within two working days of the receipt of the zoning permit
application from the Zoning Officer, the Commission, or its
designee, shall determine the need for and location of the tree
protection zone fencing around all public trees located on or
adjacent to the site.
Where determined necessary by the Commission, or its designee,
the property owner shall install or cause to be installed a staked
construction fence at least four feet high, or alternative as
approved by the Commission, or its designee, around all portions of
the tree protection zone located on public property, excluding any
portions occupied by sidewalks, street cart way, curbs/gutters or a
driveway.
No activity is permitted within the tree protection zone without a
permit issued in accordance with § 25-106 of this Part. Any activity
occurring within a tree protection zone in violation of this Part shall
be addressed as provided for in §§ 25-107 and 25-108 of this Part.
2. Membership. The Shade Tree Commission will consist of up to five
members, all of whom shall be residents of the Borough. At least two of
the members shall be professionals in forestry, horticulture, plant
pathology, entomology, landscape architecture or related fields.
Members of the Commission shall be appointed by Council for
staggered terms of five years. The first member shall be appointed to
serve one year. The second member appointed shall serve two years.
The third member appointed shall serve three years. The fourth
member appointed shall serve four years. The fifth member appointed
shall serve five years. Thereafter, each member appointed shall serve
three years.
The members of the Commission shall serve without pay, but they
may be reimbursed for actual authorized expenses within the funds
budgeted for such activities by Council.
A. Organization, Records and Meetings. Members of the Commission
shall annually elect a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson and such
other officers as it deems necessary. All the officers shall be eligible
for reelection. The Commission shall keep a written record of its
meetings in accordance with law. The Commission shall provide
Council with monthly meeting minutes as well as an annual activity
§ 25-102 FOREWORD § 25-102
FWD:547
§ 25-103. Trees on Private Property. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
All property owners shall be responsible for the maintenance of trees and
shall prune any tree overhanging the streets and highways of the Borough
so that they will not obstruct the light from any street light or from any
traffic sign, and so that there shall be a clear height of 14 feet above
the surface of the street and 10 feet over the sidewalk. The Shade Tree
Commission or its designee shall deliver or mail notice of noncompliance
with this Part to a property owner, which notice shall advise the property
owner of the noncompliance and directing the noncompliance be corrected
within 15 work days, unless the time is extended by the Commission or its
designee. If a property owner fails to complete the work within the time
limits specified in such notice, the Borough may cause such pruning to be
done at the expense of the owner either by Borough employees or by a
subcontractor, with the expense to be placed as a lien against the property,
together with administrative expenses and legal and filing fees.
§ 25-104. Dead or Dying Trees in Public Right-of-Way. [Ord. 1006, 9/
5/2006]
Trees located in a public right-of-way must be maintained by the adjacent
property owner. The Shade Tree Commission may direct a property owner
to remove a dead or dying tree. In its discretion, the Commission may direct
that the stump of the dead or dying tree be ground to a depth sufficient
to allow for a replacement tree. The Commission shall decide whether the
property owner is required to plant a tree in place of the removed tree. If
the work is not completed within 15 work days or a time period deemed
appropriate by the Commission, the Borough may cause such work to be
done at the expense of the owner either by Borough employees or by a
subcontractor, with the expense to be placed as a lien against the property,
together with administrative expenses and legal and filing fees if not paid in
accordance with the billing of the Borough.
§ 25-105. Hazardous Trees on Private Property and Public Areas.
[Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006; as amended by Ord. 1072, 7/19/2010, § 105]
report. For the purpose of taking action, a quorum of three
members must be present. Special meetings may be called by the
Chairperson, or in his/her absence, the Vice-Chairperson.
B. Voting. All votes of the Commission shall be cast at a duly
advertised public meeting. A majority vote of the members present
shall carry a motion.
1. Trees Posing a Potential Hazard. When the Commission determines that
a tree or portion of a tree on private property or in a public area is
damaged, diseased or in such condition to cause a potential hazard to
the public or to other trees on public or private property, the Shade
Tree Commission shall be authorized to act consistent with the
following:
§ 25-102 EMMAUS CODE § 25-105
FWD:548
§ 25-106. Permits. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
A. If the tree is in a public area, the Commission shall direct that the
tree shall be removed, pruned, or treated. Property owners so
ordered shall have 10 days following receipt of the order to appeal
to the Commission. The Commission shall hear the appeal and
make a determination within 10 days of the receipt of the appeal.
Following a determination by the Commission, the property owner
shall comply within 14 days. If the property owner fails or refuses
to comply, the property owner shall be subject to the penalties
specified in § 25-108(B). In addition, the Director is authorized to
remove said hazardous tree or portions thereof, all costs for such
work shall be assessed and, if not paid, shall be a lien against the
property.
B. If the tree is on an area of private property over which the Shade
Tree Commission does not exercise jurisdiction, then the Shade
Tree Commission is authorized to provide notice to the property
owner that the tree is hazardous.
2. Trees Posing an Immediate Hazard. When the Commission or Director
determines that a tree or portion of a tree in a public area is damaged,
diseased or in such condition to cause an immediate hazard to the
public or to other trees on public or private property (involving a direct
and imminent threat to person or property), the Director may remove
the hazard without notice or appeal. All costs for such work shall be
assessed and, if not paid, there shall be a lien placed against the
property.
1. The Commission is authorized to issue permits for work on a tree
having any portion of its trunk within the Commission's jurisdiction.
Permits shall be required for the following activities:
A. Planting, transplanting, pruning, removing or otherwise disturbing
any tree or its root structure located within the Commission's
jurisdiction. If a tree is removed, the Commission may require that
it be replaced with no less than a two 2 1/2 inch caliper.
B. Damaging or cutting roots by tunneling, trenching or digging for
the purpose of sidewalk, curb, pipe, conduit, electric wire, curb cut,
driveway, etc.
C. Fastening any rope, wire, electric attachment, sign or other devices
that may cause damage to any public tree. Exception: newly
planted trees may be guyed to provide stability during the first
growing season.
D. Construct site access, whether permanent or temporary.
2. Permits shall be in writing and shall specify the work permitted. All
work shall be performed in accord with the conditions of the permit.
Such permits may be revoked by the Commission if the terms and
§ 25-105 FOREWORD § 25-106
FWD:549
§ 25-107. Violations. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
§ 25-108. Penalties. [Ord. 1006, 9/5/2006]
conditions of the permit are violated. Revocations may be appealed, in
writing, to the Council within five workdays of that notice of revocation.
Nothing in this Section shall be construed to exempt public utility
companies, or any other person or entity from any of the requirements
of this Part.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to carry out any of the following
activities concerning a public tree:
A. Top any tree, which is the indiscriminate cutting of tree branches to
stubs or lateral branches that are not large enough (at least 1/3 the
diameter of the branch being cut) to assume the terminal role.
B. Climbing with spikes on any tree.
C. Cause or authorize a wire or other conductor charged with
electricity to come into contact with any tree in a manner that may
injure or kill it.
D. Cause or authorize any oil, gasoline, herbicide, paint, brine, hot
water, steam or other gas, liquid or solid substances deleterious to
trees to contact any tree or to enter the soil about the base or root
system of a tree in any manner that may injure or kill it.
E. Interfere, cause or authorize an interference with the Borough or
any of its agents or employees while they are engaged in planting,
inspecting, maintaining or removing trees.
F. Place or maintain upon the ground any asphalt, cement, stone or
other material or substances in such manner as may obstruct or
further obstruct free access of air and water to the roots of any
tree.
G. Pile any building material or make any mortar or cement within six
feet of any tree.
1. Any person violating the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction in
a proceeding filed by the Commission before a magisterial district judge
of appropriate jurisdiction, be liable to pay costs of prosecution and a
fine as follows:
A. For willfully injuring or killing a living tree in any public area or
within any tree protection zone by cutting, debarking, breaking, by
the use of herbicides, use of a vehicle, or in any other manner
wherein it is determined by the magisterial district judge that such
damage or destruction was intentionally inflicted, a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus the costs of prosecution and
value of the destroyed or damaged tree and/or cost of repair shall
§ 25-106 EMMAUS CODE § 25-108
FWD:550
be levied. The value of the tree or trees removed shall be
determined by a certified Borough arborist or other certified
arborist selected by the Borough using a valuation method
approved by the International Society of Arboriculture.
B. For failure of a property owner to remove, partially remove or treat
a tree on private property, as ordered in accord with this Part, the
guilty person shall be fined not more than $100 per day. Each day
the property owner remains in violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
C. For all other violations, where it is determined by the magisterial
district judge that such damage or destruction was not
intentionally willfully inflicted, a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $100 plus the costs of repairing or replacing the damaged tree
shall be levied. The value of the tree or trees removed shall be
determined by a certified arborist using a valuation method
approved by the International Society of Arboriculture.
§ 25-108 FOREWORD § 25-108
FWD:551

Part 2
TREE FUND
§ 25-201. Establishing a Tree Fund. [Ord. 1085, 7/16/2012, § 1]
The Borough hereby establishes a "Tree Fund" that shall be under the
control of the Emmaus Borough Council and utilized through the Shade
Tree Commission, and which shall be created and administered in
accordance with the provisions of this Part.
§ 25-202. Public Trees. [Ord. 1085, 7/16/2012, § 2]
The provisions of this Part shall apply when a property owner requests that
the Emmaus Shade Tree Commission not require the installation of a new
public tree, and the Commission grants such approval. This Section also
applies when a public tree is removed at the direction of the Commission or
the Borough because the tree poses a hazardous condition. The decision to
require the installation of a new tree remains in the sole discretion of the
Shade Tree Commission, and nothing in this Section shall impair or affect
its exercise of that discretion.
§ 25-203. Requiring a Replacement Tree. [Ord. 1085, 7/16/2012,
§ 3]
§ 25-204. Impossible or Not Feasible to Plant a Tree. [Ord. 1085, 7/
16/2012, § 4]
1. The decision to require a replacement tree shall be made by the Shade
Tree Commission after considering the following factors:
A. Clear sight for motor vehicles.
B. The location of other trees on or near the property.
C. Utilities and the possible effects therefrom.
D. Whether it is in accord with the Commission's shade tree plan or
design.
E. The effect on neighbors.
F. The need of a tree at that particular location.
G. Such other factors that may affect the public health, safety, or
welfare.
1. If the physical condition of a property makes it impossible or not
feasible to plant a tree, then the provisions of this Section shall not
apply, with the following provisions.
§ 25-201 FOREWORD § 25-204
FWD:553
§ 25-205. Maintenance and Accounting of the Tree Fund. [Ord.
1085, 7/16/2012, § 5]
A. When the Commission grants a property owner's request to not
plant a tree to replace a public tree, the property owner shall make
a payment into the Tree Fund in the amount of $200.
B. If for any reason, the installation of a new public tree may
potentially result in a hazard, the property owner shall not be
required to plant the aforesaid tree. The property owner shall be
exempt from paying the fee required in this Part. The decision to
determine the potential for such a hazard shall be at the sole
discretion of the Shade Tree Commission.
C. However, if the Shade Tree Commission concludes that there is a
more suitable location on the property, within the public right-ofway
that shall not result in a potential hazard, the property owner
shall be subject to replanting a public tree or paying the fee
pursuant to the requirements of this Part.
1. The Emmaus Borough Council shall be responsible for the maintenance
and accounting of the Tree Fund, with recommendations for use of such
funds coming from the Emmaus Shade Tree Commission, the
administration of which shall be in accordance with the following:
A. All payments made by property owners pursuant to this Section
shall be promptly deposited into the Tree Fund maintained and
managed by the Borough of Emmaus and utilized by the Shade Tree
Commission.
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall partner with the Borough
Treasurer at all times to maintain an accurate accounting of all
funds in the Tree Fund that are attributable to payments made
pursuant to this Part.
C. The monies in the Tree Fund shall be available to the Shade Tree
Commission to use for the sole purpose of planting trees that are
public trees, as defined in Ord. 1006 [Part 1], Ord. 335 [Chapter 1,
Part 3B], and as defined in this Part, in the Borough of Emmaus.
The Shade Tree Commission shall have the discretion to determine
where, when, and how such funds will be used, provided that the
only use of the monies in the Tree Fund is for the purchase and
planting of trees in the Borough of Emmaus.
D. On or before February 15, of each year, the Shade Tree Commission
and Borough Treasurer shall provide to the Borough Council a
report detailing the activity and use of the Tree Fund for the
preceding year.
§ 25-204 EMMAUS CODE § 25-206
FWD:554
§ 25-206. Appeals. [Ord. 1085, 7/16/2012, § 6]
If any property owner believes that they have been improperly assessed
a payment pursuant to this Section, the aforesaid property owner shall
have the right to appeal to the Borough Council for a determination of the
propriety of the assessment. The appeal shall be in writing to Emmaus Town
Hall, 28 South 4th Street, Emmaus, PA 18049, addressed to the Borough
Manager no more than 10 days after the date of the payment notification.
The Emmaus Borough Council shall schedule a public appeal hearing no
more than 10 days after receipt of the appeal notification. The Emmaus
Borough Council shall make a formal decision no more than 10 days after
the conclusion of the appeal hearing and shall notify the property owner in
writing of the final decision.
§ 25-207. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 1085, 7/16/2012, § 7]
Any property owner who shall fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with any of
the terms or provisions of this Part or any regulation or requirement made
pursuant thereto and authorized thereby shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable by a fine of a minimum of $50 but not more than $100 and pay
the costs of prosecution for each offense, to be collected as other fines and
costs are by law collectible. Each day in noncompliance of this Part shall be
considered a separate violation. Any fine imposed by this Section shall be
in addition to any other penalty or fee imposed by any other section of this
Part.
§ 25-206 FOREWORD § 25-207
FWD:555
Chapter 26
WATER
§ 25-207 EMMAUS CODE § 25-207
FWD:556
Part 1
WATER SYSTEM
§ 26-101. Short Title. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 1]
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Water System
Regulation Ordinance" of the Borough of Emmaus.
§ 26-102. Purpose. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 2]
This Part provides for the fixing of rates and charges pertaining to water
service in the Borough of Emmaus and its environs; fixes the responsibility
for the payment of charges for the consumption of water and related
services, and provides for the collection of same; adopts rules and
regulations for water service throughout the water system of the Borough
of Emmaus; and prescribes penalties for violations.
§ 26-103. "Water System" Defined. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 3]
The term "water system" as used herein means the wells, pumping stations,
reservoirs, filter plant, treatment equipment, and distribution lines,
together with all related equipment, which serve the inhabitants of the
Borough of Emmaus and certain of its environs and which are owned by the
Borough of Emmaus.
§ 26-104. Water Connections Required. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 4]
All owners of property abutting any street or alley, in which there is a water
main or in which a water main may be constructed, shall make connection
at their own expense to such water line for the purpose of conducting water
to such property. Any such property owner shall be given at least 45 days
notice of the requirement for connection of his property to the Borough
water system. Upon failure of such owner to make such connection, the
Borough may make the same, and collect the cost thereof from the owner
by a municipal claim or by an action of assumpsit.
§ 26-105. Rates and Charges. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 5; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986; by Ord. 1041, 5/5/2008; and by Ord. 1092,
12/17/2012]
1. The Borough Council shall from time to time fix the rates to be charged
for water furnished to individuals, copartnerships, associations or
corporations within the Borough of Emmaus. The Borough Council shall
also set rates, subject to such approval as may be required from the
Public Utilities Commission or other applicable regulatory body of the
Commonwealth, for water furnished to individuals, copartnerships,
associations, or corporations lying outside the limits of the Borough of
Emmaus but served by the Water System of the Borough of Emmaus.
2. The Borough Council may from time to time fix the charges for a
tapping or service connection fee which shall be assessed against the
§ 26-101 FOREWORD § 26-105
FWD:557
property owner whenever such owner connects said property with a
water main constructed or owned by the Borough of Emmaus.
3. The Borough Council may from time to time set the amount of a fee for a
permit which shall be required prior to connecting to the Borough
Water System or for a permit which shall be required due to any change
in occupancy of a property.
4. The whole cost, or any part of the cost, of construction of new water
mains or extension of existing water mains, whether such mains be
located within or without the limits of the Borough, and serving the
properties abutting thereon, may be assessed by the Borough Council,
against the properties abutting along the line thereof, by the front foot
rule. Such assessments may be collected as other municipal claims are
now by law collectible.
5. The Borough Council may from time to time determine the amount of a
service charge which shall be made for turning on water when water
has been shut off at the request of the owner or for non-payment of
charges or for violation of rules and regulations, providing there is a
serviceable curb box and stop in front of the premises.
Where there is no serviceable curb stop and box the property owner
shall pay all costs connected with shutting off and turning on the water.
6. The Borough Council or other authorized Borough official may assess
charges against property owners for special services rendered, for
damage to Borough owned equipment or any other lawful activity, and
such charges must be paid by said property owner. Upon failure of the
property owner to pay such charges within a reasonable time after
presentation of same, the water service may be turned off, or the claim
may be collected in such manner as other municipal claims are now by
law collected.
7. Fire hydrants located outside of the Borough of Emmaus shall be
subject to an annual service charge of an amount which shall be
determined by Borough Council.
8. The minimum fee included in the rates shall be chargeable when water
service is available, whether or not any water has been consumed
during the billing period.
9. Rates/Schedules. [Amended by Ord. 1133, 12/21/2015]
Water Rates
Quantity
First 40,000 gallons - $2.05
Next 500,000 gallons - $1.89
Next 1,000,000 gallons - $1.73
Next 5,000,000 gallons - $1.21
§ 26-105 EMMAUS CODE § 26-105
FWD:558
§ 26-106. Billing. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 6; as amended by Ord.
1041, 5/5/2008; by Ord. 1075, 12/20/2010; and by Ord. 1092, 12/17/
2012]
Quarterly Meter Rates
5/8" - 3/4" meter $17
1" - 1 1/2" meter $39.48
2" meter $76.96
3" meter $189.43
4" meter $301.89
6" meter $451.83
Multi-unit service fee - $8 per quarter per unit. In accordance with the
fee on each multi-unit account, there shall be one unit in each dwelling
or business that shall not be assessed the $8 per quarter fee.
The above rates include lateral maintenance to curb stop and are
effective as of January 1, 2016, billing.
1. All bills for water consumed will be rendered quarterly. The water
consumed shall be determined by meter registration or by estimated
bills. All water consumed shall be determined by meter registration
unless the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately or has
failed to register, in which case a bill will be rendered based on previous
average consumption for a similar period when the meter was in order,
giving proper consideration to any change in facilities or practices that
may have occurred, or by such other fair and reasonable method as
shall be based on the best information available.
2. In cases of excessive meter registration, no adjustment will be made of
bills rendered prior to the billing period in which complaint was made
or of bills of a previous consumer, whether tenant or owner.
3. Bills are due and payable upon presentation. The bill is due and payable
for a period of 30 days, after which a 10% penalty is added and becomes
due for the next 30 days. Payment of the bill must be in full, and no
installment payments will be accepted. [Amended by Ord. 1133, 12/
21/2015]
4. Water service will be subject to being discontinued to any customer who
allows a bill for water to remain unpaid for longer than 60 days from the
initial billing date. In the event that water service is discontinued due to
nonpayment of a water bill, all delinquent and current bills, plus an
additional $60 reconnection fee, must be paid before water service will
be resumed. [Amended by Ord. 1133, 12/21/2015]
5. At the option of the Borough unpaid bills for water service may be
collected in such manner as other municipal claims are collectible.
§ 26-105 FOREWORD § 26-106
FWD:559
§ 26-107. Application for Service. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 7]
6. Failure to receive a bill shall not exempt any consumer from his
obligation to pay. The presentation of a bill to the customer is only a
matter of accommodation and not a waiver of this rule.
7. Metered water consumers may take the water allowed by their
minimum quarterly rate at any time during the quarterly billing period
but failure to use their full allowance in any one billing period shall not
entitle them to any rebate or allowance to use an excess in any other
quarterly billing period.
8. When the premises are vacated, the consumer must give notice at the
office of the Borough of Emmaus Water Department so that the water
may be turned off, and he will be responsible for all charges for water
service until such notice is given.
9. Any consumer upon receipt of a bill, having reason to doubt its
accuracy, shall bring or mail said bill, within 10 days to the Borough
Water Office in Borough Hall, and such bill shall be promptly
investigated by proper personnel.
1. Any property owner desiring the introduction of a service line or lines
from the Borough of Emmaus mains into his premises, must first make a
written application on the form furnished by the Borough of Emmaus, at
least one week before service is required, stating the street and house
number or location, the name of the owner and tenant, the purpose for
which service will be used, the exact time when the trench from curb to
the property and his service will be ready for making the connection
and shall guarantee that such service will be used continuously for at
least one year.
Whenever a service line is laid in contemplation of the erection of a
building on the premises in question, and said line is not attached for
the period of one year immediately following the granting of a permit,
the Borough shall have the right to disconnect the water at the main
and charge the owner for the cost of such service.
The application must be signed by the owner of the premises, or his
duly authorized agent.
2. Any property owner desiring a supply of water must make a written
application on the form furnished by the Borough of Emmaus, at least
three days before service is required, which must be properly approved
by Borough Council or its duly authorized representative before the
water will be turned on.
3. Application for a supply of water may be received from a tenant under
the condition that the owner sign an agreement of guaranty that the
tenant will pay for all water metered to the premises when due and
payable.
§ 26-106 EMMAUS CODE § 26-107
FWD:560
§ 26-108. Separate Service Lines Required. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971,
§ 8]
4. In making application for a supply of water, each consumer contracts
and agrees to be bound by this Part; by Borough of Emmaus Rules and
Regulations for Water service, adopted December 29, 1958, as
amended; and such other rules and regulations as may be promulgated.
5. A new application must be made on any change in occupancy of
property, as described in any application, and the Borough may
discontinue the water supply until such new application has been made,
approved, and the required permit granted.
6. Where special service charges are fixed or cost of service of any kind is
estimated, payment must be made at the time application is submitted
and before the service is granted.
7. The Borough may refuse to serve an applicant if it does not have
adequate facilities to render the service desired; if the service is of such
character that is likely to result in unfavorable service to other
customers; if the applicant's installation of piping is regarded as
hazardous or of such character that satisfactory service cannot be
given; or for other just cause.
1. Each separate "consumer" shall be supplied through a separate service
line.
2. For the purposes of this Part a "consumer" shall be the owner or tenant
contracting for a supply of water to a property in the following
classifications:
A. A building under one roof and occupied as one business or
residence.
B. A combination of buildings in one common enclosure occupied by
one family or business.
C. One side of a double house having a solid vertical partition wall.
D. One side or part of a house occupied by one family even though the
closet and/or other fixtures be used in common.
E. A building of more than one apartment and using in common, one
hall and one entrance.
F. A building having a number of apartments and/or offices and/or
businesses using in common one hall or one or more means of
entrance.
3. No owner or tenant of any premises supplied with water by the Borough
will be allowed to supply other persons or families or other premises,
except by written permit authorized by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Emmaus. Consumers who violate this rule may have their
§ 26-107 FOREWORD § 26-108
FWD:561
§ 26-109. Service Lines to Curb. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 9]
§ 26-110. Service Lines, Curb to Premises. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971,
§ 10]
water shut off after a notice of 24 hours, and it may remain so until the
Borough is satisfied that the rules and regulations will be observed.
4. In the event that authorization has been granted by the Borough for
more than one customer to be supplied through a single service, any
violation of the rules of the Borough by either or any of said consumers
shall be deemed a violation as to all and the Borough may take such
action as could be taken against a single consumer, except that such
action shall not be taken until the innocent consumer who is not in
violation of the Borough's rules has been given reasonable opportunity
to attach his pipes to a separately controlled service connection.
1. Upon approval of application for a new service connection, the Borough
will require the applicant to pay the current established fee. After
proper payment the Borough will tap the main, insert corporation stop,
install service line from main to curb and install curb stop and box; all of
which shall remain the property of the Borough.
2. The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repair of the
service line from the main to and including the curb stop and box.
3. Service lines will not be installed when the service line passes over or
through premises which at the time may be the property of persons
other than the owner of the premises to be supplied, unless the owner
of the premises supplied assumes all liability and furnishes a right-ofway
agreement in form satisfactory to Council or its duly authorized
representative.
1. The service line beyond the curb stop shall be installed and maintained
by and at the expense of the consumer. All leaks between curb box and
meter must be repaired promptly by the property owner. The portion of
the service line installed by the consumer shall not be less in size and
quality than the service line in the street laid by the Borough, shall be
laid not less than three feet six inches below the surface, and shall not
be covered until the tap on the main is made and service line tested. If
any defects in workmanship or material are found, the service shall not
be turned on until such defects are remedied. All plumbing connections
should be able to withstand a pressure of at least 150 pounds per
square inch.
2. No service line shall be laid in the same trench with a sewer or gas
service connection.
3. Plumber installation of meter horn shall be made at the time the final
plumbing is completed, or where water is to be used for other than
building purposes.
§ 26-108 EMMAUS CODE § 26-110
FWD:562
§ 26-111. Meters. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 11]
§ 26-112. Fire Hydrants. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 12; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
4. The service line from the curb to the premises shall be kept in good
condition by the consumer under penalty of discontinuance of service
by the Borough.
5. The Borough reserves the right to inspect the plumbing on any
premises, and, if it shall be found not in conformity with the rules of the
Borough, to refuse water service until the objectionable or improper
work is corrected.
6. All abandoned service pipes shall be immediately detached from the
main pipe by the property owner, at his own expense, and he shall be
liable for all damages that may arise by reason of any abandoned
service pipe remaining attached to the water main in front of his
property, or wherever the same may be.
1. The Borough through its Water Department will determine the location
for all meters.
2. If it is determined that the meter is to be placed within the building, the
consumer will provide free of charge and expense to the Borough a
readily accessible place in the cellar or basement near the entrance of
service pipes, with a stop at the inlet side of the meter and a stop on the
house side of the meter, both stops to be of a disc valve type acceptable
to the Borough Water Department. If it is decided that the meter is to be
placed outside the building, it must be placed in an approved meter box
furnished by the Borough at the expense of the consumer and must
have suitable disc type valve stops approved by the Borough.
3. The Borough shall determine the size of meter to be installed, but in no
case shall the meter be more than one commercial size below the size of
the service line. A 5/8 inch meter shall be the smallest meter to be
installed on a service line for domestic use.
4. The Borough will furnish meters and connections. The meter and
connections shall remain the property of the Borough, and access to
same for reading of the meter, inspection, testing, repairs, etc., must be
permitted at all reasonable times by the consumer.
5. The consumer must, at all times, properly protect the meter from injury
by frost, hot water or any other cause, and will be held responsible for
repairs to meter made necessary due to negligence of said consumer.
The consumer shall be responsible for and shall reimburse the Borough
for all damages due to freezing, hot water or external causes.
6. In no case or under no circumstances shall any consumer or other
persons interfere with the water meter or the dials thereof.
§ 26-110 FOREWORD § 26-112
FWD:563
§ 26-113. Accuracy Tests. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 13; as amended by
Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
1. All fire hydrants shall be furnished, installed and maintained by the
Borough Water Department.
2. No person, other than a member of the Fire Department of the Borough
of Emmaus or other cooperating public fire company in active
performance of duty, shall, without a permit from the Borough of
Emmaus, use, open or otherwise interfere with any fire hydrant in the
Emmaus Water System.
3. The Borough of Emmaus may, under extraordinary circumstances,
grant a permit for the use of water from a fire hydrant. Such permit
must be obtained from the Borough Manager and must have the prior
approval of the Water Committee of the Borough Council. Any such use
must conform in all respects with the rules and regulations for such use
as established by the Emmaus Borough Council and/or the Borough
Water Department.
4. No fire hydrant shall be used for other than fire-fighting purposes
during freezing weather.
5. No person shall obstruct the access to any fire hydrant by placing or
permitting any post, tree, shrub, rocks, debris, building material or
other obstruction to remain within the following specified distances of
the front, sides and rear of the hydrant: the unobstructed distance on
sidewalk shall not be less than four feet on each side and to the rear of
the center of the hydrant except where hydrants are placed on streets
having sidewalks less than five feet in width where the clear distance to
the rear will be correspondingly limited.
The unobstructed distance on roadway in front of fire hydrant shall be
not less than 12 feet on each side of the center of the hydrant, which
clear width shall extend to the unobstructed portion of the roadway.
Property owners shall, within five days after receiving notice so to do,
remove any obstacle in violation of this regulation.
6. Where damage to a fire hydrant or other property is done by any person
having a permit to take water from said hydrant, the holder of the
permit shall pay such damages and all costs and expenses as may be
incurred by reason thereof, to the Borough Treasurer on demand.
Where damage to a fire hydrant or other property is done by a person
not having a permit, he shall be subject to pay for all damages, costs
and expenses incurred by reason thereof, and shall, in addition be
subject to the penalties hereinafter provided for violation of this Part.
1. At the written request of an owner or a consumer, the Borough will
make a test of the accuracy of the meter supplying his premises, and, if
desired, in his presence or that of his authorized representatives.
§ 26-112 EMMAUS CODE § 26-113
FWD:564
§ 26-114. Leaks, Defective Plumbing or Waste. [Ord. 474, 4/19/
1971, § 14; as amended by Ord. 715, 5/15/1989, § I]
§ 26-115. Opening, Closing or Interfering with Valves and
Stopcocks. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 15]
No person, except an employee of the Emmaus Water Department or other
duly authorized person, shall open, close or in any way interfere with any
valve or stopcock in the Emmaus Water System.
2. A deposit will be required before the meter is tested, which sum will be
returned if the meter is found to be registering more than 3% against
the consumer on a flow equal to 1/8 of the diameter of the service;
otherwise, the deposit will be retained by the Borough to cover the cost
of the test.
3. The Borough reserves the right to test at any reasonable time any meter
deemed necessary.
1. The Borough shall not be liable for any damage resulting from leaks,
broken pipes, or from any other cause, occurring to or within any house
or building, and it is expressly agreed that no claims shall be made
against the Borough for damage caused by the bursting or breaking of
any main or service pipe or of any attachment thereto.
2. All water passing through a meter shall be charged for at the regular
rate, and no allowance will be made for excessive consumption due to
leaks or waste.
3. Requirement to repair service line leaks.
A. All leaks in water service lines occurring between the curb box and
the customer meter shall be repaired promptly by the property
owner at his expense.
B. Borough Council, or its duly authorized representative, shall notify
a property owner in writing when Borough Council detects such a
leak. Within three days of receiving said notification, property
owner shall have the leak repaired by a plumber licensed to do
plumbing work in Emmaus.
C. In the event that the property owner does not have the leak
repaired within three days, Borough Council, or its duly authorized
representative, may shut off the water to the leaking service line
and assess the property owner such charges as may be determined
by Borough Council for the resumption of service.
D. Borough Council, or its duly authorized representative, shall have
the right to turn off the water to a leaking service without prior
notice to the property owner in case of an emergency where, in the
judgment of the Borough, delay could cause serious loss of water or
damage to any property, or the Borough Water System.
§ 26-113 FOREWORD § 26-116
FWD:565
§ 26-116. Connections or Outlets Between Main and Meter Not
Permitted. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 16]
No connections or outlet will be permitted on the service pipe or pipes,
supplying any premises, between the street main and the meter. All water
used must pass through the meter.
§ 26-117. Turning Off Water. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 17; as amended
by Ord. 675, 11/17/1986]
1. The Borough Council or its duly authorized representative reserves the
right at all times, after due notice, to shut off the water for nonpayment
of water bills, or for neglect or refusal to comply with these rules and
regulations, and to assess such charges as may be determined by
Borough Council for the resumption of service.
2. Service under an application may be discontinued for any of the
following reasons:
A. Misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be
supplied or the use to be made of the water supply.
B. Use of water for any property or purposes other than described in
the application.
C. Waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, fixtures or
otherwise.
D. Failure to maintain in good order, connection, service lines or
fixtures beyond the curb and owned by the applicant.
E. Molesting any service pipe, meter, curb stop or seal or any
appurtenance of the Water System of the Borough of Emmaus.
F. Vacancy of the premises.
G. Violation of any rules of the Borough of Emmaus.
H. Failure to make payments of any charges against the property.
I. Refusal of access to property for purpose of inspecting, reading,
caring for or removing meters.
3. The Borough Council, or its duly authorized representative, shall have
the right to turn off the water without notice in case of breakdowns or
for other unavoidable causes, or for the purpose of making necessary
repairs, connections, etc. Reasonable notice will be given when
practicable. In no case shall the Borough be liable for any damage or
inconvenience suffered therefrom.
4. If a property owner or landlord either fails to pay water/sewer bills for
residence or instructs the utility company to shut off the service,
property owner or landlord and tenant must be notified by the utility
§ 26-116 EMMAUS CODE § 26-117
FWD:566
§ 26-118. Supply of Water. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 18]
company. The utility company will then explain the rights and duties
related to continuing service.
A. The utility company cannot terminate the service:
(1) On a Friday, Saturday, Sunday, holiday or the day before a
holiday.
(2) For nonpayment of bills more than four years old.
(3) For nonpayment of bills for either merchandise or service
work.
(4) For nonpayment of bills in someone else's name, unless they
are found responsible by a court or the PUC.
(5) For nonpayment of an estimated bill unless they deny the
utility company access to your meter.
B. The utility company must follow these steps before shutting off
service:
(1) At least three days before service is shut off, the utility
company must attempt to contact them in person. If the
company cannot reach them by phone or in person, it must
notify a third party if they have designated one, notify a
community interest group or the PUC.
(2) At the time of shut off, the utility company must contact a
responsible adult at their residence. If no adult is home, the
termination will be postponed for 48 hours and a notice will be
left at the residence stating this.
C. If service is shut off, the utility company must provide a final
informational notice to the property owner or landlord and tenant.
1. The Borough of Emmaus shall not be liable for a deficiency or failure in
the supply when occasioned by shutting off water to make repairs or
connections or from any failure throughout the water system.
2. The Borough Council, or its duly authorized representative, reserves
the right to restrict the supply of water as circumstances may require
regardless of use for which intended, in case of scarcity, or whenever
the public welfare may require it, and to provide for the distribution of
the available supply in such manner as may be determined to be in the
public welfare.
3. The use of water for sprinkling purposes shall at all times be subject to
the express condition that the Council may, at any time, when in its
opinion the condition of the public water supply demands it, limit the
time each day during which hose may be used for sprinkling purposes,
§ 26-117 FOREWORD § 26-118
FWD:567
§ 26-119. Cancellation of Contracts. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 19]
All contracts for water shall continue in force from quarter to quarter, but
either party may cancel contract by giving 10 days' written notice that the
contract shall terminate at a certain future time.
§ 26-120. Cross Connections. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 20]
No connections shall be made between pipes or containers carrying water
supplied by the Borough and pipes or containers carrying water from any
other source unless the proposed cross-connection has been approved by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus and State Department of
Health.
§ 26-121. Changing of Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971,
§ 21]
The Borough Council reserves the right to change or amend, from time to
time, the rules and regulations for the use of water.
§ 26-122. Penalties. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971, § 22; as amended by Ord.
675, 11/17/1986]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
1 shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$300; and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day
that a violation of this Part 1 continues shall constitute as separate offense.
§ 26-123. Line Extension Regulations. [Ord. 474, 4/19/1971; as
added by Ord. 889, 7/19/1999]
or the said Council may forbid the use of water for sprinkling purposes
for any period deemed necessary.
4. The Borough of Emmaus shall not be liable for any claim or damage
arising from a shortage of water, the breaking of machinery or facilities,
or any cause beyond its control.
5. It shall be expressly understood and agreed by and between the
Borough and parties receiving water service for private fire control or
sprinkler systems that the Borough does not assume any liability as
insurers of property or person, and that the agreement does not
contemplate any special service, pressure, capacity or facility, other
than the ordinary or the changing conditions of the Borough as the
same exists from day to day, and that the Borough hereby declares, and
it is agreed to by the consumer, that the Borough shall be free and
exempt from any and all claims or injuries to persons or property, or any
other person or property, by reason of fire, water, failure to supply
water, pressure or capacity.
1. Definitions.
§ 26-118 EMMAUS CODE § 26-123
FWD:568
ANNUAL LINE EXTENSION COSTS — The sum of a company's
additional annual operating and maintenance costs, debt costs and
depreciation charges associated with the construction, operation and
maintenance of the line extension.
ANNUAL REVENUE (FOR LINE EXTENSION PURPOSES) — The
company's expected additional annual revenue from the line extension
based on the company's currently effective tariff rates and on the
average annual usage of customers similar in nature and size to the
bona fide service applicant.
BONA FIDE SERVICE APPLICANT (FOR LINE EXTENSION
PURPOSES) — A person or entity applying for water service to an
existing or proposed structure within the utility's certificated service
territory for which a valid occupancy or building permit has been issued
if the structure is either a primary residence of the applicant or a
place of business. An applicant shall not be deemed a bona fide service
applicant if:
(1) Applicant is requesting water service to a building lot,
subdivision or a secondary residence.
(2) The request for service is part of a plan for the development of a
residential dwelling or subdivision.
(3) The applicant is requesting special utility service.
COMPANY SERVICE LINE — The water line from the distribution
facilities of the company which connects to the customer service line at
the hypothetical or actual line or the actual property line, including the
control valve and valve box. The control valve and valve box determine
the terminal point for the company's responsibility for the street service
connection.
CUSTOMER — A person or entity who is an owner or occupant and who
contracts with the company for water service.
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — The water line extending from the curb,
property line or utility connection to a point of consumption.
DEBT COSTS — The company's additional annual cost of debt
associated with financing the line extension investment based on the
current debt ratio and weighted long term debt cost rate for that utility
or that of a comparable jurisdictional water utility.
DEPRECIATION CHARGES — The utility's additional annual
depreciation charges associated with the specific line extension
investment to be made based on the current depreciation accrual rates
for that company or that of a comparable jurisdictional water company.
LINE EXTENSION (FOR LINE EXTENSION PURPOSES) — An addition
to the company's main line which is necessary to serve the premises of
a customer.
OPERATING AND MAINTENANCE COSTS (FOR LINE EXTENSION
PURPOSES) — The utility's average annual operating and maintenance
§ 26-123 FOREWORD § 26-123
FWD:569
costs associated with serving an additional customer, including
customer accounting, billing, collections, water purchased, power
purchased, chemicals and other variable costs based on the current
total company level of such costs, as well as costs particular to the
specific needs of that customer, such as line flushing.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Persons or corporations owning or operating
equipment or facilities in this Commonwealth for diverting, developing,
pumping, impounding, distributing or furnishing water to or for the
public for compensation.
SHORT-TERM SUPPLY SHORTAGE — An emergency which causes the
total water supply of a company to be inadequate to meet maximum
system demand.
SPECIAL UTILITY SERVICE — Residential or business service which
exceeds that required for ordinary residential purposes. See additional
clarification in the main extension portion of this tariff.
2. Line Extensions. Whenever a developer, owner or occupant of a
property within the service territory of the company requests the
company to extend service to such property, the company will extend
service under the following conditions:
A. Requests by Bona Fide Service Applicant. Each company shall file
with the Commission, as part of its tariff, a rule setting forth the
conditions under which facilities will be extended to supply service
to an applicant within its service area. Upon request by a bona fide
service applicant, a utility shall construct line extensions within its
franchised territory consistent with the following directives:
(1) Line extensions to bona fide service applicants shall be funded
without customer advance where the annual revenue from the
line extension will equal or exceed the company's annual line
extension costs.
(2) If the annual revenue from the line extension will not equal or
exceed the company's annual line extension costs, a bona fide
service applicant may be required to provide a customer
advance to the utility's cost of construction for the line
extension. The utility's investment for the line extension shall
be the portion of the total construction costs which generate
annual line extension costs equal to annual revenue from the
line extension. The customer advance amount shall be
determined by subtracting the utility's investment for the line
extension from the total construction costs.
(3) The company's investment for the line extension shall be based
on the following formula, where X equals the utility's
investment attributed to each bona fide applicant:
§ 26-123 EMMAUS CODE § 26-123
FWD:570
X = [AR - OM] divided by [I + D]; and,
AR = The company's annual revenue
OM = The company's operating and maintenance costs
I = The company's current debt ratio multiplied by
the company's weighted long-term debt cost rate
D = The company's current depreciation accrual rate
B. Customer Advance Financing, Refunds and Facilities on Private
Property.
(1) For Use by Companies with Gross Annual Receipts of
$10,000,000 or More. When a customer advance is required
from a bona fide service applicant for service and the bona fide
applicant is unable to advance the entire amount due, the
company shall either:
(a) Allow the applicant to pay the advance plus the financing
costs equal to the company's weight cost of long term
debt, over a period of not less than three years.
(b) Provide information to the bona fide service applicant on
financial institutions that may offer financing to the
applicant for the main extension.
(2) When a customer advance is required of a service applicant
and an additional customer or customers attach service lines to
the line extension within 10 years, the utility shall refund a
portion of the advance to the customer. Deposits made for
additional facilities other than the line extension, such as
booster pumps, storage tanks and the like, are contributions in
aid of construction and need not be refunded.
(3) The company will refund to the applicant, during a period of 10
years from the date of the extension deposit, a per-customer
amount for each additional bona fide service applicant from
whom a street service connection shall be directly attached to
such main extension as distinguished from extensions or
branches thereof. Provided, however, that the total amount
refunded shall not exceed the original deposit without interest,
and provided that all or any part the deposit not refunded
within said ten-year period shall become the property of the
company and shall be treated as contributions in aid of
construction for ratemaking purposes. The per customer
refund amount shall equal the utility's investment attributed to
each bona fide applicant as calculated in the formula contained
in this tariff.
(4) A utility shall require a customer to pay, in advance, a
reasonable charge for service lines and equipment installed on
private property for the exclusive use of the customer.
§ 26-123 FOREWORD § 26-123
FWD:571
(5) Special utility service shall mean residential or business
service which exceeds that required for ordinary residential
purposes. Subsection (G)(1)(a) through (c) of this tariff does
not apply to special utility service. By way of illustration and
not limitation, special utility service shall include: the
installation of facilities such as oversized mains, booster
pumps and storage tanks as necessary to provide adequate
flows or to meet specific pressure criteria, or service to large
water consuming commercial and industrial facilities. An
otherwise bona fide applicant requesting service which
includes a "special utility service" component is entitled to
bona fide applicant status, including the corresponding
company contribution towards the costs to the line extension
which do not meet the special utility service criteria.
C. Requirement for Extension Deposit Agreement. Where extension of
facilities is not fully funded by the company pursuant to Rule A of
this section, the execution by the applicant of an extension deposit
agreement for customer contribution or advance shall be a
condition of extending the facilities. Upon notice that the company
is prepared and able to go forward with the work, the applicant will
deposit with the company the amount specified in the extension
deposit agreement.
D. Size of Line. The company shall have the exclusive right to
determine the type and size of lines to be installed and the other
facilities required to render adequate service. However, where the
company decides to install a pipe larger than necessary to render
extension of adequate service to the applicant, estimated or actual
cost figures in the extension deposit agreement shall include only
the material and installation cost for a pipe the size of which is
necessary to provide adequate service to the applicant. Any
incremental costs of a larger pipe will be the responsibility of the
company. All estimated or actual cost figures referred to in the
extension deposit agreement shall include a reasonable allowance
for overhead costs and taxes as appropriate. The minimum pipe
size for main extensions will be six inches pursuant to Commission
regulation at 52 Pa.Code § 65.17(b).
E. Length of Extension. In determining the necessary length of an
extension, the terminal point of such extension shall be at that
point in the curb line, which is equidistant from the side property
lines of the last lot for which water service is requested. A company
service connection will be provided only for customer service lines
that extend at right angles from the curb line in a straight line to
the premises to be served.
F. Cost True-up. At the conclusion of the line extension project there
shall be a reconciliation of the actual costs incurred to the amount
of extension deposit that has been paid by the customer. If the
actual cost exceeds the deposit, the applicant shall be responsible
§ 26-123 EMMAUS CODE § 26-123
FWD:572
for payment to the company of the difference. If the deposit
exceeds the actual cost, the company shall refund the difference.
§ 26-123 FOREWORD § 26-123
FWD:573

Part 2
WATER CONSERVATION
§ 26-201. General Provisions. [Ord. 880, 3/1/1999, § 201]
If the Borough experiences a short term supply shortage, the Borough
may request general conservation of inside water uses and may impose
mandatory conservation measures to reduce or eliminate nonessential uses
of water.
§ 26-202. Voluntary Conservation. [Ord. 880, 3/1/1999, § 202]
The Borough shall first request voluntary curtailment of all nonessential
uses of water.
§ 26-203. Mandatory Conservation. [Ord. 880, 3/1/1999, § 203]
If voluntary cooperation does not achieve satisfactory results, mandatory
compliance may be imposed by the Borough Council either independently
or in compliance with a directive or order of the Governor of Pennsylvania.
If any customer refuses to comply with such mandatory measures the
Borough may, after proper notice and explanation, either adjust the outside
water valve connection in a manner which will restrict water flow up to
1/2, or otherwise restrict flow such as by the insertion of a plug device.
If customer compliance is still not achieved, complete service termination
may be imposed by an administrative law judge or other presiding officer
following an expedited hearing.
§ 26-204. Nonessential Uses of Water. [Ord. 880, 3/1/1999, § 204; as
amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
Nonessential uses of water shall follow the same guidelines as those set
forth in 4 Pa. Code, Chapter 119:
A. Definitions. The following words and terms, when used in this Part and
any enforcement proceeding sought by the Borough, shall have the
following meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
AESTHETIC USES — The use of water for ornamental or decorative
purposes, such as fountains, reflecting pools and waterfalls.
ANY WATER — Any type of water, including fresh water, brackish water,
waste water or reclaimed waste water.
ARBORETUM — A place where trees, shrubs and plants are cultivated
for scientific and educational purposes.
BRACKISH WATER — Water containing more than 1,000 parts per
million of dissolved salts.
COMMISSION — The Delaware River Basin Commission, created by
the Delaware River Basin Compact (32 P.S. §§ 815.101-815.106).
§ 26-201 FOREWORD § 26-204
FWD:575
COUNCIL — The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Council
created by 35 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 7101-7707 (relating to emergency
management services).
DEPARTMENT — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth.
FRESH WATER — Water withdrawn from a surface water or
groundwater source, or from a public water supply system located
within this Commonwealth, which has not been previously used, other
than brackish water and water from a nonpotable source. The term
does not include water collected directly from precipitation in rain
barrels or cisterns.
MOBILE EQUIPMENT — A public, private or commercial automobile,
truck, bus, trailer, railroad car, camper, boat or another type of similar
equipment.
NURSERIES — Facilities which are used to grow or keep plants, trees,
shrubs, vines, bulbs, cuttings, flowering annual plants, aquatic plants,
seeds or tubers for propagation, distribution or sale.
PEMA — The Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency of the
Commonwealth created by 35 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 7101-7707.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLY AGENCY — A person, partnership,
association, corporation, municipality or municipal authority, district or
other entity supplying or authorized to supply water to the public.
RECLAIMED WATER — Waste water which has been treated to allow
reuse.
WASTE WATER — Water which has been previously used for industrial,
municipal, domestic or other purpose, and has not been returned to the
surface water or groundwater source.
WATER FROM A NONPOTABLE SOURCE — Water from a surface
water or groundwater source which the Department determines is not
used for public or private drinking water supply, and is not capable
of being rendered suitable for drinking water supply by standard and
economically feasible methods of treatment.
WATER USER — An individual, partnership, association, company,
corporation, municipality, municipal authority, political subdivision or
an agency of federal, state, county or municipal government. The term
includes the officers, employees and agents of a partnership,
association, company, corporation, municipality, municipal authority,
political subdivision or an agency of federal, state, county or municipal
government.
B. Purpose. This Part restricts nonessential water uses in response to a
state of drought and water shortage emergency that has been declared
by the Governor within specified areas of this Commonwealth to
conserve water, to balance demand with limited available supplies and
to assure that sufficient water is available to serve essential health,
§ 26-204 EMMAUS CODE § 26-204
FWD:576
safety and economic needs. This Part also restricts nonessential water
uses where the Borough Council has declared a water emergency
due to a local lack of nonpotable water or equipment failure or other
emergency.
C. Scope. This Part applies to all water uses within areas of this
Commonwealth which are included in the Governor's proclamation or
executive order that declares a state of drought or water shortage
emergency, and also those uses so specified in any declaration of local
water emergency declared by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Emmaus.
D. Prohibition of Nonessential Water Uses. Whenever the Governor
declares by proclamation or executive order a state of drought or water
shortage emergency in an area of this Commonwealth, or the Emmaus
Borough Council declares a water emergency on a local level, the
following water uses shall be deemed nonessential and are prohibited
within areas that have been declared to be in a state of drought or
water shortage emergency.
(1) The use of water for watering of lawns, except: (a) Water may be
applied to grass areas as part of a sewage or storm water treatment
system utilizing spray irrigation. (b) Water may be applied at the
minimum rate necessary to maintain grass tennis courts. (c) Water
may be used at the minimum rate necessary to establish and
maintain newly seeded and sodded grass areas when applied
between the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00 a.m. by means of a bucket,
can or hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle.
Sprinklers may not be used for this purpose. (d) Water may be used
at the minimum rate necessary to establish and maintain newly
seeded or sodded nonresidential grass areas exceeding 10,000
square feet when applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m., by any means designed and operated to assure effective
conservation of the water. (v) Water may be used by a professional
landscaper at the minimum rate necessary on newly seeded and
sodded grass areas greater than 10,000 square feet during regular
working hours by any means designed and operated to assure
effective conservation of the water.
(2) The use of fresh water for irrigation and watering of outdoor
gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs and other outdoor plants
except that fresh water may be: (a) Used for agricultural irrigation
for the production of food and fiber, the maintenance of livestock
and poultry or the production of nursery stock. (b) Applied by
means of a hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shut-off
nozzle, when applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(c) Applied by means or a hand-held container or hand-held hose
equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle at the minimum rate
necessary to establish and maintain newly planted gardens, trees,
shrubs or other outdoor plants. Sources of water, other than fresh
water, shall be used where available. (d) Used by commercial
§ 26-204 FOREWORD § 26-204
FWD:577
nurseries at the minimum rate necessary to maintain stock, only to
the extent that sources of water other than fresh water adequate
to supply needs are not available or feasible to use. (e) Used
by arboretums and public gardens of national, state or regional
significance at the minimum rate necessary to preserve specimens,
to the extent that sources of water other than fresh water adequate
to supply needs are not available or feasible to use. (f) Used at
the minimum rate necessary to implement revegetation following
earthmoving, where revegetation is required under an approved
erosion and sedimentation control plan adopted under state law or
regulation, to the extent that sources of water, other than fresh
water, adequate to supply needs are not available or feasible to use.
Revegetation use shall comply with applicable best conservation
management practices for revegetation prescribed by the
Department and County Conservation Districts.
(3) The use of fresh water for watering a portion of golf courses, except
that fresh water may be used: (a) To water tees and greens during
the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m. (b) To syringe heat sensitive
grasses during daytime stress periods at the minimum rate
necessary. (c) As part of a necessary overseeding or resodding
operation during the months of August, September and October at
the minimum rate necessary.
(4) The use of water for washing paved surfaces, such as streets,
roads, sidewalks, driveways, garages, parking areas, tennis courts
and patios, except water may be used: (a) For prewashing in
preparation of asphalt street or driveway recoating and sealing. (b)
At the minimum rate necessary for the maintenance of tennis
courts composed of clay or similar materials by means or a handheld
hose equipped with an automatic shut-off nozzle. (c) At the
minimum rate necessary for sanitation of the premises of eating
and drinking places.
(5) The use of water for ornamental purposes, including fountains,
artificial waterfalls and reflecting pools.
(6) The use of water for washing or cleaning of mobile equipment,
including automobiles, trucks trailers and boats, except that: (a) An
individual may wash personally owned or leased vehicles by
buckets only. (b) Water may be used by commercial car washes at
the minimum rate necessary to ensure an effective wash. (c) Water
may be used for cleaning of construction, emergency, public
transportation or government vehicles if necessary to preserve the
proper functioning and safe operation of the vehicle. (d) Water may
be used for the cleaning of new and used cars which are part of a
dealer's sales inventory in accordance with the following
restrictions:
(a) A vehicle may be washed in preparation for sale at the time the
vehicle is received from the manufacturer or prior owner.
§ 26-204 EMMAUS CODE § 26-204
FWD:578
(b) A vehicle shall be washed no more than once every seven days,
to be determined as follows: (i) odd street addresses on
Tuesdays; (ii) even street addresses on Wednesdays; (iii) no
street address on Thursdays.
(c) A vehicle may be washed following sale immediately prior to
delivery to the purchaser.
(d) A vehicle may be washed only by a means designed and
operated to assure effective conservation of water or by bucket
of hand-held hose equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle.
(i) Water may be used by professional mobile wash
businesses, at the minimum rate necessary, for the
washing of commercial, government or other vehicles as
part of normal business practices.
(7) The serving of water in restaurants, clubs or eating places, unless
specifically requested by the individual.
(8) The use of water to fill and top off swimming pools, except that
water may be used to fill and top off: (a) Public swimming pools and
residential swimming pools serving 25 or more dwelling units, if
the pools have filtration equipment allowing for continued use and
recycling of water over the swimming season. (b) Swimming pools
operated by health care facilities used in relation to patient care
and rehabilitation. (c) Other pools only if approved by the public
water supply system from which the water is withdrawn. If water is
obtained from other sources, permission from the owner of the
source is required.
E. Variances from the Prohibition of Nonessential Uses of Water In Local
Emmaus Borough Water Emergency. Where the Borough Council has
independently declared a Water Emergency due to local shortage of
potable water or equipment failure or pipe breakage, the following
procedures shall be implemented to afford persons a forum for seeking
relief from the restrictions. If the water emergency has been declared
by the Borough Council, the Council shall sit as a committee of the
whole to hear such applications, utilizing the standards of review and
application procedures as set forth in the Zoning Ordinance at Chapter
27, § 27-116(2), for conditional use applications. Such decision shall be
appealable to the Lehigh County Court of Common Pleas as a decision
of an agency under the Local Agency Law. Where the water emergency
is declared by the Governor, the procedures set forth in 4 Pa.Code,
Chapter 119, shall be applicable.
F. Procedure for Exemptions or Variance From the Prohibition of
Nonessential Uses of Water.
(1) If compliance with the prohibition of nonessential use of water
would result in extraordinary hardship upon a water user, the
water user may apply for an exemption or variance.
§ 26-204 FOREWORD § 26-204
FWD:579
(2) For purposes of this section, extraordinary hardship means a
permanent damage to property or other personal or economic loss
which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by
other water users subject to the prohibition of nonessential use of
water.
(3) A water user that believes it suffers an extraordinary hardship and
desires to be wholly or partially exempt from the prohibitions or
nonessential use of water may apply for an exemption or variance
under the following procedures:
(a) The water user shall submit a written application with full
documentation supporting the need for the requested relief to:
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator c/o Department of
Environmental Protection, Bureau of Water Supply &
Community Health, Post Office Box 8467 Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania 17105-8467.
(b) The application shall contain information specifying:
(i) The nature of the hardship claimed and the reason for the
requested exemption or variance.
(ii) The efforts taken by the water user to conserve water and
the extent to which water use may be reduced by the
applicant without extraordinary hardship.
(c) The Commonwealth Drought Coordinator will review the
application in consultation with the staff of PEMA and other
appropriate Commonwealth agencies, and may request the
water user to provide within a reasonable time additional
information as necessary to review the application.
(d) The Commonwealth Drought Coordinator, as agent for PEMA
and the Council, is authorized to render a decision regarding
applications received for exemption or variance. The
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator will provide the water
user and other interested parties notice in writing of the
decision and the reasons for the decision. When possible, the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator will provide a decision
within seven working days of submission of an application or of
additional information as necessary to review the application,
unless appealed under this section, the decision of the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator shall be considered a
final action on the application.
(e) A water user aggrieved by a decision of the Commonwealth
Drought Coordinator may, within 30 days of notice of the
decision, appeal the decision to the Council.
(f) An appeal from an initial decision of the Commonwealth
Drought Coordinator will not act as an automatic supersedes,
§ 26-204 EMMAUS CODE § 26-204
FWD:580
§ 26-205. Enforcement, Fines and Penalties. [Ord. 880, 3/1/1999,
§ 205]
In the event of a drought emergency, (as declared by a river basin
commission and or by a proclamation or executive order issued by the
Governor), the Borough is authorized to collect fines and/or excess use
charges as set forth in its Local Rationing Plan as filed with and approved
by the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency from any water user.
Fines may also be imposed upon water users for violation of any part of
this Part, upon a finding by a District Justice of noncompliance with an
official Borough directive or emergency plan, at a rate not in excess of
$300 per day per event. A water user who violates this Part by violating a
but, upon cause shown and where the circumstances require
it, the Commonwealth Drought Coordinator or the Council, or
both, will have the power to grant a supersedes.
(g) When an initial decision is appealed, the Council will provide
the water user with an opportunity for a hearing. The council
will appoint a presiding officer to act as the hearing officer.
Hearings will be conducted under 1 Pa. Code, Part II, (relating
to general rules of administrative practice and procedure).
(h) The hearing examiner will provide the record of the hearing, if
any, and a recommendation to PEMA and Council for review
and adoption.
(i) The Council will notify the water user in writing of its final
decision and the reasons for the decision regarding the appeal.
(4) An exemption or variance will only be granted to a water user to
the extent necessary to relieve extraordinary hardship and will be
conditioned upon compliance with all reasonable conservation
measures required by this Part or the variance or exemption.
(5) An exemption or variance approved by the Council may be modified
or rescinded if public health, safety and welfare require further
reduction in water use.
(6) An exemption or variance granted to a water user for a specific
property, purpose or person is not transferable to another property,
purpose or water user without prior written approval from PEMA
and the Council.
G. Implementation Period. This Part shall be implemented upon
declaration by the Governor of a drought or water shortage emergency,
and shall remain in effect during the period of the emergency until
terminated by action of the Governor or by concurrent resolution of the
General Assembly. Notice of the termination of the drought emergency
and the reversion of this Part to a standby status will be submitted to
the Legislative Reference Bureau for publication in the Pennsylvania
Bulletin.
§ 26-204 FOREWORD § 26-205
FWD:581
state directive, fails to implement the duties and responsibilities imposed
by this chapter or impedes or interferes with action undertaken or ordered
under this Part shall be subject to the penalties provided under 35 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7707 (relating to penalties). Violation of a provision of this Part is a
summary offense enforceable by proper law enforcement authorities or
private citizens under 234 Pa.Code, Chapter 50.
§ 26-205 EMMAUS CODE § 26-205
FWD:582
Part 3
LITTLE LEHIGH CREEK WATERSHED ACT 167 STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE
A.
General Provisions.
§ 26-301. Short Title. [Ord. 1011, 6/5/2006, § 101]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Little Lehigh Creek
Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 26-302. Statement of Findings. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 102]
1. The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater
resulting from development throughout a watershed increases
flood flows and velocities, contributes to erosion and
sedimentation, changes the natural hydrologic patterns, destroys
aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic pollutant concentrations and
loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity of streams and storm
sewers, greatly increases the cost of public facilities to carry and
control stormwater, undermines floodplain management and flood
control efforts in downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental
to the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the
people of the municipality and all of the people of the
Commonwealth, their resources and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
E. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities
are required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from
their separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).23
23.Note: Throughout this Part, these provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4
Ordinance Provisions and are not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES
Phase II regulations.
§ 26-301 FOREWORD § 26-302
FWD:583
§ 26-303. Purpose. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 103]
§ 26-304. Statutory Authority. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 104]
The municipality is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority
of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
F. Non-stormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer
systems can contribute to pollution of waters of the Commonwealth
by the municipality.
1. The purpose of this Part is to promote the public health, safety, and
welfare within the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed by minimizing the
damages and maximizing the benefits described in § 26-302 of this Part
by provisions designed to:
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage
systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to
maintain groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface
and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and
watercourses in the municipality and the Commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management BMPs that are implemented in the municipality.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for
stormwater planning, design and management.
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which
requires a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa.Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support
those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality
in "special protection" streams.
J. Prevent scour and erosion of streambanks and streambeds.
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.24
24.Note: Throughout this Part, these provisions are from the DEP Guidance on MS4
Ordinance Provisions and are not required for municipalities not subject to the NPDES
Phase II regulations.
§ 26-302 EMMAUS CODE § 26-304
FWD:584
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act" and the Code of Ordinances
of the Borough of Emmaus, Chapter 26, Part 3.
§ 26-305. Applicability. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 105]
§ 26-306. Exemptions. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 106]
1. This Part shall only apply to those areas of the municipality which are
located within the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed as delineated on an
official map available for inspection at the municipal office. A map of the
Little Lehigh Creek Watershed at a reduced scale is included in
Appendix A for general reference. (Municipalities subject to the NPDES
Phase II regulations must ensure that all of the ordinance provisions
required to meet the MS4 NPDES requirements apply across the entire
municipality.) The following activities are defined as regulated activities
and shall be governed by this Part:
A. Land development.
B. Subdivision.
C. Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
E. Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
F. Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
G. Regulated earth disturbance activities.
1. Impervious Cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those
defined in §§ 26-305.E and 26-305.F, which would create 10,000 square
feet or less of additional impervious cover is exempt from the drainage
plan preparation provisions of this Part. All of the impervious cover
added incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000 square feet shall
be subject to the drainage plan preparation provisions of this Part. If a
site has previously received an exemption and is proposing additional
development such that the total impervious cover on the site exceeds
10,000 square feet, the total impervious cover on the site proposed
since the original ordinance date must meet the provisions of this Part.
A. The date of the Municipal Ordinance adoption of the original Little
Lehigh Act 167 Stormwater Management Ordinance (1978) shall
be the starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent
tracts" in which future subdivisions and respective impervious area
computations shall be cumulatively considered.
B. For development taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with these criteria.
§ 26-304 FOREWORD § 26-306
FWD:585
§ 26-307. Compatibility with Other Ordinance Requirements. [Ord.
1011, 9/5/2006, § 109]
Approvals issued pursuant to this Part do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
C. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not be limited to,
additional indoor living spaces, decks, patios, garages, driveways,
storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or driveway
areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part of or
for the proposed regulated activity.
D. Any additional areas proposed to initially be gravel, crushed stone,
porous pavement, etc., shall be assumed to be impervious for the
purposes of comparison to the exemption criteria. Any existing
gravel, crushed stone or hard packed soil areas on a site shall be
considered as pervious cover for the purpose of exemption
evaluation.
2. Prior Drainage Plan Approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
municipality prior to the effective date of this Part is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this Part, except as cited in
subsection C, provided that the approved drainage plan included design
of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently
proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions
in effect at the time of approval and the approval has not lapsed under
the Municipalities Planning Code. If significant revisions are made to
the drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the
effective date of this Part, preparation of a new drainage plan, subject
to the provisions of this Part, shall be required. Significant revisions
would include a change in control methods or techniques, relocation or
redesign of control measures or changes necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the original drainage plan.
3. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, property, and
state water quality requirements. These measures include adequate
and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the site.
These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
4. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§§ 26-305.E and 26-305.F.
§ 26-306 EMMAUS CODE § 26-308
FWD:586
§ 26-308. Duty of Persons Engaged in the Development of Land.
[Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 110]
Notwithstanding any provisions of this Part, including exemption and
waiver provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration
or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such
actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality
of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
§ 26-308 FOREWORD § 26-308
FWD:587

B.
Definitions.
§ 26-311. Definitions. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, Art. 2]
1. For the purposes of this Part, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the
land through the combined action of human activities and natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the
natural process alone.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities,
measures or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and
quality impacts from the regulated activities listed in § 26-305, to
meet state water quality requirements, to promote groundwater
recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this Part.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND
MAINTENANCE PLAN — Documentation, included as part of a
drainage plan, detailing the proposed BMPs, how they will be
operated and maintained and who will be responsible.
BIORETENTION — Densely vegetated, depressed features that
store stormwater and filter it through vegetation, mulch, planting
soil, etc. Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated,
or discharged. Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest
ecosystems in terms of species diversity, density, distribution, use
of native plants, etc.
BUFFER — (1) STREAMSIDE BUFFER —
A ZONE OF VARIABLE WIDTH LOCATED ALONG A STREAM THAT
IS VEGETATED AND IS DESIGNED TO FILTER POLLUTANTS
FROM RUNOFF. (2) SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER —
a required isolation distance from a special geologic feature to a
proposed BMP needed to reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due
to stormwater management activities.
CAPTURE/REUSE — Stormwater management techniques such as
cisterns and rain barrels which direct runoff into storage devices,
§ 26-311 FOREWORD § 26-311
FWD:589
surface or sub-surface, for later re-use, such as for irrigation of
gardens and other planted areas. Because this stormwater is
utilized and no pollutant discharge results, water quality
performance is superior to other non-infiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate
minerals, such as limestone and dolomite; specifically a
sedimentary rock composed of more than 50% by weight of
carbonate minerals that underlies soil or other unconsolidated,
superficial material.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing
rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in
the land surface. It is characterized by internal drainage, varying
magnitude, and an unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lehigh County Conservation
District, as applicable.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS — Constructed wetlands are similar
to wet ponds (see below) and consist of a basin which provides
for necessary stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool
or water level, planted with wetland vegetation. To be successful,
constructed wetlands must have adequate natural hydrology (both
runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water). In these cases, the
permanent pool must be designed carefully, usually with shallow
edge benches, so that water levels are appropriate to support
carefully selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including
appurtenant works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or
another fluid or semifluid or a refuse bank, fill or structure for
highway, railroad or other purposes which does or may impound
water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
(formerly the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources).
DESIGN STORM — The depth and time distribution of precipitation
from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g.,
one-hundred-year storm) and duration (e.g., twenty-four-hour), and
used in computing stormwater management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater
runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at the
appropriate release rate.
§ 26-311 EMMAUS CODE § 26-311
FWD:590
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or
other entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof that
undertakes any regulated activity of this Part.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which
a regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE — See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a land owner to
a grantee, allowing the use of private land for stormwater
management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed
stormwater quantity and quality management controls to be used
for a given development site, including a BMP operations and
maintenance plan, the contents of which are established in
§ 26-333.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other
human activity which disturbs the surface of the land including,
but not limited to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations,
embankments, road maintenance, building construction and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES — Those uses actually attained in the water body
on or after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included
in the water quality standards. (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1)
FILL — Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and
waste materials.
FILTER STRIPS — See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater
management structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above
that required to convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST — A written request for a waiver
alleging that the provisions of this Part inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. Waivers from the water quality provisions of
this Part shall not be granted.
HOT SPOT LAND USES — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic
substances than typically found in stormwater runoff. These land
uses are listed in § 26-324.16.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Soils are classified into four
HSGs (A, B, C and D) to indicate the minimum infiltration rates,
§ 26-311 FOREWORD § 26-311
FWD:591
which are obtained for bare soil after prolonged wetting. The
Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the U.S.
Department of Agriculture defines the four groups and provides
a list of most of the soils in the United States and their group
classification. The soils in the area of the development site may
be identified from a soil survey report that can be obtained from
local NRCS offices or Conservation District offices. Soils become
less permeable as the HSG varies from A to D.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER) — A surface which
prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE — A practice designed to direct runoff
into the ground, e.g., French drain, seepage pit, seepage trench or
bioretention area.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by
depressions, sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills,
underground drainage and caves. Karst is usually formed on
carbonate rocks, such as limestones or dolomites and sometimes
gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LOADING RATE — The ratio of the land area draining to the
system, as modified by the weighting factors in § 26-327.2,
compared to the base area of the infiltration system.
LOW IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A development approach that
promotes practices that will minimize post-development runoff
rates and volumes thereby minimizing needs for artificial
conveyance and storage facilities. Site design practices include
preserving natural drainage features, minimizing impervious
surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of impervious
surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots,
tracts or parcels of land for any purpose involving (a) a group
of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single nonresidential
building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of occupants
or tenure; or (b) the division or allocation of land or space,
whether initially or cumulatively, between or among two or
more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for the
purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
(3)
§ 26-311 EMMAUS CODE § 26-311
FWD:592
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural
channel or man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of
transporting runoff from the site to the mainstem.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other
conveyance used as a reach in the Little Lehigh Creek hydrologic
model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate
(e.g., cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel
shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may
include closed conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MARYLAND STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — A stormwater
design manual written by the Maryland Department of the
Environment and the Center for Watershed Protection. As of
January 2004, the Manual can be obtained through the following
web site: www.mde.state.md.us.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE
PRACTICES (MD/MM) — A site design practice in which careful
limits are placed on site clearance prior to development allowing
for maximum retention of existing vegetation (woodlands and
other), minimum disturbance and compaction of existing soil
mantle and minimum site application of chemicals postdevelopment.
Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance setback
criteria from buildings as well as related site improvements such
as walkways, driveways, roadways, and any other improvements.
These criteria may vary by community context as well as by type
of development being proposed. Additionally, MD/MM also shall
include provisions (e.g., deed restrictions, conservation easements)
to protect these areas from future disturbance and from application
of fertilizers, pesticides, and herbicides.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Emmaus, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
NO HARM OPTION — The option of using a less restrictive runoff
quantity control if it can be shown that adequate and safe runoff
conveyance exists and that the less restrictive control would not
adversely affect health, safety and property.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS — NATURAL RESOURCE CONSERVATION SERVICE —
U.S. Department of Agriculture. (Formerly the Soil Conservation
Service.)
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A structural mechanism designed to
remove free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from stormwater
runoff.
§ 26-311 FOREWORD § 26-311
FWD:593
OUTFALL — "Point source" as described in 40 CFR 122.2 at the
point where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to
surface waters of the Commonwealth.
OWNER — One with an interest in and often dominion over a
property.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater
runoff at a given location and time resulting from a specified storm
event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to each watershed for the
Act 167 Plans. The model was "calibrated" to reflect actual flow
values by adjusting key model input parameters.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association
or corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or other for
or not for profit statutory entity or other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete
conveyance including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel,
tunnel or conduit from which stormwater is or may be discharged,
as defined in state regulations at 25 Pa.Code § 92.1.
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION — The determination of the
depth to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high water table and
the soil permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site
through the use of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate
bedrock areas, the location of special geologic features must also
be determined along with the associated buffer distance to the
possible infiltration area. See Appendix G.
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a
public water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to
the public for human consumption which has at least 15 service
connections or regularly serves an average of at least 25
individuals daily at least 60 days out of the year. (See 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 109)
QUALIFIED GEOTECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL — A licensed
professional geologist or a licensed professional engineer who has
a background or expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using
a standardized runoff coefficient (rational 'c'), acreage of tract and
rainfall intensity determined by return period and by the time
necessary for the entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational
method formula is stated as follows: Q = ciA, where "Q" is the
calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet per second, "c" is the
dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix C), "i" is the rainfall
intensity in inches per hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in acres.
§ 26-311 EMMAUS CODE § 26-311
FWD:594
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance
channels used for watershed runoff modeling purposes to connect
the subareas and transport flows downstream.
RECHARGE VOLUME (REV) — The portion of the water quality
volume (WQv) used to maintain groundwater recharge rates at
development sites. (See § 26-324.10.)
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which
impact upon proper management of stormwater runoff and which
are governed by this Part as specified in § 26-305.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Earth
disturbance activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one
acre or more with a point source discharge to surface waters or to
the municipality's storm sewer system or earth disturbance activity
of five acres or more regardless of the planned runoff. This includes
earth disturbance on any portion of, part or during any stage of a
larger common plan of development.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the pre-development peak
rate of runoff for a development site to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases
throughout the watershed.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example,
the twenty-five-year return period rainfall or runoff event would be
expected to recur on the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross-section such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS — Chambers which
provide storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect
sediment, debris and associated pollutants, typically requiring
periodic clean out.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth
filled with loose stone or similar material and into which surface
water is directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system
of conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal
streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels
or storm drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying
stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the
ground surface.
§ 26-311 FOREWORD § 26-311
FWD:595
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff
computation developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil
type and land use/cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve
number."
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features,
including but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes,
fracture traces, lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles,
which may exist and must be identified on a site when stormwater
management BMPs are being considered.
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM — A program
that identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning
up potential spills and makes such procedures known and the
necessary equipment available to appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under
state regulations — protection of designated and existing uses (See
25 Pa. Code, Chapters 93 and 96) — including:
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A method of routing or
moving an inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention
structure. The method solves the mass conservation equation to
determine an outflow hydrograph as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack
adequate stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and
which present a hazard to persons or property. These areas are
either documented in Appendix B of this Part or identified by the
municipality or municipal engineer.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use,"
such as "cold water fishes" or "potable water supply," which
are listed in Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and
maintained, under state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975,
regardless whether they have been designated in Chapter 93.
Regulated earth disturbance activities must he designed to
protect and maintain existing uses and maintain the level of
water quality necessary to protect those uses in all streams,
and to protect and maintain water quality in special protection
streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can
be impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment, and
changes in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or
rates as a result of changes in land surface area from those
activities. Therefore, permanent discharges to surface waters
must be managed to protect the stream bank, streambed and
structural integrity of the waterway, to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 26-311 EMMAUS CODE § 26-311
FWD:596
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which
carries intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash
waters, or drainage, but excludes domestic sewage and industrial
wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
STORMWATER FILTERS — Any number of structural mechanisms
such as multi-chamber catch basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters,
and so forth which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and
remove pollutants prior to discharge. Typically, these systems
require periodic maintenance and clean out.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing
stormwater runoff adopted by Lehigh County for the Little Lehigh
Creek Watershed as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, (Act 167), as amended, and known as the "Stormwater
Management Act."
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for
hydrologic modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria
have been established in the Stormwater Management Plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or
other divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for
the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the
court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership
or building or lot development; provided, however, that the
subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all
rivers, streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches,
watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands,
ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels of conveyance of
surface water, or parts thereof, whether natural or artificial, within
or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries
surface water runoff. See also "vegetated swale."
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL &
INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002 — The
report written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of
infiltration in carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek
Watershed. The report is available at the LVPC offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS — Racks, screens or other similar
devices installed in a storm drainage system to capture coarse
pollutants (trash, leaves, etc.).
§ 26-311 FOREWORD § 26-311
FWD:597
VEGETATED BUFFERS — Gently sloping areas that convey
stormwater as sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated earthen
area, possibly coupled with the use of level spreading devices.
Vegetated buffers should be situated on minimally disturbed soils,
have low-flow velocities and extended residence times.
VEGETATED ROOFS — Vegetated systems installed on roofs that
generally consist of a waterproof layer, a root-barrier, drainage
layer (optional), growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated
roofs store and eventually evapotranspirate the collected rooftop
rainfall; overflows may be provided for larger storms.
VEGETATED SWALES — (1) Vegetated earthen channels designed
to convey stormwater. These swales are not considered to be water
quality BMPs. (2) Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen
channels designed to treat stormwater while slowly infiltrating,
evapotranspirating, and conveying it. Swales should be gently
sloping with low flow velocities to prevent erosion. Check dams
may be added to enhance performance.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water
having defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with
perennial or intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS — Any number of commercially
available devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture
sediment, oil, grease, metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or
other body of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS — A basin that provides for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool of water. To be
successful, wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology (both
runoff inputs as well as soils and water table which allow for
maintenance of a permanent pool of water) and must be able to
support a healthy aquatic community so as to avoid creation of
mosquito and other health and nuisance problems.
§ 26-311 EMMAUS CODE § 26-311
FWD:598
C.
Stormwater Management Requirements.
§ 26-321. General Requirements. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 301]
1. All regulated activities in the municipality shall be subject to the
stormwater management requirements of this Part.
2. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unobstructed flow
in natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities, pipe systems or open channels consistent with this Part.
3. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the
affected property owner(s).
4. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this Part. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that
there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge to the point of predevelopment
flow concentration, to the stream reach or otherwise prove that no
harm will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing
diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release
rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage
areas.
5. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a
one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the municipality, there shall
be provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the line
of such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unobstructed flow of storm runoff based on calculations
made in conformance with § 26-327 for the one-hundred-year return
period runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 0.5 foot above the
design water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure proper
runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the onehundred-
year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable
municipal floodplain regulations.
6. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning Equation.
§ 26-321 FOREWORD § 26-321
FWD:599
§ 26-322. Permit Requirements by Other Government Entities. [Ord.
1011, 9/5/2006, § 302]
§ 26-323. Erosion and Sediment Control During Regulated Earth
Disturbance Activities. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 303]
7. Post-construction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and
maintained to meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law and
implementing regulations, including the established practices in 25 Pa.
Code, Chapter 102, and the specifications of this Part as to prevent
accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of
discharge.
8. No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities
shall commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this Part.
9. Techniques described in Appendix F (Low Impact Development) of this
Part are encouraged because they reduce the costs of complying with
the requirements of this Part and the state water quality requirements.
10. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and
geology permit, consistent with the provisions of this Part and, where
appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration Stormwater
Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix D.
1. The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of
regulated and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter
102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under
25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102 and Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the Commonwealth, including
wetlands, subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter
105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a
state highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway
shall be subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (PENNDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which
may constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code,
Chapter 105.
§ 26-321 EMMAUS CODE § 26-323
FWD:600
§ 26-324. Post Construction Water Quality Criteria. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/
2006, § 304]
1. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities. Written approval by
DEP or a delegated County Conservation District shall satisfy this
requirement.
2. An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for
any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under [25]
Pa. Code, § 102.4(b).
3. A DEP NPDES stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities
under [25] Pa. Code, Chapter 92.
4. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
5. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
1. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a drainage plan which
demonstrates compliance with this Part. This Part provides standards to
meet NPDES permit requirements associated with construction
activities and MS4 permit requirements.
2. The water quality volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The
WQv shall be calculated two ways. First, WQv shall be calculated using
the following formula:
WQv = (c)(P)(A)\12
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method post-development runoff coefficient
for the 2-year storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity
§ 26-323 FOREWORD § 26-324
FWD:601
Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff volume
from predevelopment to post-development for the two-year return
period storm. The effect of closed depressions on the site shall be
considered in this calculation. The larger of these two calculated
volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and treated, except
that in no case shall the WQv be permitted to exceed 1.25 inches of
runoff over the site area. This standard does not limit the volume of
infiltration an applicant may propose for purposes of water quantity/
peak rate control.
3. The WQv shall be calculated for each post-development drainage
direction on a site for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious
cover and no proposed disturbance during development may be
excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
4. If an applicant is proposing to use a dry extended detention basin, wet
pond, constructed wetland or other BMP that ponds water on the land
surface and may receive direct sunlight, the discharge from that BMP
must be treated by infiltration, a vegetated buffer, filter strip,
bioretention, vegetated swale or other BMP that provides a thermal
benefit to protect the high quality waters of the [Watershed Name] from
thermal impacts.
5. The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be
treated with infiltration or two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in
subsection 15, except for minor areas on the periphery of the site that
cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
6. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill unless the applicant
demonstrates that the fill is stable and otherwise meets the infiltration
BMP standards of this Part.
7. The WQv for a site as a result of the regulated activities must either be
treated with infiltration or two acceptable BMPs such as those listed in
subsection .15, except for minor areas on the periphery of the site that
cannot reasonably be drained to an infiltration facility or other BMP.
8. For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed where an
applicant intends to use infiltration BMP's, the applicant shall conduct a
preliminary site investigation, including gathering data from published
sources, a field inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a
minimum of two percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix G. This
investigation will determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal
high water table, soil permeability and location of special geologic
features, if applicable. This investigation may be done by a certified
Sewage Enforcement Officer (SEO) except that the location(s) of
special geologic features shall be verified by a qualified geotechnical
professional.
9. Sites where applicants intend to use infiltration BMPs must meet the
following criteria:
§ 26-324 EMMAUS CODE § 26-324
FWD:602
A. Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal
to two feet.
B. Depth to seasonal high water table below the invert of the BMP
greater than or equal to three feet; except for infiltration of
residential roof runoff where the seasonal high water table must be
below the invert of the BMP. (If the depth to bedrock is between
two and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal high water
table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the depth
to seasonal high water table is required.)
C. Soil permeability (as measured by the adapted 25 Pa. Code, § 73.15
percolation test in Appendix G) greater than or equal to 0.5 inches/
hour and less than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
D. Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(1) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(2) Fifteen feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations; except for residential development where the
required set back is 15 feet downgradient or 40 feet
upgradient from building foundations.
(3) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields; except for residential
development where the required setback is 25 feet from septic
system drainfields.
(4) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock
unless a preliminary site investigation is clone in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(5) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from existing or potential
future wells, foundations and drainfields on neighboring
properties will be met; except for one and two family
residential dwellings where the required setback is 40 feet
unless documentation is provided to show that all setbacks
from existing or potential future wells, foundations and
drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
10. For entirely non-carbonate sites, the recharge volume (REv) shall be
infiltrated unless the applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to
infiltrate the REv for reasons of seasonal high water table, permeability
rate, soil depth or setback distances; or except as provided in
subsection .21.
A. The REv shall be calculated as follows:
REv = (0.25)*(I)/12
§ 26-324 FOREWORD § 26-324
FWD:603
Where:
REv = Recharge volume in acre-feet
I = Impervious area in acres
B. The preliminary site investigation described in subsection .8 is
required and shall continue on different areas of the site until a
potentially suitable infiltration location is found or the entire site is
determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For infiltration areas
that appear to be feasible based on the preliminary site
investigation, the additional site investigation and testing as
outlined in Appendix G shall be completed.
C. If an applicant proposes infiltration, the municipality may
determine infiltration to be infeasible if there are known existing
conditions or problems that may be worsened by the use of
infiltration.
D. The site must meet the conditions listed in subsection .9.
E. If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full REv, the applicant shall
infiltrate that portion of the REv that is feasible based on the site
characteristics. If none of the REv can be infiltrated, REv shall be
considered as part of the WQv and shall be captured and treated as
described in subsection .15.
F. If REv is infiltrated, it may be subtracted from the WQv required to
be captured and treated.
11. In entirely carbonate areas, where the applicant intends to us
infiltration BMPs, the preliminary site investigation described in
subsection .8 shall be conducted. For infiltration areas that appear
feasible based on the preliminary site investigation, the applicant shall
conduct the additional site investigation and testing as outlined in
Appendix G. The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed loading rate,
each weighted as described in § 26-327, along with the buffer from
special geologic features shall be compared to the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D to determine if the site is recommended for
infiltration. In addition to the recommendation from Appendix D, the
conditions listed in subsection .9 are required for infiltration in
carbonate areas.
Applicants are encouraged to infiltrate the REv, as calculated in
subsection .10, but are not required to use infiltration BMPs on a
carbonate site even if the site falls in the "Recommended" range on
the chart in Appendix D. Any amount of volume infiltrated can be
subtracted from the WQv to be treated by non-infiltration BMPs. If
infiltration is not proposed, the full WQv shall be treated by two
acceptable BMPs, as specified in subsection .15.
§ 26-324 EMMAUS CODE § 26-324
FWD:604
12. If a site has both carbonate and non-carbonate areas, the applicant
shall investigate the ability of the non-carbonate portion of the site to
fully meet this Part to meet the requirements for REv for the whole site
through infiltration. If that proves infeasible, infiltration in the
carbonate area as described in subsection .11 or two other noninfiltration
BMPs as described in subsection .15 must be used. No
infiltration structure in the non-carbonate area shall be located within
50 feet of a boundary with carbonate bedrock, except when a
preliminary site investigation has been done showing the absence of
special geologic features within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration
area.
13. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the postdevelopment
two-year runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80% or
more of the pre-development runoff volume for the carbonate portion of
the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the predevelopment
infiltration volume.
14. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance
and compaction except as necessary for construction of infiltration
BMPs.
15. If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the
WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in series for each
discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and
concentrated flow shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an
impervious area is to be drained across a pervious area as one BMP, the
length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the length
of impervious area. In no case may the same BMP be employed
consecutively to meet the requirement of this section. Acceptable BMPs
are listed below along with the recommended reference for design.
Best Management Practice Design Reference Numberc
BioretentionA 4, 5, 11, 16
Capture/ReuseB 4, 14
Constructed Wetlands 4, 5, 8, 10, 16
Dry Extended Detention Ponds 4, 5, 8, 12, 18
Minimum Disturbance/Minimum
Maintenance Practices
1, 9
Significant Reduction of Existing
Impervious Cover
N/A
Stormwater FiltersA (Sand, Peat,
Compost, etc.)
4, 5, 10, 16
Vegetated Buffers/Filter Strips 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Vegetated Roofs 4, 13
§ 26-324 FOREWORD § 26-324
FWD:605
Best Management Practice Design Reference Numberc
Vegetated SwalesA 2, 3, 5, 11, 16, 17
Water Quality InletsD 4, 7, 15, 16, 19
Wet Detention Ponds 4, 5, 6, 8
A This BMP could be designed with or without an infiltration
component. If infiltration is proposed, the site and BMP will be
subject to the testing and other infiltration requirements in this
Part.
B If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv then it is the only
BMP required because of this BMP's superior water quality
performance.
C See table below.
D Water quality inlets include such BMPs as oil/water separators,
sediment traps/catch basin sumps, and trash/debris collectors in
catch basins.
Number Design Reference Title
1 "Conservation Design For Stormwater Management - A
Design Approach to Reduce Stormwater Impacts From
Land Development and Achieve Multiple Objectives
Related to Land Use," Delaware Department of Natural
Resources and Environmental Control, the
Environmental Management Center of the Brandywine
Conservancy, September 1997.
2 "A Current Assessment of Urban Best Management
Practices: Techniques for Reducing Nonpoint Source
Pollution in the Coastal Zone," Schueler, T.R., Kumble,
P. and Heraty, M., Metropolitan Washington Council of
Governments, 1992.
3 "Design of Roadside Channels with Flexible Linings,"
Federal Highway Administration, Chen, Y.H. and Cotton,
G.K., Hydraulic Engineering Circular 15, FHWA-IP-87-7,
McLean Virginia, 1988.
4 "Draft Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,"
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection,
January 2005.
5 "Evaluation and Management of Highway Runoff Water
Quality," Federal Highway Administration, FHWAPD-
96-032, Washington, D.C., 1996.
6 "Evaporation Maps of the United States," U.S. Weather
Bureau (now NOAA/National Weather Service) Technical
Paper 37, Published by Department of Commerce,
Washington D.C., 1959.
§ 26-324 EMMAUS CODE § 26-324
FWD:606
Number Design Reference Title
7 "Georgia Stormwater Manual," AMEC Earth and
Environmental, Center for Watershed Protection, Debo
and Associates, Jordan Jones and Goulding, Atlanta
Regional Commission, Atlanta, Georgia, 2001.
8 "Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts," Federal
Highway Administration, FHWA HDS 5, Washington,
D.C., 1985 (revised May 2005).
9 Low Impact Development Design Strategies, An
Integrated Design Approach, Prince Georges County,
Maryland Department of Environmental Resources, June
1999.
10 "Maryland Stormwater Design Manual," Maryland
Department of the Environment, Baltimore, Maryland,
2000.
11 "Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices
for Developing Areas," Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, 1998.
12 "Recommended Procedures for Act 167 Drainage Plan
Design," LVPC Revised 1997.
13 "Roof Gardens History, Design, and Construction,"
Osmundson, Theodore. New York: W.W. Norton &
Company, 1999.
14 "The Texas Manual on Rainwater Harvesting," Texas
Water Development Board, Austin, Texas, Third Edition,
2005.
15 "VDOT Manual of Practice for Stormwater
Management," Virginia Transportation Research
Council, Charlottesville, Virginia, 2004.
16 "Virginia Stormwater Management Handbook," Virginia
Department of Conservation and Recreation, Richmond,
Virginia, 1999.
17 "Water Resources Engineering," Mays, L.W., John Wiley
& Sons, Inc., 2005.
18 "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Technical
Report 55, US Department of Agriculture, Natural
Resources Conservation Service, 1986.
19 US EPA, Region 1 New England web site (as of August
2005) http://www.epa.gov/NE/assistance/ceitts/
stormwater/techs/html
16. Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pre-treated. In no
case, may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in subsection .15. Acceptable
methods of pre-treatment are listed below:
§ 26-324 FOREWORD § 26-324
FWD:607
Hot Spot Land Use Pre-treatment Method(s)
Vehicle maintenance and
repair facilities including
auto parts stores
-Water quality inlets
-Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
-Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
-Spill prevention and response
programs
Vehicle fueling stations -Water quality inlets
-Spill prevention and response program
Storage areas for public
works
-Water quality inlets
-Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
-Use of absorbent devices to reduce
liquid releases
-Spill prevention and response program
-Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
Outdoor storage of liquids -Spill prevention and response program
Commercial nursery
operations
-Vegetated swales/filter strips
-Constructed wetlands
-Stormwater collection and reuse
Salvage yards and recycling
facilities*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan under an
NPDES Permit
Fleet storage yards and
vehicle cleaning facilities*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan under an
NPDES Permit
Facilities that store or
generate regulated
substances*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan under an
NPDES Permit
Marinas* -BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan under an
NPDES Permit
Certain industrial uses
(listed under NPDES)*
-BMPs that are a part of a Stormwater
Pollution Prevention Plan under an
NPDES Permit
§ 26-324 EMMAUS CODE § 26-324
FWD:608
* Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program
Design references for the pre-treatment methods, as necessary, are
listed below. If the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of
the municipality that the proposed land use is not a hot spot, then the
pretreatment requirement would not apply.
Pre-treatment Method Design ReferenceA
Constructed wetlands 5, 6, 10, 12, 18
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
5, 13
Stormwater collection and reuse
(especially for irrigation)
5, 16
Stormwater filters (sand, peat,
compost, etc.)
5, 6, 12, 18
Vegetated swales 2, 4, 6, 13, 18, 19
Water quality inlets 5, 9, 17, 18, 21
A These numbers refer to the Design Reference Title Chart in
subsection .15 above.
17. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use areas.
18. Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be placed in or on a special
geologic feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be
discharged into existing on-site sinkholes.
19. Applicants shall request, in writing, public water suppliers to provide
the Zone I Wellhead Protection radius, as calculated by the method
outlined in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Wellhead Protection regulations, for any public water supply well
within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback distances specified
in subsection .9, infiltration is prohibited in the Zone I radius as defined
and substantiated by the public water supplier in writing. If the
applicant does not receive a response from the public water supplier,
the Zone I radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
20. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the
regulated activities must be managed to prevent the physical
degradation of receiving waters from such effects as scour and
streambank destabilization, to satisfy state water quality requirements,
by controlling the two year post-development runoff to a 30% release
rate.
21. The municipality may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative
methods for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this section, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law including but not
limited to the Clean Streams Law.
§ 26-324 FOREWORD § 26-325
FWD:609
§ 26-325. Stormwater Management Districts. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006,
§ 305]
1. Mapping of Stormwater Management Districts. To implement the
provisions of the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed Stormwater
Management Plan, the municipality is hereby divided into stormwater
management districts consistent with the Little Lehigh Creek Release
Rate Map presented in the plan update. The boundaries of the
stormwater management districts are shown on an official map which is
available for inspection at the municipal office. A copy of the official
map at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for general reference.
2. Description of Stormwater Management Districts. Two types of
stormwater management districts may be applicable to the
municipality, namely Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts and
Dual Release Rate Districts as described below.
A. Conditional/Provisional No Detention Districts. Within these
districts, the capacity of the "local" runoff conveyance facilities (as
defined in Part 3B) must be calculated to determine if adequate
capacity exists. For this determination, the developer must
calculate peak flows assuming that the site is developed as
proposed and that the remainder of the local watershed is in the
existing condition. The developer must also calculate peak flows
assuming that the entire local watershed is developed per current
zoning and that all new development would use the runoff controls
specified by this Part. The larger of the two peak flows calculated
will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists. If adequate
capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site to the main
channel (as defined in Part 3B), these watershed areas may
discharge post-development peak runoff without detention
facilities. If the capacity calculations show that the "local" runoff
conveyance facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall
either use a 100% release rate control or provide increased
capacity of downstream elements to convey increased peak flows
consistent with § 26-326.16. Any capacity improvements must be
designed to convey runoff from development of all areas tributary
to the improvement consistent with the capacity criteria specified
in § 26-326.4. By definition, a storm drainage problem area
associated with the "local" runoff conveyance facilities indicates
that adequate capacity does not exist. Sites in these districts are
still required to meet all of the water quality requirements in
§ 26-324.
B. Dual Release Rate Districts. Within this district, the two year postdevelopment
peak runoff must be controlled to 30% of the predevelopment
two year runoff peak. Further, the ten-year, twentyfive-
year and one-hundred-year post-development peak runoff must
be controlled to the stated percentage of the pre-development
peak. Release rates associated with the ten through one-hundred-
§ 26-325 EMMAUS CODE § 26-325
FWD:610
§ 26-326. Stormwater Management District Implementation
Provisions. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 306]
year events vary from 50% to 100% depending upon location in the
watershed.
1. Applicants shall provide a comparative pre- and post-construction
stormwater management hydrograph analysis for each direction of
discharge and for the site overall to demonstrate compliance with the
provisions of this Part.
2. Any stormwater management controls required by this Part and subject
to a dual release rate criteria shall meet the applicable release rate
criteria for each of the two, ten, twenty-five and one-hundred-year
return period runoff events consistent with the calculation methodology
specified in § 26-327.
3. The exact location of the stormwater management district boundaries
as they apply to a given development site shall be determined by
mapping the boundaries using the two foot topographic contours
provided as part of the drainage plan. The district boundaries as
originally drawn coincide with topographic divides or, in certain
instances, are drawn from the intersection of the watercourse and a
physical feature such as the confluence with another watercourse or a
potential flow obstruction (e.g. road, culvert, bridge, etc.). The physical
feature is the downstream limit of the subarea and the subarea
boundary is drawn from that point up slope to each topographic divide
along the path perpendicular to the contour lines.
4. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
Part shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
A. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion.
B. Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
C. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
5. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
§ 26-325 FOREWORD § 26-326
FWD:611
designed for up to a 100% release rate so long as the total runoff from
the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
6. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the pre-development peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas re-combine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate provided that the
overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
7. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a conditional/provisional no
detention subarea, the size of the pre-development drainage area on a
site may not be changed post-development to create potentially adverse
conditions on downstream properties except as part of a "no harm" or
hardship waiver procedure.
8. No portion of a site may be regraded between the Little Lehigh Creek
Watershed and any adjacent watershed except as part of a "no harm" or
hardship waiver procedure.
A. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development
site which has areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the
design release from the site will be the lesser of (a) the applicable
release rate flow assuming no closed depression(s) or (b) the
existing peak flow actually leaving the site. In cases where (b)
would result in an unreasonably small design release, the design
discharge of less than or equal to the release rate will be
determined by the available downstream conveyance capacity to
the main channel calculated using subsection .4 and the minimum
orifice criteria.
9. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity
criteria in subsection .4 and the detention criteria in § 26-327.
10. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention
ponds shall be designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied
to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond discharge direction. All
site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of
whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that
time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series
where only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated
release rate.
11. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
§ 26-326 EMMAUS CODE § 26-326
FWD:612
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The impact area
includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
12. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged
from the site compared to predevelopment are not subject to the
release rate provisions of this Part.
13. "No Harm" Water Quantity Option. For any proposed development site
not located in a conditional/provisional no detention district, the
developer has the option of using a less restrictive runoff control
(including no detention) if the developer can prove that special
circumstances exist for the proposed development site and that "no
harm" would be caused by discharging at a higher runoff rate than that
specified by the plan. Special circumstances are defined as any
hydrologic or hydraulic aspects of the development itself not
specifically considered in the development of the plan runoff control
strategy. Proof of "no harm" would have to be shown from the
development site through the remainder of the downstream drainage
network to the confluence of the creek with the Delaware or Lehigh
River. Proof of "no harm" must be shown using the capacity criteria
specified in subsection .4 if downstream capacity analysis is a part of
the "no harm" justification. Attempts to prove "no harm" based upon
downstream peak flow versus capacity analysis shall be governed by
the following provisions:
A. The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five- and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated PSRM model
for the Little Lehigh Creek or as calculated by an applicant using an
alternate method acceptable to the municipality. The flow values
from the PSRM Model would be supplied to the developer by the
municipality upon request.
B. Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system as
documented by a developer may be used by the developer only in
proportion to his development site acreage relative to the total
upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified capacity (i.e., if
his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped acreage, he may use
up to 10% of the documented downstream available capacity).
C. Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would,
by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove "no
harm," except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements
for the problem areas consistent with subsection .16. Any "no
harm" justifications shall be submitted by the developer as part of
the drainage plan submission per Part 3D. Developers submitting
"no harm" justifications must still meet all of the water quality
requirements of § 26-324.
§ 26-326 FOREWORD § 26-326
FWD:613
§ 26-327. Calculation Methodology. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 307]
14. Regional Detention Alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined based on the required
release rate at the point of discharge.
15. Capacity Improvements. In certain instances, primarily within the
conditional/provisional no detention areas, local drainage conditions
may dictate more stringent levels of runoff control than those based
upon protection of the entire watershed. In these instances, if the
developer could prove that it would be feasible to provide capacity
improvements to relieve the capacity deficiency in the local drainage
network, then the capacity improvements could be provided by the
developer in lieu of runoff controls on the development site. Peak flow
calculations shall be done assuming that the local watershed is in the
existing condition and then assuming that the local watershed is
developed per current zoning and using the specified runoff controls.
Any capacity improvements would be designed using the larger of the
above peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in subsection .4. All
new development in the entire subarea(s) within which the proposed
development site is located shall be assumed to implement the
developer's proposed discharge control, if any. Capacity improvements
may also be provided as necessary to implement any regional detention
alternatives or to implement a modified "no harm" option which
proposes specific capacity improvements to provide that a less
stringent discharge control would not create any harm downstream.
1. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the rational method or the soil-cover-complex methodology.
2. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D shall be calculated as follows:
(Area Tributary to infiltration BMP
Base area of infiltration BMP)
*100%
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
All disturbed areas to be made
impervious:
Weight at 100%
All disturbed areas to be made
pervious:
Weight at 50%
§ 26-326 EMMAUS CODE § 26-327
FWD:614
All undisturbed pervious areas: Weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: Weight at 100%
3. Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration system. The effective soil thickness in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the
thickness factor based on soil permeability (as measured by the
adapted 25 Pa.Code § 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G), as follows:
Permeability Range* Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 inches/hour 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 inches/hour 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 inches/hour 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 inches/hour 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 inches/hour 1.0
* If the permeability rate (as measured by the adapted 25 Pa.Code
§ 73.15 percolation test in Appendix G) falls on a break between
two thickness factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be used.
Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 in/hr or less than 0.5 in/
hr, as measured by the adapted 25 Pa.Code § 73.15 percolation test in
Appendix G, are not recommended for infiltration.
4. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this Part shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin using the storage indication method or
other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph
for routing shall be either the Universal Rational Hydrograph or the
Modified Rational Method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes
detention volume. Use of the Modified Rational hydrograph shall be
consistent with the procedure described in Section "PIPE.RAT" of the
Users' Manual for the Penn State Urban Hydrograph Method (1987).
5. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall be routed using the storage indication method.
6. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below
the lowest outlet invert.
7. Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv
shall assume that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet
is full at the beginning of design event routing for the purposes of
evaluating peak outflows.
§ 26-327 FOREWORD § 26-327
FWD:615
8. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one foot
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation associated with the two
through twenty-five-year runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall be
provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool
elevation to the invert of the emergency spillway. The two through onehundred-
year storm events shall be controlled by the primary outlet
structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be designed to
pass the one-hundred-year return frequency storm peak basin inflow
rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the top of basin.
The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any off-site areas
tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this detention
facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the design of
the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105 regulations, and
may be required to pass a storm greater than the one-hundred-year
event.
9. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches. Designs where a lesser
size orifice would be required to fully meet release rates shall be
acceptable with a three inch orifice provided that as much of the site
runoff as practical is directed to the detention facilities. The minimum
three inch diameter does not apply to the control of the WQv.
10. Runoff calculations using the soil-cover-complex method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods to be used consistent with this Part may be taken
from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 or the PennDOT Intensity - Duration -
Frequency Field Manual ("PDT-IDF") (May 1986) for Region 4. The
following values are taken from the PDT-IDF Field Manual:
Return Period 24-Hour Rainfall Depth
1-year 2.40 inches
2-year 3.00 inches
5-year 3.60 inches
10-year 4.56 inches
25-year 5.52 inches
50-year 5.48 inches
100-year 7.44 inches
A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II-24 hour
distribution is included in Appendix C.
11. Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2, Version 2.1, 2004, or the
Intensity-Duration-Frequency Curves as presented in Appendix C.
§ 26-327 EMMAUS CODE § 26-327
FWD:616
12. Runoff curve numbers (CN's) to be used in the soil-cover-complex
method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix C.
13. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix C.
14. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach
which may include one or all of the flow types below:
A. Sheet Flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS
average velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or
the modified kinematic wave travel time equation (equation 3-3,
NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave
travel time equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50
feet for designs using the Rational Method and limited to 150 feet
for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex method.
B. Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from
the watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure
3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
C. Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning Equation. Bankfull flows shall be used
for determining velocities. Manning 'n' values shall be based on the
table presented in Appendix C.
D. Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated using the Manning Equation assuming full flow and the
Manning 'n' values from Appendix C.
15. If using the Rational Method, all pre-development calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
If using the Rational Method, all post-development calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
16. The Manning Equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning 'n' values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix C or other appropriate
standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities shall be
determined by methods acceptable to the municipality.
17. The Pennsylvania DEP, Chapter 105, Rules and Regulations, apply to
the construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both
existing and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments
throughout the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of
stormwater management facilities according to this Part may not be the
same criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam
Safety Program.
§ 26-327 FOREWORD § 26-327
FWD:617

D.
Drainage Plan Requirements.
§ 26-331. General Requirements. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 401]
For any of the regulated activities of this Part, prior to the final approval of
subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit, or
the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance activity, the owner,
subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan and receive
municipal approval of the plan.
§ 26-332. Exemptions. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 402]
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in
§ 26-306.
§ 26-333. Drainage Plan Contents. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 402]
1. The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater
controls.
(3) The name and address of the project site, the name and
address of the owner of the property and the name of the
individual or firm preparing the drainage plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities
or other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep
slopes (greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be
used. Off-site drainage areas impacting the project including
topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
existing drainage swales, wetlands, closed depressions,
sinkholes and areas of natural vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers and water
lines. The locations of all existing and proposed utilities,
sanitary sewers and water lines within 50 feet of property lines
of the project site.
§ 26-331 FOREWORD § 26-333
FWD:619
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the
Lehigh or Northampton County Soil Survey, as applicable,
latest edition. Any hydric soils present on the site should be
identified as such.
(7) An overlay showing geologic types, boundaries, and any
special geologic features present on the site.
(8) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(11) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the
site.
(12) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(13) An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs
that would provide municipal ingress to and egress from a
public right-of-way.
(14) A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the
site and all existing man-made features beyond the property
boundary that would be affected by the project.
(15) The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of
the project and all private water supply wells within 100 feet of
the project.
C. Stormwater Management Controls and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown
on a map and described, including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds
or trenches. When these structures are used, the locations
of septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as roof-top storage,
semi-pervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds,
storm sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of
the BMPs shall be shown.
(3) All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of
infiltration on a site.
§ 26-333 EMMAUS CODE § 26-333
FWD:620
§ 26-334. Plan Submission. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 404]
(4) All details and specifications for the construction of the
stormwater management controls and BMPs.
D. The BMP operations and management plan, as required in Part 3G,
describing how each permanent stormwater BMP will be operated
and maintained and the identity of the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance. A statement must be included, signed
by the landowner, acknowledging that the stormwater BMPs are
fixtures that cannot be altered or removed without approval by the
municipality.
E. An environmental resources site design assessment that describes
the following:
(1) The extent to which the proposed grading and impervious
cover avoid disturbance of significant environmental resources
and preserve existing site hydrology.
(2) An assessment of whether alternative grading and impervious
cover site design could lessen the disturbance of significant
environmental resources and/or make better use of the site
hydrologic resources.
(3) A description of how the proposed stormwater management
controls and BMPs serve to mitigate any adverse impacts on
environmental resources on the site.
Significant environmental resources considered in the site
design assessment include, but are not limited to, steep
slopes, ponds, lakes, streams, wetlands, hydric soils,
floodplains, riparian vegetation, native vegetation and special
geologic features.
1. For regulated activities specified in §§ 26-305.A and 26-305.B:
A. The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Borough Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
B. Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
C. Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(1) One copy to the municipal governing body.
(2) One copy to the Borough Engineer.
(3) Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except
for drainage plans involving less than 4,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover.
§ 26-333 FOREWORD § 26-334
FWD:621
§ 26-335. Drainage Plan Review. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 405]
D. Drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover shall be submitted by the developer
(possibly through the municipality) to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission as part of the preliminary plan submission. The Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission will conduct an advisory review of the
drainage plan for consistency with the Little Lehigh Creek
Watershed Stormwater Management Plan. The LVPC will not
review details of the erosion and sedimentation plan or the BMP
operations and maintenance plan.
(1) Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(2) The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and
the municipality, within a time frame consistent with
established procedures under the Municipalities Planning
Code, as to whether the drainage plan has been found to be
consistent with the Stormwater Management Plan.
E. Drainage plans shall be submitted by the developer to the Borough
of Emmaus for regulated activities involving more than 4,000
square feet of additional impervious surfaces.
2. For regulated activities specified in §§ 26-305.C and 26-305.D, the
drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the municipal
building permit officer as part of the building permit application.
3. For regulated activities specified in §§ 26-305.E, 26-305.F and
26-305.G:
A. The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Flood Plain Management)
of DEP's Rules and Regulations and the NPDES regulations.
B. One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
4. Earth-moving for all regulated activities under § 26-305 shall be
conducted in accordance with the current federal and state regulations
relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
1. The municipality shall review the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, for consistency with the adopted
Little Lehigh Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan as
embodied by this Part and with any permits issued by DEP. The
municipality shall also review the drainage plan against any additional
storm drainage provisions contained in the Municipal Subdivision and
Land Development [Chapter 22] or Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], as
applicable.
§ 26-334 EMMAUS CODE § 26-335
FWD:622
§ 26-336. Modification of Plans. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 406]
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the municipality) shall require a resubmission of
the modified drainage plan consistent with § 26-334 subject to review per
§ 26-335 of this Part.
§ 26-337. Hardship Waiver Procedure. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 407]
2. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
3. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
(regulated activities §§ 26-305.A and 26-305.B) or building permit
application (regulated activities §§ 26-305.C and 26-305.D) if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the Stormwater
Management Plan.
4. The municipality may require an "as-built survey" of all stormwater
BMPs and an explanation of any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
1. The municipality may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that
the provisions of this Part inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and accompanied by
the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the municipality.
A copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the following:
municipality, municipal engineer, municipal solicitor and Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of
the alleged hardship.
2. The municipality may grant a waiver provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions, and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this Part in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this Part, including the "no harm"
provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
§ 26-335 FOREWORD § 26-337
FWD:623
D. That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
E. That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship
waiver.
3. In granting any waiver, the municipality may attach such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
Part. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still manage
the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as
is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
4. For regulated activities described in §§ 26-305.A and .B, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the municipality.
5. For regulated activities in §§ 26-305.C, .D, .E, and .F, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the municipality.
6. The municipality shall not waive the water quality provisions of this
Part.
§ 26-337 EMMAUS CODE § 26-337
FWD:624
E.
Inspections.
§ 26-341. Schedule of Inspections. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 501]
1. DEP or its designees (e.g. county conservation district) normally ensure
compliance with any permits issued, including those for stormwater
management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
2. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this Part, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals issued by the
municipality until the deficiencies are corrected.
§ 26-341 FOREWORD § 26-341
FWD:625

F.
Fees and Expenses.
§ 26-351. General. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 601]
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of the drainage
plan, including the BMP operations and maintenance plan to defray review
costs incurred by the municipality. The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 26-352. Expenses Covered by Fees. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 602]
1. The fees required by this Part shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the drainage plan, including the BMP operations and
maintenance plan by the municipality.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and
improvements required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit
provisions, regulated by this Part, correct violations, and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs.
§ 26-351 FOREWORD § 26-352
FWD:627

G.
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements.
§ 26-361. General Requirements. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 701]
Regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g., postconstruction)
stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
§ 26-362. Responsibilities for Operations and Maintenance of
BMPs. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 702]
§ 26-363. Adherence to Approved BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plan. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 703]
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is
granted in writing by the municipality.
§ 26-364. Operations and Maintenance Agreement for Privately
Owned Stormwater BMPs. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 704]
1. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
A. If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
B. If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single owner or
if sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the operation and maintenance of stormwater
BMPs shall be the responsibility of the owner or private
management entity.
2. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
1. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix E of this Part.
2. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the
municipality to be reasonable or necessary to guarantee the
§ 26-361 FOREWORD § 26-364
FWD:629
§ 26-365. Stormwater Management Easements. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/
2006, § 705]
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention areas and
other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 26-364.
§ 26-366. Recording of Approved BMP Operations and Maintenance
Plan and Related Agreements. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 706]
§ 26-367. Municipal Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance
Fund. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 707]
satisfactory operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater
BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the
municipality.
1. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Lehigh County, within 90 days of approval of
the BMP operations plan by the municipality:
A. The operations and maintenance plan or a summary thereof.
B. Operations and maintenance agreements under § 26-364.
C. Easements under § 26-365.
2. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
1. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require the applicant to pay a specified amount to
the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Fund to
help defray costs of operations and maintenance activities. The amount
may be determined as follows:
A. If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operation and
maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the municipality.
B. The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
2. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 26-364 EMMAUS CODE § 26-367
FWD:630
H.
Prohibitions.
§ 26-371. Prohibited Discharges. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 801]
1. No person in the municipality shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater except as provided in
Subsection .2 below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
2. Discharges that may be allowed based on the municipality finding that
the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute pollution to surface
waters of the Commonwealth are listed below:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities.
B. Potable water sources including dechlorinated water line and fire
hydrant flushings.
C. Irrigation drainage.
D. Routine external building washdown which does not use detergents
or other compounds.
E. Air conditioning condensate.
F. Water from individual residential car washing.
G. Springs.
H. Water from crawl space pumps.
I. Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
J. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
K. Lawn watering.
L. Pavement washwaters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
M. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
N. Uncontaminated groundwater.
3. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in subsection .2 significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the Commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will
notify the responsible person to cease the discharge.
4. Upon notice provided by the municipality under subsection .3, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 26-371 FOREWORD § 26-371
FWD:631
§ 26-372. Prohibited Connections. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 802]
§ 26-373. Roof Drains. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 803]
§ 26-374. Alteration of BMPs. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 804]
5. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
1. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in
§ 26-371.2 above:
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
which allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater and wash water, to enter the separate storm
sewer system and any connections to the storm drain system from
indoor drains and sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by the municipality.
1. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in subsection .2.
2. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
3. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
1. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP without the written approval of the municipality
unless it is part of an approved maintenance program.
2. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP, without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 26-371 EMMAUS CODE § 26-374
FWD:632
I.
Right of Entry, Notification and Enforcement.
§ 26-381. Right of Entry. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 901]
§ 26-382. Notification. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 902]
1. Upon presentation of proper credentials, and with the consent of the
landowner, duly authorized representatives of the municipality may
enter at reasonable times upon any property within the municipality to
inspect the implementation, condition or operation and maintenance of
the stormwater BMPs or to investigate or ascertain the condition of the
subject property in regard to any aspect regulated by this Part.
2. In the event that the land owner refuses admission to the property, duly
authorized representatives of the municipality may seek an
administrative search warrant issued by a district justice to gain access
to the property.
1. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this Part, the municipality may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require without limitation:
A. The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
B. The location of the property in violation.
C. The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
D. The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
E. Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
F. The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
G. Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
H. The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
I. Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
2. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that should the violator fail to take the required action
within the established deadline, the work will be done by the
municipality or designee and the expense thereof, together with all
related lien and enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be
charged to the violator.
3. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this Part. All such penalties shall be
§ 26-381 FOREWORD § 26-382
FWD:633
§ 26-383. Public Nuisance. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 903]
§ 26-384. Suspension and Revocation of Permits and Approvals.
[Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 904]
§ 26-385. Penalties. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 905]
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
1. The violation of any provision of this Part is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
2. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
1. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
A. Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
B. A violation of any provision of this Part.
C. The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
2. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
A. The municipality or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
B. The municipality is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law
or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. Payment of all municipal fees, costs and expenses related to or
arising from the violation has been made.
3. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this Part.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this Part shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil
enforcement proceeding commenced by the municipality, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the municipality as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of a violation by the district justice. If
the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
§ 26-382 EMMAUS CODE § 26-385
FWD:634
§ 26-386. Appeals. [Ord. 1011, 9/5/2006, § 906]
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee
relevant to the provisions of this Part may appeal using the appeal
procedures established in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
municipality may enforce the judgment pursuant to a separate
violation, unless the district justice, determining that there has been
a violation, further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall
be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the district
justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
2. The court of common pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
3. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the municipality the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
4. District justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
5. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this Part. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 26-385 FOREWORD § 26-386
FWD:635
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 26-386 EMMAUS CODE § 26-386
FWD:636
Part 1
ADMINISTRATION
§ 27-100. Short Title. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 2]
This chapter shall be known and, be cited as the "Borough of Emmaus
Zoning Ordinance of 1993."
§ 27-101. Purposes and Objectives. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 101]
This chapter is hereby adopted: (1) in accordance with the requirements
and purposes (including § 604 or its successor section, which is included
by reference) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10604; (2) in accordance with the community development goals and
objectives (which are included by reference) of the Borough of Emmaus
Comprehensive Plan of 1992 (as may be amended), which constitutes an
overall program; (3) in consideration of the character of the Borough, its
various parts and the suitability of the various parts for particular uses and
structures; and, (4) to assist in carrying out the purposes and provisions of
the Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (especially Article
I, Section 27), the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, 32 P.S.
§ 679.101 et seq., Pennsylvania Storm Water Management Act, 32 P.S.
§ 680.1 et seq., Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
regulations on erosion and sedimentation control, Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation regulations on highway access control and other relevant
federal and state laws, regulations, official policies and relevant court
decisions.
§ 27-102. Applicability. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 102; as amended by
Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 8]
1. Any activity regulated by this chapter shall only occur in such a way
that conforms with the regulations of this chapter.
2. This chapter regulates matters authorized by § 603 "Ordinance
Provisions" of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10603, or such successor section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough unless a building permit has
been obtained from the Building Permit Officer. Any of the following
activities or any other activity regulated by this chapter shall only be
carried out after receipt of any required approval or permit and in
compliance with this chapter:
A. Erection, construction, movement, placement or extension of a
structure, building or sign, except for signs that Part 7 specifically
states do not require a permit.
§ 27-100 FOREWORD § 27-102
FWD:637
§ 27-103. Enforcement, Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 103]
See §§ 616 and 617 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. 10617.
§ 27-104. Filing Fees and Costs. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 104]
§ 27-105. Interpretation and Similar Uses. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 105; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 10]
B. Change of the type of use or expansion of the use of a structure or
area of land.
C. Establishment of a new use.
D. Installation of a driveway.
E. Creation of a lot or alteration of lot lines.
4. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Building Permit Officer to determine that:
A. All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
C. Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
5. Repairs and Maintenance. Ordinary repairs, facade improvements and
maintenance to existing structures may be made without a zoning
permit, if such work does not involve: (A) a change in use, (b) an
expansion, construction or placement of a structure, (C) an increase in
the number of dwelling units or boarding house units, (D) an
infringement upon a required setback; and/or, (E) any other activity
regulated by this chapter.
6. All persons reading this chapter have the responsibility to procure the
latest amendments to this chapter.
1. Fee Schedule. The Borough has established an official fee schedule,
which may be revised by resolution of Borough Council. In addition, any
applicant for any zoning change shall be responsible to reimburse the
Borough for the costs of required legal ads.
2. No application or appeal shall be considered filed until all fees are paid.
§ 27-102 EMMAUS CODE § 27-105
FWD:638
§ 27-106. General Procedure for Permits. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 106]
1. Minimum Requirements. The provisions of this chapter shall be
interpreted as the minimum requirements to promote public health,
safety and general welfare. Where a provision of this chapter differs or
conflicts with any other provision of this chapter or any other
ordinance, regulation or law, the provision that is more restrictive upon
uses and structures shall apply. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive.
2. Uses Not Specifically Regulated. If a use clearly is not permitted by
right, by condition or by special exception by this chapter within any
Zoning District in the Borough, the use is prohibited in the Borough,
except the applicant may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board. After a
review by the Planning Commission, the Zoning Hearing Board may
permit such use if the applicant proves all of the following to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board:
A. That the use would clearly be less offensive in impacts and
nuisances than uses permitted in that district.
B. That the use would be compatible with permitted uses in that
district.
C. That the proposed use would be compatible with the purposes of
the district.
D. That the use can meet the general criteria listed in § 27-118(3)-(D).
E. That the use is not "specifically prohibited" in the district.
3. Interpretation of Ordinance Text and Boundaries. The Zoning Officer
shall apply the wording of this chapter and the location of all district
boundaries to particular applications. The Zoning Officer may request
an advisory opinion from the Borough Solicitor or the Zoning Hearing
Board Solicitor. See § 27-111 and the Borough fee schedule concerning
appeals.
4. Definitions. An applicant may appeal the Zoning Officer's determination
of meaning of a term that is not defined by this chapter to the Zoning
Hearing Board.
1. See provisions regarding applications in § 27-107(3). After receiving a
proper and complete application for a permitted by right use, the
Zoning Officer shall either: (A) issue the permit under this chapter; or,
(B) refuse the permit, indicating at least one applicable reason verbally
or in writing to the applicant or his/her representative. If specifically
requested in writing by an applicant, reason(s) for a refusal shall then
be stated in writing.
§ 27-105 FOREWORD § 27-106
FWD:639
§ 27-107. Permits and Certificates. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 107; as
amended by Ord. 937, 11/5/2001, § 9]
2. Reviews. Certain activities require review and/or approval of the
Zoning Hearing Board and/or of the Borough Council, and/or the
recommendations of the Planning Commission. In such case, the Zoning
Officer shall not issue a zoning permit until such required review or
approval occurs.
3. Appeal. If refused a permit by the Zoning officer, the applicant may
appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board for further consideration.
4. Timing. After a zoning permit has been received by the applicant, the
applicant may undertake the action permitted by the permit under this
chapter, within other Borough ordinances. However, it is recommended
that applicants wait 30 days to begin construction if there is a
possibility of an appeal by another party to have the permit revoked.
Any commencement of construction or a use within this thirty-day
appeal period shall be at the risk of the applicant. See occupancy
permit process in § 27-107(8).
1. Applicability. See § 27-102.
2. Types of Uses.
A. Permitted by Right Uses. If a use is listed as permitted by right by
this chapter and meets the requirements of this chapter, the Zoning
officer shall issue a permit in response to a complete application.
See additional requirements for specific uses listed in §§ 27-402
and 27-403.
B. Special Exception Use or Application Requiring a Variance. A
permit under this chapter for a use requiring a special exception or
variance shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written
order of the Zoning Hearing Board after a hearing.
C. Conditional Use. A permit under this chapter for a conditional use
shall be issued by the Zoning Officer only upon the written order of
the Borough Council, after the Planning Commission has been
given an opportunity to review the application.
3. Applications.
A. Any request for a decision, interpretation or variance by the Zoning
Hearing Board or for a permit under this chapter shall be made in
writing on a form provided by the Borough. Such completed
application, with any required fees, and with any required site
plans or other required information, shall be submitted to a
Borough employee responsible for processing such application. The
applicant is responsible to ensure that a responsible Borough
official notes the date of the official receipt on the application.
§ 27-106 EMMAUS CODE § 27-107
FWD:640
B. Unless waived by the Zoning Officer, five copies of a site plan shall
be submitted if an application requires action by the Zoning
Hearing Board, and two copies shall be submitted if action by the
Board is not required. Such site plan shall be drawn to scale.
C. Any application to the Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board
shall include the following information, unless the Zoning Officer
determines that a site plan or such information is unnecessary to
determine compliance with this chapter:
(1) The location and dimensions of the lot.
(2) Locations, dimensions, heights and uses of existing and
proposed structures, signs, parking and loading areas, and
locations of existing and proposed uses of areas of land, with
differentiation between existing and proposed features.
(3) Existing and proposed numbers of parking spaces.
(4) Name and address of the applicant, or appellant.
(5) Name and address of the owner of the affected property, and
last known address of owner of record of abutting lots.
(6) A description of the existing and proposed use(s) of the
property, including numbers of dwelling units, minimum
square feet of proposed dwelling units and number and types
of proposed business establishments, if any.
(7) Plans for any required buffer plantings (See § 27-803(4)).
(8) Such additional information that the Zoning Officer may
determine is reasonably necessary to determine compliance
with this chapter.
(9) All other applicable information listed on the official Borough
application form.
(10) The Zoning Officer shall have the right and authority to require
a sealed, surveyed drawing and/or a statement from a
registered surveyor prior to or after zoning application
approval.
D. Submittals to the Board. In addition to the information listed in
subsection (3), above, an application requiring a site plan and
action by the Zoning Hearing Board shall also include the following
information, unless the Zoning Officer *determines that such
information is unnecessary for determination of whether the
proposal complies with this chapter:
(1) The present zoning district and major applicable lot
requirements.
§ 27-107 FOREWORD § 27-107
FWD:641
(2) A description of the proposed nonresidential operations and
storage in sufficient detail to indicate potential nuisances and
hazards regarding noise, large truck traffic, glare, odors, dust,
fire or toxic or explosive hazards or other significant public
health and safety hazards.
(3) If a principal nonresidential use is proposed within close
proximity to dwellings, a description of hours of operation and
proposed methods of storing garbage outdoors on site.
(4) A listing of any specific sections of this chapter being appealed,
with the reasons for any appeal.
E. Other Laws. The Zoning Officer may suspend issuance of a permit
under this chapter if he/she has reason to believe that the use may
not comply with another Borough, state or federal law or
regulation, until such time as the applicant proves compliance with
such other law or regulation.
F. Ownership. No person other than a landowner or their specifically
authorized agent or a tenant or lessee with written permission of
the landowner shall submit a zoning application (see definition of
"landowner" in Part 2).
G. Advisory Reviews. The Zoning Officer may submit a copy of any
plan and application to any appropriate agencies and/or individuals
(such as the Planning Commission, the Joint Conservation District
or Borough Engineer) for review and comment.
4. Issuance of Permit.
A. At least two copies of any permit required under this chapter shall
be made.
B. One copy of any such permit shall be retained in Borough files and
one copy shall be retained by the applicant. A copy of any such
permit shall be shown by the applicant to the Zoning Officer upon
the Zoning officer's request. One copy of a submitted site plan
should be returned to the applicant after approval/disapproval,
with such action certified on the plan with the signature of the
Zoning Officer.
C. The Zoning Officer should issue or deny a permit for a permitted by
right use that meets the requirements of this chapter within a
maximum of 30 days after a complete, duly filed application and
fees are submitted.
5. Revocation of Permits. The Zoning Officer shall revoke a permit or
approval issued under the provisions of this chapter in case of:
A. Any false statement or misrepresentation of fact in the application
or on the plans on which the permit or approval was based (The
Pennsylvania Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., provides for
§ 27-107 EMMAUS CODE § 27-107
FWD:642
penalties for providing false information to a municipal employee
in the carrying out of his/her duties).
B. Upon violation of any condition lawfully imposed upon a special
exception or conditional use.
C. Any work being accomplished or land or structures being used in
such a way that does not comply with this chapter or an approved
site plan or approved permit application.
D. For any other just cause set forth in this chapter.
6. Temporary Permit. See § 27-807.
7. Changes to Approved Plans.
A. After the issuance of a permit and/or approval of a site plan under
this chapter by the Borough, such approved application and/or site
plan shall not be changed without the written consent of the
Borough, as stated in subsection (7)(B), below.
B. Changes to a site plan approved by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception use or by the Borough Council as a conditional
use shall require re-approval of the changes by such bodies if the
Zoning Officer determines that such changes affect matters that
were within the scope of approval of such Board. Such approval by
the Zoning Hearing Board or the Council is not required for clearly
minor technical adjustments or matters that are solely corrections
of information that do not affect any of the significant features of
the site plan or the intensity of the use, as determined by the
Zoning Officer.
C. A copy of such adjustment or correction should be provided in
writing to the Chairperson of the Planning Commission, the
President of Borough Council or the Chairperson of the Zoning
Hearing Board if the change concerns a plan approved by such
bodies.
8. Certificate of Use and Occupancy (or "Occupancy Permit").
A. A certificate of use and occupancy shall be required by the Borough
upon completion of work authorized by a permit or approval under
this chapter. A new certificate of use and occupancy shall be
required if the use of the property should change.
B. An application for such certificate shall be made on an official
Borough form. If the designated Borough staff person(s)
determines, to the best of his/her current knowledge, that such
work conforms with this chapter and applicable Borough codes,
approvals and permits, then he/she shall issue the certificate of use
and occupancy.
§ 27-107 FOREWORD § 27-107
FWD:643
§ 27-108. Amendments to this Chapter. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 108]
C. A temporary certificate of use and occupancy may be issued for a
maximum period of six months pending the completion of all or part
of the premises; provided, that the designated Borough staff
person(s) is satisfied that the applicant will utilize necessary
safeguards to protect the public safety.
1. The Borough Council may amend, challenge or repeal any or all
portions of this chapter on: (A) its own motion; or, (B) upon agreeing to
hear a written request of any person, entity or the Planning
Commission.
2. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, following the procedural
requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq., including public notice.
3. Review of Amendments.
A. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by or under
the direction of the Planning Commission, the Borough Council
shall submit each such amendment to the Planning Commission at
least 30 days prior to their hearing on such proposed amendment;
the Planning Commission shall be permitted an opportunity to
provide recommendations.
B. JPC Review. The Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to
the Joint Planning Commission (JPC) for recommendations at least
30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed amendment.
C. No action shall be taken by the Borough Council until any JPC or
Borough Planning Commission comments are received, unless 30
days pass without such comments being received.
4. Changes After a Hearing. If, after any public hearing held upon an
amendment, the proposed amendment is revised, or further revised, to
include or exclude land previously not affected by it, the Borough
Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
5. Application for Amendment. Any request for amendment of this chapter
(including supplement, change or repeal) by any person or entity (other
than the Borough staff, Planning Commission, Borough Council or
committee appointed by the Borough Council or under the direct
oversight of such entity) shall include the following:
A. A statement of why the change would be in the best interests of the
Borough.
B. A statement of how the proposal will relate to the Borough
Comprehensive Plan.
§ 27-107 EMMAUS CODE § 27-108
FWD:644
§ 27-109. Curative Amendments. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 109]
A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the validity
of this chapter which prohibits or restricts the use or development of
land in which he/she has an interest, may submit a curative amendment
to the Borough Council with a written request that this challenge and
proposed amendment be heard and decided as provided in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
C. A statement addressing any adverse affects on adjacent residences.
D. A statement addressing any major traffic access, traffic safety or
congestion concerns.
E. A map showing the proposed boundaries of any proposed map
changes, the existing zoning of the land and of adjacent lands and
the current uses of adjacent lots.
F. A statement explaining proposed extensions and major
improvements, if needed, of public water and sewer systems to
serve the land area.
6. Traffic Impacts of Zoning Amendments. The Planning Commission or
the Borough Council may require an applicant for a zoning amendment
to fund a traffic impact study following standard methods and
completed by a qualified traffic engineer. Such a study shall take into
account the entire land area-proposed for a change, with an emphasis
on the net projected traffic increases from the proposed amendment
compared to the existing zoning, based upon reasonable assumptions
about the intensity and type of development.
7. Notification of Proposed Zoning Map Amendment. If a zoning map
amendment is requested by a private entity and is not considered at the
same public hearing as zoning map amendments proposed by Borough
officials, then at least 10 days prior to the hearing on the proposed
change, the applicant shall send or have delivered in person written
notice of the proposed change. The applicant shall provide a signed
letter to the Zoning Officer stating that such notice has been sent. Such
notice shall include the hearing date and time and a Borough official to
contact for more information. Such notice shall be provided to all
owners of record of all property proposed to be rezoned (other than the
applicant) and all property directly abutting or directly across the street
from the land to be rezoned.
8. Time Guideline on Reviewing Amendment. If a zoning amendment is
properly requested in writing and submitted together with any required
fees to the Zoning Officer outside of the curative amendment process,
the Planning Commission should hold an initial public meeting on such
proposed amendment within 60 days of receiving such request, unless
the Commission determines at a regular meeting that such request is
not worthy of further consideration.
§ 27-108 FOREWORD § 27-110
FWD:645
§ 27-110. Zoning Officer. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 111]
§ 27-111. Zoning Hearing Board Actions and Variances. [Ord. 776,
6/21/1993, § 111; as amended by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
1. Appointment. The appointment of the Zoning Officer(s) shall be
confirmed by the Borough Council. The Zoning Officer(s) shall not hold
any elective office within the Borough, but may hold other appointed
offices.
2. Duties and Powers. The Zoning Officer shall:
A. Administer this chapter.
B. Direct applicants to provisions regarding required procedures.
C. Receive and examine all applications required under the terms of
this chapter and issue or refuse permits within this chapter.
D. Receive complaints of violation of this chapter, and issue a written
notice of violation to any person violating any provision of this
chapter.
E. Keep records of applications, permits, certificates, written
decisions and interpretations issued, of variances granted by the
Board, of complaints received, of inspections made, of reports
rendered and of notice or orders issued.
F. Make all required inspections and perform all other duties as called
for in this chapter.
G. Not have the power to permit any activity which does not conform
to this chapter or all other ordinances of the Borough known to the
Zoning Officer.
1. Appointment and Term.
A. The existing Zoning Hearing Board is hereby continued and shall
consist of three residents of the Borough. Members shall be
appointed by Borough Council. Alternate members may be
appointed as provided within the provisions of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. Members of
the Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the
Municipality, nor shall any member be an employee of the
Municipality.
B. Terms. The term of office of the three member board shall be three
years, and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one member
shall expire each year.
2. Vacancies. The Board shall promptly notify Borough Council of any
vacancies that occur. Appointments to fill a vacancy shall be only for the
unexpired portion of the term.
§ 27-110 EMMAUS CODE § 27-111
FWD:646
3. Removal of Members. This shall be governed by § 905 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
4. Organization of Board. This shall be governed by § 906 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
5. Zoning Hearing Board Functions. The Zoning Hearing Board shall be
responsible for the following:
A. Appeal of a Decision by the Zoning Officer.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged by
the appellant (a person affected or any agency of the Borough)
that the Zoning Officer has failed to follow prescribed
procedures, or has misinterpreted or misapplied any valid
provision of this chapter.
(2) See time limitations for appeals in § 27-111(6).
B. Challenge to the Validity of the Ordinance or Map.
(1) The Board shall hear challenges to the validity of this chapter
filed with the Board in writing by the landowner affected, any
officer or agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved.
(2) After the conclusion of the hearing(s), the Board shall decide
all questions and shall make findings on all relevant issues of
fact, within the time limits of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
C. Variance.
(1) The Board shall hear requests for variances filed with the
Board in writing by any landowner (or any tenant with the
permission of such landowner).
(2) Standards. The Board may grant a variance only within the
limitations of state law. (As of 1993, the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., provided
that all of the following findings must be made, where relevant:
(a) There are unique physical circumstances or conditions
(including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot
size or shape, or exceptional topographical or other
physical conditions peculiar to the particular property)
and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions
generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located;
(b) Because of such physical circumstances or conditions,
there is no possibility that the property can be developed
in strict conformity with the provisions of this chapter and
§ 27-111 FOREWORD § 27-111
FWD:647
a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable
use of the property;
(c) Such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant;
(d) The variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the
property is located, nor substantially or permanently
impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, nor be detrimental to the public welfare; and,
(e) The variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.)
(3) Variance Conditions. In granting any variance, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and
to protect the public health and safety. The Board may in
variance cases prohibit certain otherwise permitted uses on a
lot where the Board finds that such uses would be contrary to
the public interest considering the facts and circumstances of
the case and the variance.
(4) Side Yard Exceptions for Accessory Structures.
(a) The following provision shall only apply to the placement
of a one story customarily accessory structure of less than
600 square feet of building floor area or a household
swimming pool serving a dwelling unit if such structure or
pool is proposed within the required setback area for such
use along abutting lot lines of another lot(s).
(i) If all abutting property-owner(s) of record along such
abutting affected lot line sign a notarized statement
clearly stating that he/she does not object to such
reduction of the required setback for the placement of
such structure or pool, and the Zoning Officer
determines that no other Borough requirement would
prevent such placement of such structure or pool,
then the Zoning Officer shall permit such reduction or
waiver of such required accessory setback, without
the requirement for a zoning variance.
(ii) In such case, future owners of such abutting lots shall
not have the right to require movement of such
structure or pool.
(b) If the abutting property owner does not provide such
waiver, that lack of support shall not by itself prevent the
Board from granting a variance.
§ 27-111 EMMAUS CODE § 27-111
FWD:648
D. Special Exception Uses.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide requests for all special
exceptions filed with the Board in writing by any landowner (or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner), as provided
in this chapter and in accordance with such standards and
criteria contained in this chapter and the procedures in
§ 27-119.
(2) Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Zoning
Hearing Board may attach such reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it
may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter
and to protect the public health, safety and general welfare.
(3) See special exception use process in § 27-119.
E. Hearings. See § 27-112.
F. Records and Reports. The staff to the Board shall keep full public
records of its business.
G. Court Appeals. In the case of an appeal from the Board to the court
of common pleas, the appellant shall make the return required by
law and should promptly notify the Borough Zoning Hearing Board
Solicitor of such appeal.
H. Appeal by the Zoning Officer. See § 27-105(4).
6. Time Limits for Appeals. The time limitations for appeals shall be as
follows:
A. No person shall be allowed to file any appeal with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after the decision by the Zoning
Officer that is being appealed has been officially issued, or appeal
with the County Court of Common Pleas later than 30 days after a
decision of the Zoning Hearing Board has been officially issued,
except as may be provided under § 914.1 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10914.1.
B. The failure of an aggrieved person other than the landowner to
appeal an adverse decision directly related to a preliminary
subdivision or land development plan shall preclude an appeal from
a final plan approval except in the case where the final submission
substantially deviates from the approved preliminary plan.
C. This thirty-day time limit for appeals shall not apply to the
revocation of a permit under § 27-107(6).
7. Stay of Proceedings. See § 916 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10916.
§ 27-111 FOREWORD § 27-111
FWD:649
§ 27-112. Board Hearings and Decisions. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 112]
8. Time Limits on Permits and Variances. The following time limits shall
apply to a zoning permit or the zoning portion of a building permit, but
shall not limit the time limits for a permit under the Borough Building
Code:
A. After a variance is approved or a conditional or special exception
approval is officially authorized under this chapter, then a zoning
permit shall be secured by the applicant within 12 months after the
date of such approval or authorization. Such action under such
permit shall then substantially begin within 12 months of the
issuance of the permit.
B. If the applicant submits complete plans for a required site plan
review or subdivision or land development approval or special
exception or conditional use approval that is related to the variance
or issuance of a permit under this chapter within the above time
limits, then such time limits shall begin after such plan review is
completed or such plan approval is granted.
C. For good cause the Zoning Officer may, upon application in writing
stating the reasons therefore, extend in writing the twelve-month
application period to up to 18 months.
D. If an applicant fails to obtain the necessary permits within the
above time period, or, after obtained, the permittee fails to
diligently commence substantial construction within 12 months or
allows interruptions in substantial construction of longer than six
months, it shall be conclusively presumed that the applicant has
waived, withdrawn or abandoned the approval, and all such
approvals, variances and permits shall be deemed automatically
rescinded.
E. Any building construction shall be completed within 30 months of
issuance of an applicable permit, unless a written extension is
granted by the Zoning Officer for good cause, or unless a more
restrictive requirement is established by the Borough Building
Code [Chapter 5]. Otherwise, a permit shall be considered to have
automatically expired at the end of such thirty-month period.
1. The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance
with the following:
A. Notice of Hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be
given as follows:
(1) Ad. Public notice shall be published, as defined by § 107 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10107.
The notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
§ 27-111 EMMAUS CODE § 27-112
FWD:650
particular nature and property address of the matter to be
considered.
(2) Posting. Notice of such hearing shall be conspicuously posted
on the affected tract of land at least one week prior to the
hearing. It is the responsibility of the applicant to ensure that
such notice is posted and remains posted until the hearing.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and a
general description of the request.
(3) Persons Given Notice.
(a) Written notice shall be mailed or personally delivered to
the applicant or his/her representative listed on an official
application form.
(b) Notice should be delivered or mailed to the Chairperson of
the Planning Commission, the Borough Manager, the
President of Borough Council and the last known address
of owners of record of property that is abutting or directly
across the street from the subject property. The applicant
shall provide the Borough with a list of such property
owners. Failure of the Borough to notify all such persons
shall not by itself invalidate any action by the Board.
(c) Also, such notice shall be mailed or delivered to the
address of any other person or group (including civic or
community organizations) who has made a written timely
request (including an address) for such notice.
(d) All notice under this subsection should be intended to be
received or posted at least seven days prior to the hearing
date.
(e) Notice of decisions. See § 27-112(J).
(4) Adjacent Municipalities. In any matter which relates to a lot
which lies within 200 feet of the boundary of another
municipality and where the Zoning Officer determines the
proposed activity may have significant impact on that
municipality, the Borough staff should transmit to the offices of
the adjacent municipality a copy of the official notice of the
public hearing on such matter prior to the hearing date.
(5) Fees. The Borough Council may, by resolution, establish a
reasonable fee schedule, based on cost, to be paid by: a) the
applicant for any notice required by this chapter; and, b) those
persons requesting any notice not required by this chapter.
B. Parties in Hearings.
(1) The parties to a hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
§ 27-112 FOREWORD § 27-112
FWD:651
record before the Board and any other person, including civic
or community organizations permitted to appear by the Board.
(2) The Board shall have power to require that all persons who
wish to be considered parties enter appearances in writing on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
(3) The Board may determine which objectors have standing on a
particular application.
C. Oaths and Subpoenas. The Chairperson of the Board or Hearing
Officer shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas
to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of
relevant documents and papers, including witnesses and
documents reasonably needed by and requested by the parties.
D. Representation by Counsel. The parties shall have the right to be
represented by legal counsel and shall be afforded the opportunity
to respond and present evidence and argument and cross-examine
adverse witnesses on relevant issues.
E. Evidence and Record. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but
irrelevant, immaterial or unduly repetitious evidence may be
excluded. The Board, at its option, may exclude written comments
from persons who are not present at a hearing. The Board or the
hearing officer, as applicable, shall keep a record of the
proceedings as required by state law.
F. Communications Outside of Hearings.
(1) The Board shall not meet with, visit the site with or directly
communicate specifically on the matter with the applicant or
any officially protesting party or their representatives in
connection with any issue involved, except if opportunity is
provided for the applicant and any officially protesting party to
participate.
(2) The Board shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda or other materials directly affecting a
proposed application unless the parties are afforded an
opportunity to examine and contest the material so noticed or
unless such materials are already a matter of public record.
This restriction shall not apply to advice from the Board's
Solicitor.
G. Advisory Reviews. The Zoning Hearing Board may request that the
Planning Commission, County Conservation District or Borough
Engineer provide an advisory review on any matter before the
Board.
H. Initiation of Hearings. A hearing required under this chapter shall
be initiated within 60 days of the date of an applicant's request for
§ 27-112 EMMAUS CODE § 27-112
FWD:652
§ 27-113. Appeals. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 113]
§ 27-114. Public Utility Exemptions. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 114]
See § 619 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10619.
a hearing, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. A request for a hearing by an applicant shall not
be accepted prior to submission of a duly filed application.
I. Decision/Findings.
(1) The Board shall render a written decision or make written
findings (when no decision is called for) on each application
within 45 days after the last hearing on that application before
the Board, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
(2) Where the application is contested or denied, the decision shall
be accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based
thereon, together with the reasons for such conclusions.
(3) Any conclusion based on any provision of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., or of this
chapter should contain a reference to the provision relied on.
J. Notice of Decision.
(1) A copy of the final decision or a copy of the findings (when no
decision is called for), shall be personally delivered or mailed
to the applicant or his or her representative or their last known
address not later than the time limit established by § 907 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10907.
(2) A copy of any final decision should be, but is not required to be,
personally delivered or mailed to any persons who officially
were accepted by the Board at the hearing as objectors to the
applicant's request.
1. In General. All appeals of activities and approvals within the jurisdiction
of this chapter shall conform with Article X-A of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 11001-A et seq.
2. Procedural Defects in Enactment. Allegations that this chapter or any
amendment was enacted in a procedural defective manner shall be
appealed directly to the court and be filed not later than 30 days from
the intended effective date of this chapter or amendment.
3. To the Zoning Hearing Board. Appeals to the Board shall comply with
§ 27-112, "Hearings."
§ 27-112 FOREWORD § 27-115
FWD:653
§ 27-115. Borough and Borough Authority Limited Exemption. [Ord.
776, 6/21/1993, § 115]
The minimum lot area requirements of this chapter shall not apply to uses
or structures owned by Emmaus Borough or an Emmaus Borough Authority
for uses and structures that are intended for a legitimate governmental,
public health and safety, stormwater management or public utility purpose.
§ 27-116. Site Plan Review Procedures for Certain Uses. [Ord. 776,
6/21/1993, § 116; as amended by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
1. When Site Plan Required. A separate site plan review by the Planning
Commission is required for any of the following uses when the Zoning
Officer decides that a site plan review is necessary to determine
compliance with this chapter:
A. A new principal non-residential building or use of land;
B. An expansion of more than 2,500 square feet in the floor area of any
non-residential building;
C. Any new or expanded impervious area of greater than 4,000 square
feet;
D. Any conversion of a principal residential building to a principal
non-residential use; except in the R-HO and B-C Districts; or
E. Any change from one principal non-residential use to a type of
principal non-residential use that is significantly different, and
would require the addition of 10 or more off-street parking spaces;
and
F. Any use not approved by Borough Council as a subdivision, land
development or conditional use.
2. Site Plan Procedures. The following procedures shall be followed for
any use required to be reviewed under this section:
A. Submission. Eight complete copies of any required site plan shall
be submitted to the Borough. The Zoning Officer shall refuse to
accept an application if it does not contain sufficient information to
determine compliance with this chapter. A minimum of one copy
shall be retained in Borough files. The site plan shall include the
information listed in § 27-117.
B. Timing. The applicant shall submit a complete site plan within a
minimum of 15 days prior to the first Planning Commission meeting
at which the site plan is intended to be reviewed. The Planning
Commission shall be given an opportunity to review the site plan
and provide any comments in writing to the Zoning Officer within
the time guideline stated in subsection (C), below.
§ 27-115 EMMAUS CODE § 27-116
FWD:654
§ 27-117. Submission Requirements for Uses Requiring Site Plan
Review. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 117]
C. Zoning Officer Action. The Zoning Officer shall review the site plan
and determine its compliance or non-compliance with this chapter.
The Zoning Officer shall make such determination within 60 days
after the first scheduled Planning Commission regular meeting that
occurs a minimum of 15 days after the receipt of a complete site
plan submission.
D. Notice. The Borough should mail or personally deliver a copy of the
decision to the applicant or his/her representative within 15 days
after such decision. If a proper application is denied, the Zoning
Officer should state reason(s) for such denial.
3. Compliance With Approved Plan. See § 27-107(8).
1. The following information, as applicable, shall be submitted by the
applicant for any conditional use or any use requiring a site plan under
§ 27-116 or 27-118, except for information waived by the Zoning Officer
as not applicable or necessary:
A. A statement describing the proposed use.
B. Layout. A site layout drawn to scale (one inch equals 20 feet, one
inch equals 30 feet, one inch equals 40 feet, one inch equals 50 feet
or another scale pre-approved by the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer) showing the location, dimensions and area of each lot;
the location, dimensions and height of proposed and any existing
structures; the required setback areas; the proposed density of
residential uses; the location and width of proposed or abutting
streets; and the proposed areas to be used for different purposes
within the development, including outdoor storage or display areas.
If the plan involves one phase of what eventually may be a larger
development, then the interrelationships of those phases shall be
shown.
C. Landscaping. The width of any buffer yard and the heights, spacing
and general species of plants to be used for screening. General
numbers, locations and types of landscaping to be provided in offstreet
parking lots, along streets and in other areas.
D. Parking. The locations and numbers of parking spaces; the location
and widths of aisles; the location and sizes of off-street loading
areas. The method of calculating the off-street parking
requirement, based upon § 27-601.
E. Lighting and Signs. The height, location and approximate intensity
of exterior lighting. The sign area, height, location and general
method of lighting of signs.
§ 27-116 FOREWORD § 27-117
FWD:655
F. Sidewalks. The location of any proposed sidewalks (with width) and
curbing.
G. Utilities. Proposed method of providing wastewater treatment and
water supply (such as "Public Water and Public Sewage Services
extended 100 feet from existing mains").
H. Nuisances and Safety. A description of any proposed industrial or
commercial operations or storage in sufficient detail to indicate
potential nuisances and hazards regarding noise, large trucks,
glare, air pollution, odors, dust, fire or toxic or explosive hazards or
other significant hazards to the public health and safety; together
with proposed methods to control such hazards and nuisances.
I. Grading and Stormwater.
(1) Proposed and existing contours if earth disturbance is
proposed (at two feet contours or other contours pre-approved
by the Borough Engineer or Zoning Officer). Identification of
any slopes between 15% and 25% and greater than 25% that
are proposed to be impacted.*
(2) Proposed method of managing stormwater runoff, including
stormwater calculations if the application will involve an
increase of more than 5,000 square feet of total impervious
coverage.*
(3) Delineation of any floodplains from the Official Floodplain
Maps and any wetlands in areas proposed to be disturbed.*
J. Map. A location map showing the relation of the project to
surrounding streets. Approximate lot lines of abutting lots within
50 feet of the project, with identification of abutting land uses.
K. Zoning district and major applicable requirements.
L. Preparer. Name and address of the person who prepared the site
plan (which shall be a registered engineer, architect, landscape
architect or surveyor, who shall certify such plan), the applicant
and the owner of record of the land.
M. Tax map parcel number.
N. Certification of ownership and acknowledgement of plan, signed by
owner or developer.
O. Applicable signature blocks.
P. Such other data or information as the Zoning Officer deems is
reasonably necessary to determine compliance with Borough
ordinances.
§ 27-117 EMMAUS CODE § 27-117
FWD:656
§ 27-118. Conditional Use Process. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 118]
Note:
* This information is not required on a zoning site plan if such
information will be submitted on a subdivision or land
development plan for the use.
1. Applicability. Certain uses that are permitted by this chapter as
"conditional uses" shall be required to follow the review and zoning
approval procedures described in this section.
2. Procedure.
A. Submission.
(1) Three complete copies of any required site plan meeting the
requirements of § 27-117 shall be submitted to the Borough.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall refuse to accept an incomplete
application which does not provide sufficient information to
determine compliance with this chapter.
B. Distribution. The Borough shall distribute at least one copy of the
site plan to the Planning Commission. A minimum of one copy shall
be retained in the Borough files. The Borough Fire Bureau should
be given an opportunity for a review, if deemed appropriate by the
Zoning Officer.
C. Zoning Officer Review. The Zoning Officer shall report in writing or
in person to the Planning Commission or Borough Council stating
whether the proposal complies with this chapter. The Zoning
Officer or Planning Commission may request a review by the
Borough Engineer.
D. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall be given an
opportunity to review the conditional use application and submit a
recommendation to the Borough Council within the time limit in
subsection (2)(E)(1), below.
E. Council Action.
(1) The Borough Council shall not act to approve or deny a
conditional use application unless: (A) the Council has received
the reports of the Zoning Officer and the Planning Commission;
or, (B) unless a period of 60 days has passed from the date of
the application.
(2) The Borough Council shall approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove the conditional use submission within a maximum
of 90 days from the date of the first scheduled Planning
Commission regular meeting following the submission of a
§ 27-117 FOREWORD § 27-118
FWD:657
complete and proper application, unless the applicant has
agreed to a written time extension.
(3) In granting a conditional use, the Borough Council may require
such reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to
those expressed in this chapter) as it determines are necessary
to implement the purposes of this chapter.
(4) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and
shall be directly communicated to, delivered to or mailed to the
last known address of the applicant or his/her representative.
3. Approval of Conditional Uses. The Borough Council shall approve any
proposed conditional use if Council finds adequate evidence that the
proposed use:
A. Complies with any specific requirements for the proposed use
listed in § 27-402 or § 27-403.
B. Complies with other applicable sections of this chapter.
C. Generally will be capable of meeting applicable sections of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
D. Complies with all of the following standards:
(1) Other Laws. Will not clearly be in conflict with other Borough
ordinances or state or federal laws or regulations known to the
Borough. The Borough may require an applicant to prove
compliance, or to prove that appropriate applications have
been submitted to obtain such compliance.
(2) Traffic. Will not result in or significantly add to a significant
traffic hazard or significant net increase in traffic congestion,
after taking into any improvements proposed to be funded or
completed by the applicant.
(3) Safety. Will not create a significant public safety hazard,
including fire, toxic or explosive hazards.
(4) Stormwater Management. Will follow adequate, professionally
accepted engineering methods to manage stormwater.
Stormwater shall not be one of the criteria in making a
decision under this chapter if the application clearly would be
subject to a separate engineering review and an approval of
stormwater management by the Planning Commission under
the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter
22].
(5) Neighborhood. Will not negatively affect the desirable
character of an existing residential neighborhood in a
significant way.
§ 27-118 EMMAUS CODE § 27-118
FWD:658
§ 27-119. Special Exception Use Process. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 119]
(6) Site Planning. Will involve adequate site design methods,
including plant screening and setbacks as needed to avoid
significant negative impacts on adjacent uses.
(7) Performance Standards. Will not have a serious threat of
inability to comply with the performance standards of this
chapter, as stated in Part 5.
1. Purpose. The special exception process is designed to allow careful
review of uses that have some potential of conflict with adjacent uses or
areas.
2. Special Exception Procedure.
A. All applicants for a special exception use shall submit five sets of
site plans for the proposed use to the Secretary of the Zoning
Hearing Board together with a written application. The Zoning
Officer may waive the site plan requirement for home occupations
that are not intense and other uses not involving new buildings nor
additional off-street parking. Photographs of the existing site or
buildings may also be requested to be presented by the applicant.
B. All site plans shall contain the information required in § 27-107(4).
C. Borough Procedures.
(1) The Borough shall forward the application to the Zoning
Hearing Board. A minimum of one copy shall be retained in the
Borough files.
(2) The Zoning Officer should, prior to the next Zoning Hearing
Board meeting where the application will be discussed, review
the plan to determine compliance with this chapter and report
these findings to the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Planning Commission Review of Uses. See § 27-116, "Site Plan
Reviews." Such Planning Commission review may or may not occur
prior to a Zoning Hearing Board decision on a special exception.
E. Zoning Hearing Board Action on Special Exception Uses.
(1) The Board shall hear and decide such request for a special
exception use under the procedures of Part 1 and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq.
(2) The Board shall schedule the first hearing within 60 days of
submittal of a proper application, unless granted a written
extension by the applicant. The Board shall issue a decision
§ 27-118 FOREWORD § 27-119
FWD:659
§ 27-120. Site Planning Guidelines. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 120]
within 45 days after the conclusion of the final hearing on the
matter.
(3) The decision of the Board shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant or their representative in
accordance with Part 1.
3. Approval of Special Exception Uses. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
approve any proposed special exception use if they find adequate
evidence that any proposed use will meet:
A. All of the standards listed in § 27-118(3)(D).
B. Specific standards for the proposed use listed in § 27-402 and
§ 27-403.
C. All other applicable requirements of this chapter.
4. Conditions. In granting a special exception, the Board may require such
reasonable conditions and safeguards (in addition to those expressed in
this chapter) as it determines is necessary to implement the purposes of
this chapter. Conditions imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
automatically become conditions of the construction permit issued
pursuant thereto, and any failure to comply with said conditions shall
be a violation of this chapter.
1. The following advisory guidelines are intended to assist applicants and
the Borough in developing well-planned developments:
A. Natural Features. Seek to minimize grading changes and removal
of mature trees. Seek to preserve the natural beauty of highly
visible areas. Seek to preserve land along creeks and steep
hillsides.
B. Circulation. Seek to separate pedestrian circulation from major
routes of vehicle traffic. Minimize the number of access points
along major roads. Avoid parking spaces backing into through
traffic routes. Ensure adequate capacity of driveways and drivethrough
lanes to avoid traffic backing onto streets.
C. Utilities. Seek to place as many utility lines as possible
underground.
D. Signs. Seek to minimize the lighting intensity of signs. Seek to
avoid signs with overly bright, less attractive colors. Consider use
of ground-mounted or wooden signs.
E. Compatibility. Seek to locate noisier and less compatible uses (such
as loading docks) as far away from homes as possible. Seek to
screen out views of less attractive activities from streets and
homes.
§ 27-119 EMMAUS CODE § 27-121
FWD:660
§ 27-121. Liability. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 121]
1. Neither the approval nor the granting of any review, issuance of permit
or approval related to construction, activity within the floodplain, site
plan review, subdivision or land development approval, erosion control,
stormwater runoff, activity on steep slopes or any other review or
permit of this chapter, by an officer, employee, consultant or agency of
the Borough shall constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by the Borough, or its employees, officials, consultants or
agencies, of the practicality or safety of any structure, use or
subdivision, and shall create no liability upon, nor a cause of action
against such public body, official, consultant nor employee for any
damage that may result pursuant thereto.
2. If the Zoning Officer mistakenly issues a permit under this chapter, the
Borough shall not be liable for any later lawful withdrawal of such
permit for valid cause shown.
§ 27-121 FOREWORD § 27-121
FWD:661

Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 27-201. General Interpretation. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 201]
§ 27-202. Terms Defined. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 202; as amended
by Ord. 802, 9/19/1994, § 1; by Ord. 830, 5/6/1996, § 4; by Ord. 937,
11/5/2001, § 4; by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 1-3; by Ord. 994, 6/6/2995,
§§ 3,4; by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006; and by Ord. 1083, 12/19/2011]
When used in this chapter, the following words, terms and phrases shall
have the following meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise or unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
ABUT — Areas of contiguous lots that share a common lot line, except not
including lots entirely separated by a street or a perennial waterway. See
definition of "adjacent."
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an acute
1. For the purposes of this chapter, words and terms used herein shall be
interpreted as follows:
A. Words in the present tense shall include the future tense.
B. "Used" or "occupied" as applied to any land or building, include the
words "intended, arranged, or designed to be used or occupied."
C. "Should" means that it is strongly encouraged but is not mandatory.
"Shall" is always mandatory.
D. "Sale" shall also include rental.
E. The singular shall include the plural and vice-versa. The masculine
gender shall include the feminine and neuter, and vice-versa.
F. If a word is not defined in this chapter but is defined in the Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], as
amended, the definition in that Ordinance shall apply. If a word is
defined in both this chapter and another Borough ordinance, each
definition shall apply to the provisions of each applicable
ordinance.
G. Any word or term not defined in this chapter or in the Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], as
amended, shall be used with the meaning of standard usage within
the context of the section.
H. The words "such as," "includes," "including" and "specifically" shall
provide examples. These examples shall not, by themselves, limit a
provision to the examples specifically mentioned if other examples
would otherwise comply with the provision.
§ 27-201 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:663
care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/
6/2017]
ACCESS DRIVE OR ACCESSWAY — A privately-owned, constructed and
maintained vehicular access roadway accessing more than one dwelling
unit or more than one commercial, institutional or industrial principal use.
See also "driveway."
ACCESS POINT — One combined entrance/exit point, or one clearly defined
entrance point separated from another clearly defined exit point. This term
shall not include accessways or driveways that are strictly and clearly
limited to use by only emergency vehicles; such accesses are permitted by
right as needed.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building (such as a private garage, private
tool shed, children's playhouse or noncommercial greenhouse) which is
subordinate and accessory to a principal building on the same lot and which
is used for purposes that are clearly customarily incidental to the use of the
principal building. A portion of a principal building used for an accessory
use shall not be considered an accessory building.
ACCESSORY STRUCTURE — A structure, such as a private garage or
private swimming pool, serving a purpose customarily incidental to the
use of the principal building and located on the same lot as the principal
building.
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
ACRE — Forty three thousand five hundred sixty square feet.
ADJACENT — Includes contiguous lots that share a common lot line or that
are separated only by a street or waterway.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — A use with a significant portion of the market
value of or total number of items for sale or rent being books, films,
magazines, video tapes, coin- or token-operated films, novelties, items,
paraphernalia or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized
by a clear emphasis on matter depicting, describing, displaying or relating
to uncovered male or female genitals or "specified sexual activities" (see
definition). This shall include but not be limited to materials that would be
illegal to sell to persons under age 18 under state law.
ADULT DAY CARE CENTER — A use providing supervised care and
assistance primarily to persons who are over age 60 and/or are not in good
physical health, are suffering from Alzheimer's disease, are developmentally
disabled and/or are physically handicapped, and who need such daily
assistance because of such condition. This use shall not include persons
who need oversight because of behavior that is criminal or violent to others.
This use may involve occasional overnight stays, but shall not primarily be a
residential use. The use shall involve typical stays of less than a total of 60
hours per week per person.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:664
ADULT LIVE ENTERTAINMENT USE OR FACILITY — A use including live
entertainment involving persons (which may include, but is not limited
to, waiters, waitresses, dancers, clerks, bartenders, contractors or others)
displaying uncovered male or female genitals or nude or nearly nude female
breasts (including but not limited to the wearing of only "pasties") or
engaging in simulated or actual "specified sexual activities" related to some
form of monetary compensation paid to a person, company or organization
operating the use or to persons involved in such activity.
ADULT MOVIE THEATER — A use involving the presentation typically to
three or more persons at one time of motion pictures, video tapes or
similarly reproduced images distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on depiction of "specified sexual activities" for observation by patrons
therein and that is related to some form of monetary compensation by the
persons viewing such matter. A theater that only shows such films or video
tapes for a maximum of 14 days in any calendar year shall not be considered
an "adult movie theater."
ADULT USE — This shall include only the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment use.
AFTER HOURS CLUB — A commercial use or membership club that permits
the consumption of alcohol and is routinely open between the hours of 2:00
a.m. to 4:00 a.m., in addition to any other hours. See State Act 219 of 1990,
which generally prohibits this use.
AGRICULTURE — "Crop farming," "plant nursery" and "raising of
livestock." See definition of each.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare having a right-of-way width of 20 feet or
less, regardless of the name of such thoroughfare.
ALTERATION — Any change or rearrangement in the structural parts or in
the existing facilities of a building or structure, or any enlargement thereof,
whether by extension on any side or by an increase in height, or the moving
of such structure from one location to another.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An indoor commercial use with four or more
electronic machines for amusement or entertainment, with such machines
activated by the use of tokens or coins.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — Shall have the same meaning as "veterinarian
office."
ANTENNA, PRIVATE — A device, partially or wholly exterior to a building,
that is used for receiving and/or transmitting electronic signals or shortwave
or citizens band radio frequencies, and which is not a "commercial
communications antennae" and other than a "satellite antennae." This
includes any accessory supporting structures.
APARTMENT — See "dwelling types."
APPLICANT — The person(s), company, partnership, profit or nonprofit
corporation or trust responsible for a particular application for an approval
or permit under this chapter, and his/her heirs, successors and assigns.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:665
AUDITORIUM, COMMERCIAL — A commercial area or structure involving
indoor or outdoor space for exhibits, meetings, live performances or sports
events, but not a use that meets the definition of a movie theater, adult live
entertainment use or standard or fast-food restaurant.
AUTO, BOAT AND/OR MANUFACTURED HOME SALES — A building or
area, other than a street, used for the outdoor or indoor display, sale
or rental of two or more of the following in operable condition: motor
vehicles, recreation vehicles, boat trailers, farm machinery, motorcycles,
trucks, utility trailers, construction vehicles or boats or transportable
manufactured homes in a livable condition. This use may include an auto
repair garage as an accessory use provided that all requirements of such
use are complied with. This use shall not include a manufactured home park
or a junkyard.
AUTO REPAIR GARAGE — A building and/or land where repairs,
improvements and installation of parts and accessories for motor vehicles
and/or boats are conducted that involves work that is more intense in
character than work permitted under the definition of "auto service station."
An auto repair garage shall include, but not be limited to, any use that
involves any of the following work: major mechanical or body work,
straightening of body parts, painting, welding or rebuilding of
transmissions. Any use permitted as part of an "auto service station" is also
permitted as part of an "auto repair garage." This use shall not include a
use meeting the definition of a "truck stop."
AUTO SERVICE STATION — A building and/or land where gasoline is sold,
and where no repairs are conducted, except work that may be conducted
that is closely similar in character to the following: sale and installation
of oil, lubricants, batteries and belts and similar accessories and safety
and emission inspections. This use may include the sale of ready-to-eat
food for consumption off the lot and of common household products as
a clearly accessory use. An accessory use providing only motor fuel to
vehicles operated by that business shall not be considered to be an auto
service station. This use shall not include a use meeting the definition of a
"truck stop." See storage limits in § 27-402.
BASEMENT — An enclosed floor area partly or wholly underground, other
than a building which is completely underground. A basement shall be
considered a "story" if:
BED AND BREAKFAST USE — The use of a single-family detached dwelling
and/or accessory structure which includes the rental of overnight sleeping
accommodations and bathroom access for a maximum of 10 temporary
guests at any one time, and which does not provide any cooking facilities
or provision of meals for guests other than breakfast. This use shall only
include a use routinely renting facilities for a maximum of seven days in any
The majority of the basement has a clearance from floor to ceiling of six
feet or greater; and,
A.
The roof of the basement is an average of four or more feet above the
finished grade of the front side of the building that faces onto a street.
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:666
month to any person(s) and shall primarily serve transient visitors to the
area.
BETTING USE — A use where lawful gambling activities are conducted
including, but not limited to, off-track pari-mutuel betting. This term shall
not include betting under the State Lottery programs or betting under
the "Small Games of Chance" provisions of state law, which shall instead
be regulated under the regulations applicable to the principal use of the
property (such as a "membership club").
BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of Emmaus.
BOARDING HOUSE OR ROOMING HOUSE —
BOROUGH — Emmaus Borough, Lehigh County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of Emmaus.25
BUFFER YARD — A strip of land that:
BUILDING — Any structure having a permanent roof and intended for
the shelter, work area, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, vehicles,
equipment or materials and that has a total area under roof of greater than
50 cubic feet. "Building" is interpreted as including "or part thereof." See
the separate definition of "structure." Any structure involving a permanent
roof (such as a covered porch or a carport) that is attached to a principal
building shall be considered to be part of that principal building.
A residential use in which individual room(s) that do not meet the
definition of a dwelling unit are rented for habitation by a total of two
or more persons; or,
A.
A dwelling unit includes greater than the permitted maximum number
of unrelated persons.
A boarding house shall not include a use that meets the definition of:
a hotel, dormitory, motel, life care center, personal care center, bed
and breakfast use, group home or nursing home. A college fraternity
or sorority house used as a residence shall be considered a type of
boarding house. A boarding house may either involve or not involve
the providing of meals to residents. This use shall only involve renting
living accommodations for minimum periods of five consecutive days.
B.
A. Separates one use from another use or feature; and,
Is not occupied by any building, parking, outdoor storage or any use
other than open space or approved pedestrian pathways.
A buffer yard may be a part of the minimum setback distance but land
within an existing or future street right-of-way shall not be used to
meet a buffer yard requirement.
B.
25.Editor's Note: The former definition of "brew pub," added by Ord. 1111, 9/2/2014, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:667
BUILDING COVERAGE — The percentage obtained by dividing the
maximum horizontal area in square feet of all principal and accessory
buildings and attached structures covered by a permanent roof on a lot by
the total lot area of the lot upon which the buildings are located.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building used for the conduct of the principal
use of a lot and which is not an accessory building.
BUILDING LENGTH — The horizontal measurement between the two most
distant portions, other than portions measured diagonally, of any one
building or of attached buildings.
BUILDING LINE OR BUILDING SETBACK LINE — See "setback line."
BUILDING WIDTH — The horizontal measurement between two structural
walls of one building that are generally parallel, measured in one general
direction that is most closely parallel to the required lot width. For a
townhouse, this width shall be the width of each dwelling unit.
BULK RECYCLING CENTER — A use involving the bulk commercial
collection, separation and/or processing of types of waste materials found in
the typical household for some productive reuse, but which does not involve
the actual processing or recycling of hazardous or toxic substances, and
which does not primarily involve the processing of non-recycled solid waste,
unless the use also meets the applicable requirements for a solid waste
transfer facility. This definition shall not include a "junkyard."
BULK STORAGE — Storage beyond what is reasonably needed for
customary use on site. This includes storage of substances intended to be
sold or re-sold for use off site.
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver medical
marijuana.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
CARPORT — A roofed building intended for the storage of one or more
motor vehicles, but which is not enclosed on all sides by walls or doors.
If any portion of a carport is attached to a principal building, it shall be
considered to be part of that building.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street designed for vehicular traffic and
on-street parking, but not including the shoulder of the street.
CEMETERY — Land or buildings used for the burial of deceased humans,
but not animals. The internment or scattering of remains of properly
cremated humans is not regulated by this chapter.
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical marijuana
by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the patient's serious
medical condition, as authorized by certification by the
commonwealth.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
CHAIRPERSON — Includes chairman, chairwoman, chair and acting
chairperson (when applicable).
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:668
CHECK CASHING BUSINESS — An establishment engaged primarily in the
cashing of checks by individuals for the deferred deposit of personal checks
whereby the check casher refrains from depositing a personal check written
by a customer until a specific date; or the offering of a loan until a paycheck
would be received by the person receiving the loan. This term shall not
include any of the following: (a) a state or federally chartered bank, savings
association, credit union, or industrial loan association, or (b) a retail store
engaged primarily in selling or leasing items to retail customers and/or
cashes a check for a fee not routinely exceeding 1% of the check amount as
a service to its customers incidental to the retail store principal use.
CHRISTMAS TREE FARM OR TREE FARM — A type of crop farming
involving the raising and harvesting of evergreen trees for commercial
purposes. This may include the retail sale of trees from November 15 to
December 30 that were produced on the premises.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinct bowl-shaped depression in the land
surface; it is characterized by varying magnitude, an unbroken ground
surface around the perimeter and internal drainage.
CLEAR CUTTING — A logging method that removes all trees or the vast
majority of all trees from a tract of land or a portion thereof.
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/
2017]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION TOWER — A structure, partially or
wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or retransmitting
electronic signals. Commercial communications towers include, but are not
limited to, antenna used for transmitting commercial radio or television
signals or cellular telephone communications or for transmission of a highspeed
internet signal, but shall not include an amateur radio antenna.
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any device used for the
transmission or reception of radio, television, wireless telephone, pager,
commercial mobile radio service, or any other wireless communications
signals, including, without limitation, omnidirectional or whip antennas and
directional or panel antennas owned or operated by any person or entity
licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) to operate such
device. This definition shall not include private residence mounted satellite
dishes or television antenna or amateur radio equipment, including, without
limitation, HAM or citizen band radio antennas.
COMMERCIAL DISTRICT — The B-H, B-C and B-L Zoning Districts.
A. Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its affiliate
provides advice to the entity, regarding, among other areas, patient
health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
B.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:669
COMMERCIAL HIGH-SPEED INTERNET ANTENNA — An antenna used
solely for the transmission of a high-speed internet signal and for no other
use, including, but not limited to, cellular telephone communications. This
shall also include the accessory equipment used to operate the antennas.
COMMERCIAL OUTDOOR RECREATION — A use that:
COMMERCIAL USE — Includes retail sales, offices, personal services, auto
sales, auto repair garages and other uses of a similar nature. The sale of
goods or services from a vehicle on a lot shall also be considered to be a
commercial use.
COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of Emmaus.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A noncommercial use that exists solely to provide
leisure and educational activities and programs to the general public or
certain age groups. The use also may include the noncommercial
preparation and/or provision of meals to low-income elderly persons. This
shall not include residential uses or a "treatment center."
COMPOSTING — The collection and processing of vegetative material to
allow it to biologically decompose under controlled anaerobic or aerobic
conditions to yield a humus-like product.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The document entitled the Emmaus Borough
Comprehensive Plan, or any part thereof, adopted by the Borough Council,
as amended.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use which is allowed or denied by the Borough
Council within the provisions of Part 1, after review by the Planning
Commission.
CONDOMINIUM — A set of individual dwelling units or other areas of
buildings each owned by an individual person(s) in fee simple, with such
owners assigned a proportionate interest in the remainder of the real estate
which is designated for common ownership, and which is created under
either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of 1963 or the Pennsylvania
Uniform Condominium Act of 1980, as amended, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3301 et seq.
CONSTRUCTION — Includes the placing of construction materials in
permanent position and fastening in a temporary or permanent position
and/or the demolition of a pre-existing building.
CONVENIENCE STORE — A use that primarily sells routine household
goods, groceries and prepared ready-to-eat foods to the general public, but
that is not primarily a restaurant, and that includes a building with a floor
area of less than 4,000 square feet. This use may also include the accessory
sale of gasoline, provided the requirements for an "auto service station" are
also met.
A. Has a total building coverage of less than 15%.
Is used principally for active or passive recreation (such as a driving
range); and,
B.
C. Is used for a profit-making purpose.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:670
CONVERSION — To change or adapt land or structures to a different use.
COUNTY — The County of Lehigh, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.26
CRAFT BEVERAGE — An alcoholic beverage product manufactured by a
small, independent and privately held brewery, winery or distillery with a
principal office for doing business or a craft beverage production facility
located in the Borough of Emmaus and subject to regulation and licensing
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. This term shall include wine, liquor,
mead, malt or brewed beverages, potable distilled spirits and other, similar
alcoholic drinks or drinkable liquids, all as defined in the Pennsylvania
Liquor Code.27[Added by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015]
CRAFT BEVERAGE PRODUCTION FACILITY — A small, independent
facility that manufactures craft beverages (as defined herein) and whose
flavor derives from traditional or innovative ingredients, manufacturing
techniques and their fermentation. In the case of malt or brewed beverages,
the manufacture shall not exceed 40,000 barrels annually. Permitted
activities of a craft beverage production facility may include what is
commonly known as a "tasting room" for the purpose of tasting, or
otherwise sampling, and promoting the sale of its craft beverages to
consumers. A craft beverage production facility may offer its product for
retail and wholesale distribution and shall meet all applicable licensing
requirements of governmental agencies.[Added by Ord. 1128, 7/27/
2015]
CRAFT BEVERAGE RESTAURANT — A restaurant, which may include what
is commonly known as a "tasting room," owned, operated and maintained
by the owner(s) of a craft beverage production facility which, in addition to
food, sells or dispenses craft beverages manufactured by the craft beverage
restaurant owner or a craft beverage production facility in common
ownership with the craft beverage restaurant owner. Such sales may
include the sale of craft beverages for on-site and off-site consumption as
well as off-site wholesale distribution. It is not necessary that the craft
beverage be manufactured on site; however, the product may be
manufactured on site and dispensed from storage tanks or other vessels
directly to consumers. To constitute a craft beverage restaurant, the total
beverage alcohol volume sold shall be in craft beverage product
manufactured by the owner(s) of the craft beverage restaurant. A craft
beverage restaurant shall meet all applicable licensing requirements of
governmental agencies.[Added by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015]
CROP FARMING — The cultivating, raising and harvesting of products of
the soil and the storage of these products produced on the premises. The
definition of crop farming shall also include orchards and Christmas tree
farms, but shall not include animal husbandry, commercial forestry, riding
academies or kennels. If a crop farming lot includes more than 15 acres, it
may also include the keeping of up to 10 additional animals as a permitted
26.Editor's Note: The former definition of "craft brewery," added by Ord. 1111, 9/2/2014,
which immediately followed this definition, was repealed by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015.
27.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:671
accessory use, in addition to what is permitted under the "keeping of pets"
in § 27-403.
CULTURAL CENTER — A building and/or land open to the public which
primarily contains exhibits of clearly artistic or cultural interest, such as
a museum, library, art gallery or indoor nature study area. This shall not
include uses that are primarily commercial in nature.
CURATIVE AMENDMENT — A proposed zoning amendment made to the
Borough Council by any landowner who desires to challenge on substantive
grounds the validity of an ordinance which prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which they have an interest.
DAY CARE, CHILD — A use involving the supervised care of children under
age 16 outside of the children's own home primarily for periods of less than
18 hours during the average day. This use may also include educational
programs that are supplementary to state-required education, including a
"nursery school." Any such use shall meet state licensing requirements, as
applicable. The following three types of day care are permitted without
regulation by this chapter:
DAYS — Calendar days.
DENSITY — The total number of dwelling units proposed on a lot divided by
the "lot area," unless otherwise stated.
D.E.P. (OR "DEP") — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, or its successor, and its relevant subparts.
DETACHED BUILDING — A building that is surrounded on all sides by open
yards and that is not attached to any other building.
DEVELOPMENT — Construction, erection or expansion of a structure or
mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
The term also includes any activities defined as "land development" under
the Emmaus Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
A. Care of children by their own relatives;
Care of children within a place of worship during regularly scheduled
weekly religious services; and,
B.
Care of one to three children within any dwelling unit, in addition to
children who are relatives of the care giver. See also the definition of
"adult day care center."
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER, AS AN ACCESSORY USE — A type of "day
care" use that provides care for six or fewer children at one time who
are not relatives of the care giver. See § 27-403.
CHILD DAY CARE CENTER, AS A PRINCIPAL USE — A type of "day
care" use that provides care for seven or more children at any one time
who are not relatives of the primary operator. See § 27-402. See also
day care as an accessory use of a business under § 27-306(5).
C.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:672
DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination thereof,
which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health (hereinafter
named "DOH") of the commonwealth to dispense medical
marijuana.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
DISTRIBUTION — The processing of materials so as to sort out which
finished goods are to be transported to different locations, and the loading
and unloading of such goods. This use usually involves inventory control,
material handling, order administration and packaging. This term shall not
include a "trucking company terminal."
DISTRICT (OR ZONING DISTRICT) — A land area within the Borough
within which certain uniform regulations and requirements apply under the
provisions of this chapter.
DRIVEWAY — A privately owned, constructed and maintained vehicular
access from a street or access drive to only one dwelling unit, commercial
unit, institutional or industrial principal use. See also "access drive."
DWELLING — A building used as nontransient living quarters, but not
including a boarding house, hotel, motel, hospital, nursing home or
dormitory. A dwelling may include a use that meets the definition of a
"sectional home." This chapter categorizes dwellings into the following
types:
CONVERSION APARTMENT - A new dwelling unit created within an
existing building within the standards of Part 4 and where permitted by
Part 3 and meeting the floor area requirements of § 27-801.
LOW-RISE APARTMENTS (OR GARDEN APARTMENTS) - Three or more
dwelling units within a building that are separated by only horizontal floors
or by a combination of horizontal floors and vertical walls (see definition of
"townhouses"). This shall include buildings with a maximum height of 3 1/
2 stories or 35 feet, whichever is lesser. The individual dwelling units may
be leased or sold for condominium ownership.
MID-RISE APARTMENTS - Three or more dwelling units within a building
that is higher than 35 feet or 3 1/2 stories, and less than six stories
(whichever is less).
SECTIONAL HOME - A type of dwelling that meets a definition of singlefamily
detached dwelling, single-family semi-detached dwelling, townhouse
or garden apartment that is substantially but not wholly produced in two
or more major sections off the site and then is assembled and completed on
the site, and that does not meet the definition of a "manufactured home"
and that is supported structurally by its exterior walls and that rests on
a permanent foundation. This type of home is also commonly called a
"modular home."
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING - One dwelling unit in one
building accommodating only one family and having open areas on all
sides.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:673
MANUFACTURED HOME - A type of single-family detached dwelling that
meets all of the following requirements:
A. Is transportable;
B. Is designed for permanent occupancy;
C. Is contained in a single piece, or two substantial pieces designed to
be joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for
repeated towing;
D. Which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations;
E. Is constructed so that it may be used with or without a permanent
foundation;
F. Is not a "recreation vehicle"; and,
G. Includes a minimum of 300 square feet of interior floor space. The
terms "mobile home" and "manufactured home" have the same
meaning. See the definition of "sectional home."
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING OR HALF OF A TWIN
DWELLING - One dwelling unit accommodating one family that is attached
to and completely separated by a vertical unpierced fire resistant wall to
only one additional dwelling unit. One side yard shall be adjacent to each
dwelling unit. This use is commonly known as 1/2 of a duplex. Each unit
may or may not be on a separate lot.
TOWNHOUSE - One dwelling unit that is attached to two or more dwelling
units, and with each dwelling unit being completely separated from and
attached to each other by unpierced vertical fire resistant walls. Each
dwelling unit shall have its own outside access. Side yards shall be adjacent
to each end unit. Townhouses are also commonly referred to as "row
houses" or "single-family attached dwellings."
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING - Two dwelling units
accommodating one family each, with both dwelling units within a single
building on a single lot, and without the dwelling units being completely
separated by a vertical wall. The building shall have two side yards.
DWELLING UNIT — A single habitable living unit occupied by only one
"family." See definition of "family." Each dwelling unit shall have:
EASEMENT — Authorization by a property owner for the use by another,
and for a specified purpose, of any designated part of the owner's property.
A. Its own toilet, bath or shower, sink, sleeping and cooking facilities; and,
Separate access to the outside or to a common hallway or balcony
that connects to outside access at ground level. No dwelling unit shall
include a separate living area that is completely separated by interior
walls so as to prevent interior access from the remainder of the living
area.
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:674
EMERGENCY SERVICES STATION — A building for the housing of fire,
emergency, medical, police equipment, and for related activities. This may
include housing for emergency personnel while on call.
EMPLOYEES — The highest number of workers (including both part-time
and full-time, both compensated and volunteer and both employees and
contractors) present on a lot at any one time, other than clearly temporary
and occasional persons working on physical improvements to the site.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — Utility or municipal uses that are necessary
for the preservation of the public health and safety and that are routine,
customary and appropriate to the character of the area in which they are to
be located. See standards in § 27-306. Essential services shall not include
a central sewage treatment plant, a solid waste disposal area or facility,
commercial communications towers, a power generating station, septic or
sludge disposal, offices, storage of trucks or equipment or bulk storage of
materials.
EXERCISE CLUB — A facility that offers indoor or outdoor recreational
facilities, such as the following: weight rooms, exercise equipment,
nonhousehold pool and racquetball courts.
FAMILY — One or more persons living in a single dwelling unit and
functioning as a common household unit. A family shall not include more
than four persons who are not "related" to each other (see definition in Part
2). The term "family" may specifically include a maximum of four unrelated
persons living within a permitted "group home" (including the highest
number of staff present during any one shift), except that the provisions for
groups homes in § 27-402 may allow a greater number of unrelated persons
in certain circumstances. A "treatment center" shall not be considered a
"family" or a "group home."
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation,
an enclosure or a visual barrier that is constructed of wood, chain-link
metal, vinyl or aluminum and/or plastic inserts. Man-made barriers
constructed principally of masonry, concrete, cinder block or similar
materials shall be considered a "wall." The term "wall" does not include
engineering retaining walls, which are permitted uses as needed in all
districts. The terms "fence" and "wall" do not include hedges, trees or
shrubs.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — An establishment primarily involved with
loans and monetary, not material, transactions and that has routine
interactions with the public.
FLOODPLAIN (ONE-HUNDRED YEAR) — See definitions in § 27-516 of this
chapter entitled "Floodplain Area Regulations."
FLOOR AREA OR TOTAL FLOOR AREA — The total floor space within
a building(s) measured from the exterior faces of exterior walls or from
the center lines of walls separating buildings. Floor area shall specifically
include, but not be limited to:
A. Fully enclosed porches; and,
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:675
FORESTRY, COMMERCIAL — The harvesting of more live trees with a trunk
width of six inches or more at a height four feet above the average ground
level that is allowed as a permitted by right use under § 27-515.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for the particular patient, including
the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety and
quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
GARAGE, PRIVATE OR HOUSEHOLD — An enclosed building for the
storage of one or more motor vehicles. No business, occupation or service
shall be conducted in a private garage that is accessory to a dwelling,
except as may be allowed as a home occupation. The rental to a person who
does not reside on the property of storage space that would accommodate
more than three cars or for commercial purposes shall be regulated as a
business use.
GARAGE SALE — The accessory use of any lot for the occasional sale
or auction of only common household goods and furniture and items of a
closely similar character. See the Borough Garage Sale Ordinance [Chapter
13, Part 2].
GLARE — A sensation of brightness within the visual field which causes
annoyance, discomfort or loss in visual performance, visibility and/or ability
to focus.
GROUP HOME — The use of any lawful dwelling unit that meets all of the
following criteria:
Basement or cellar or attic space that is potentially habitable and
has a minimum head clearance of at least 6.5 feet. For the purposes
of determining minimum square feet of a dwelling unit, floor area
specifically shall not include the following:
(1) Elevator shafts;
(2) Common stairwells serving numerous dwelling units or uses; or,
(3) Unenclosed porches, decks or breezeways.
B.
Involves the care of the maximum number of persons permitted by
"group home" standards of § 27-402, and meets all other standards of
such section.
A.
B. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
Involves providing nonroutine support services and oversight to
persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within an
institution, because of physical disability, old age, mental retardation or
other "handicap"* as defined by applicable federal law.
C.
D. Does not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:676
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and
process medical marijuana.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Those wastes where significant potential exists
for causing adverse public health or environmental impacts if the waste
is handled, stored, transported, treated or disposed of in a manner
customarily accepted for ordinary solid wastes. This also includes wastes
subject to special state or federal licensing or regulation including but
not limited through the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act, 35 P.S.
§ 6018.101 et seq., as amended.
HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average elevation of
the average proposed ground level around the building to the highest point
of a structure. For a building with a roof, such height shall be measured to
the highest point of the structural roof. See exemptions for certain types of
structures in § 27-802. For height of signs, see Part 7, entitled "Signs."
HELIPORT — An area used for the take-off and landing of helicopters,
together with any related support facilities such as for maintenance,
refueling and storage. This chapter is not intended to regulate the
nonroutine emergency landing and take-off of aircraft to pick-up seriously
injured or ill persons.
PUBLIC HELIPORT - A heliport that does not meet the definition of a
private heliport.
PRIVATE HELIPORT - A heliport limited to a maximum total of 15 flights
or take-offs in any seven-day-period and that is not available for use by the
general public. This is also known as a helistop.
HOME OCCUPATION — A routine, accessory and customary nonresidential
use conducted within or administered from a portion of a dwelling or its
permitted accessory building that:
Does not involve the housing or treatment of persons who could
reasonably be considered a threat to the physical safety of others.
NOTE: As of 1991, the Federal Fair Housing Act defined "handicap"
as follows: "(1) a physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities; (2) a record of
having such an impairment; or, (3) being regarded as having such an
impairment, but such term does not include current, illegal use of or
addiction to a controlled substance as defined in § 802 of Title 21."
E.
A. Is conducted primarily by a permanent resident of the dwelling.
Meets the definition, standards and limitations of a "general home
occupation" or a "light home occupation" within the following
definitions and § 27-403.
B.
Only includes uses that are clearly incidental and secondary to the
principal residential use.
C.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:677
GENERAL HOME OCCUPATION - A type of "home occupation" that:
A. Only involves persons working on the premises who are permanent
residents of the dwelling plus a maximum of one nonresident working
on the premises at any one point in time.
B. Does not meet the definition and standards of a "light home
occupation."
C. Meets the standards of § 27-403.
NOTE: This use typically requires approval by the Zoning Hearing Board
under Part 3.
LIGHT HOME OCCUPATION - A type of "home occupation" that:
A. Only involves persons working on the premises or routinely operating
from the premises who are permanent residents of the dwelling.
B. Does not involve more persons regularly entering and exiting the
premises for business purposes other than specified in § 27-403, but
instead primarily involves the operator visiting clients at their home or
business.
C. Is limited to only the following types of activities:
(1) Office-type work (such as writing, editing, drafting, tax
preparation, computer programming and computer data
inputting).
(2) Clerical work (such as typing, stenography, addressing and
sending mail).
(3) Custom sewing and fabric crafts.
(4) Creation of visual arts (such as painting, sculpture or wood
carving).
(5) The receiving of phone calls and the keeping of files on the site.
(6) Sales and surveys over the phone.
D. Meets the standards of § 27-403.
NOTE: This use typically does not require Zoning Hearing Board approval
under Part 3.
HOSPITAL — A use involving the diagnosis, treatment or other medical or
hospice care of humans that includes, but is not limited to, care requiring
stays overnight. A medical care use that does not involve stays overnight
Does not include any retail or wholesale sales on the premises (other
than over the phone and through the mail) nor any industrial use (other
than custom crafts and sewing).
D.
Specifically does not include the following: hotel, motel, nursing home,
boarding house, restaurant, stable, kennel, auto repair, retail sales,
painting of vehicles, tractor repair, lawn mower and engine repair,
manufacturing (other than custom crafts) or bulk welding.
E.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:678
shall be considered a "medical office or clinic." See § 27-402, which
describes uses permitted in conjunction with a hospital.
HOTEL OR MOTEL — A building or buildings including rooms rented out
to persons as clearly transient and temporary living quarters. Any such
use that customarily involves the housing of persons for periods of time
longer than 30 days shall be considered a "boarding house" and shall meet
the requirements of that use. See also "bed and breakfast" use. A hotel or
motel may include a restaurant, nightclub, newsstand or tavern; provided,
that such uses are clearly accessory to the principal use of overnight
accommodations.
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A document issued by the DOH that permits
access to medical marijuana.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — The total area of all "impervious surfaces" on
a lot (including building coverage) divided by the total lot area.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Area covered by roofs, concrete, asphalt or
other man-made cover which has a coefficient of runoff of 0.7 or higher.
The Borough Engineer shall decide any dispute over whether an area is
"impervious."
INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT — The I-L District.
INDUSTRIAL USE — Includes manufacturing, distribution, warehousing
and other operations of an industrial and not primarily of a commercial,
institutional or residential nature.
INSTITUTIONAL PARKING — Parking that is associated with school,
hospital, church or other religious establishment, museum, library or other
similar type facility or use of property.
IRON SURFACE MINE — A mining pit from which iron ore was taken.
JUNK — Any discarded, unusable, scrap or abandoned man-made or manprocessed
material or articles, such as the following types: metal, furniture,
appliances, motor vehicle parts, aircraft, glass, plastics, machinery,
equipment, containers and building materials other than materials
permitted under § 27-306(5). Junk shall not include: (a) solid waste that
is temporarily stored as is customary in an appropriate container that is
routinely awaiting collection and disposed of in a manner consistent with
state regulations; (B) toxic wastes; (C) grass clippings, leaves or tree limbs;
Areas being voluntarily dedicated as common open space may be
included in the acreage for determining impervious coverage of an
adjoining lot.
A.
The nonimpervious coverage may be partially or wholly met by land
that abuts the use, even if such land is in a different zoning district, an
adjoining municipality and/or an abutting lot, if such land will be deed
restricted as permanent open space and be so clearly stated on official
recorded plans. In such case, such land shall be properly maintained by
the abutting use.
B.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:679
or, (D) items clearly awaiting imminent recycling at an approved recycling
use.
JUNK VEHICLE — Includes any vehicle or trailer that meets any of the
following conditions:
JUNKYARD —
KARST — A type of topography that is formed over limestone, dolomite
or gypsum, by bedrock solution, and that is characterized by closed
depressions or sinkholes, caves and underground drainage.
KENNEL — The keeping of a greater number of dogs or cats on a lot or
within a dwelling unit beyond that number permitted under the "Keeping of
Pets" or the "Crop Farming" provisions of this chapter. A nonprofit animal
shelter is a type of kennel.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The definition in the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], as amended, shall apply.
LANDOWNER — The owner of a legal or equitable interest in land,
including the holder of a written, signed and active option or contract to
purchase or a person leasing the property (if authorized under the lease
Does not display a license plate with a current registration sticker and
does not have a valid state safety inspection sticker (except for licensed
antique cars not required to have an inspection sticker), (licenses or
inspection stickers that expired less than 90 days ago shall be
considered current for the purposes of this section).
A.
B. Has been demolished beyond repair.
C. Has been separated from its axles, engine, body or chassis.
Includes only the axle, engine, body parts and/or chassis separated
from the remainder of the vehicle.
D.
Land or a structure used for the collection, storage, dismantling,
processing and/or sale, other than within a completely enclosed
building, of material of one or more of the following types:
(1) "Junk." (See definition).
A greater number of junk vehicles than is permitted under this
chapter or other Borough ordinances that are partly or fully visible
from an exterior lot line, dwelling and/or public street. This shall
not apply to such vehicles allowed to be stored within the specific
requirements of an auto repair garage or auto service station.
(2)
One or more mobile/manufactured homes that are not in a
habitable condition.
(3)
A.
Junk stored within a completely enclosed building for business
purposes shall be considered a warehouse and shall be regulated as a
warehouse.
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:680
to exercise the right to the landowner and if such lease is for a remaining
period of at least 12 months), or authorized officers of a partnership or
corporation that is a "landowner" or other person having a proprietary
interest in land. A person who has clearly received formal notarized powers
of attorney relating to a landowner may act in the capacity of the landowner,
if legally authorized.
LED (LIGHT EMITTING DIODE) AND ELECTRONIC DISPLAY SIGNS —
Includes any sign such as an electronically or electrically controlled public
service time, temperature and date sign, message center, scrolling marquis,
or reader board, where different copy changes are shown no less than every
90 seconds on the same lamp bank.
LIBRARY — See "cultural center."
LIMONITE EXCAVATION — A mining pit from which iron ore, as limonite
or hematite, was taken. Most have collapsed and are now partially filled
with soil material. Locations indicate zones of deep weathering and/or
preexisting sinkholes. Up to 2,000 feet long and 175 feet deep, most are less
than 50 feet deep.
LIVESTOCK, RAISING OF — The raising and keeping of livestock, poultry
or insects for any commercial purposes or the keeping of any animals for
any reason beyond what is allowed under the "Keeping of Pets" section of
§ 27-403 and beyond what is allowed within the definition of "crop farming."
The raising of livestock shall not include a slaughterhouse nor a stockyard
used for the housing of animals awaiting slaughter.
LOT — A separate parcel of land that is recorded or that will be recorded
after Borough final subdivision approval in the office of the County Recorder
of Deeds. A parcel under common ownership that is completely separated
into two parts by a public street shall be considered to be one tract but two
lots.
LOT, CORNER — A lot abutting on two or more intersecting streets which
has an interior angle of less than 135° at the intersection of right-of-way
lines of two streets. A lot abutting upon a curved street or streets shall be
considered a "corner lot" if the tangent to the curve at the points beginning
within the lot or at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with the
street lines intersect at an angle of less than 135°.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel
streets, but only has access onto one street.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that abuts two approximately parallel streets.
LOT, FLAG — An irregularly shaped lot characterized by an elongated
extension from a street to the principal part of the lot. The flag shape of the
lot is normally intended to provide for access to an otherwise landlocked
interior parcel. See § 27-801.
LOT AREA — The horizontal land area contained within the lot lines of a lot
(measured in acres or square feet), but excluding the following:
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:681
LOT DEPTH — The average horizontal distance between the front and the
rear lot lines, measured through the approximate center of the lot.
LOT LINES — The property lines bounding the lot. Wherever a property line
borders a public street, the lot line shall be considered to be existing street
right-of-way.
FRONT LOT LINE (STREET LINE) — A lot line separating the lot from the
future street right-of-way.
REAR LOT LINE — A lot line opposite and most distant from the front line.
(A three sided lot has no rear lot line.)
SIDE LOT LINE — Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line. A "side
street lot line" is a side lot line separating a lot from a street.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured
at the minimum prescribed front yard setback line, unless otherwise stated.
In the event of a curved lot line, the lot width shall be measured using a
straight line from end to end.
LOW-RISE APARTMENTS — See under "dwellings."
MANUFACTURE — The making, with substantial use of machinery, of some
product for sale, and/or associated assembly, fabrication, cleaning, testing,
processing, recycling, packaging, conversion, production, distribution and
repair, with substantial use of machinery, of products for sale. This term
shall not include the following: retail sales, personal services, solid waste
disposal facility or truck terminal.
MASSAGE — The performance of manipulative exercises using the hands
and/or a mechanical or bathing device on a person(s)'s skin other than
the face or neck by another person(s) that is related to certain monetary
compensation, and which does not involve persons who are related to
each other by blood, adoption, marriage or official guardianship. See also
"personal services."
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:
Areas within the "future" or "existing" legal rights-of-way of:
(1) Any proposed or existing public streets or alleys; or,
Any proposed or existing commonly maintained private streets that
serve more than one lot.
(2)
A.
Areas that are currently or will be required to be dedicated as common
open space.
B.
Areas within rights-of-way intended for overhead electrical lines of 35
kilovolts or higher capacity, which shall only be excluded for residential
lots.
C.
A. "Massages" are conducted (see definition).
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:682
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.[Added by
Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility used
to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds to one
or more marijuana growers/processors and/or dispensaries.[Added by Ord.
1153, 2/6/2017]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY — A dispensary or
a grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.[Added by Ord.
1153, 2/6/2017]
MEDICAL OFFICE OR CLINIC — A use involving the treatment and
examination of patients by state-licensed physicians or dentists; provided,
that not patients shall be kept overnight on the premises. This use may
involve the testing of tissue, blood or other human materials for medical or
dental purposes.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — An area of land or building used by a recreational,
civic, social, fraternal, religious, political or labor union association of
persons for meetings and routine socializing and recreation that are limited
to members and their occasional guests, and persons specifically invited
to special celebrations, but which is not routinely open to members of the
general public and which is not primarily operated as a for-profit business.
The club shall involve a meaningful and substantial membership system, as
opposed to a token boarding house, a tavern, a restaurant or an auditorium
unless that particular use is permitted in that district and the requirements
of that use are met. See also "after hours club."
MANUFACTURED HOME — See under "dwelling types."
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient residential use. The individual
manufactured homes may be individually owned. A development of
manufactured homes that is subdivided into individual lots shall be
regulated in the same manner as a subdivision of site-built homes, and shall
not be considered to be a "manufactured home park."
MOTEL — See "hotel."
The person conducting the massage is not licensed as a health care
professional or a licensed massage therapist by the state.
B.
The massages are not conducted within a licensed hospital, nursing
home, personal care center or office of a medical doctor or chiropractor.
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements.
D.
The use is not clearly a customary and incidental accessory use to a
permitted exercise club or to a high school or college athletic program.
E.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:683
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE — The Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988, and as may
be further amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq..
NATURE PRESERVE — A noncommercial preservation of land for providing
wildlife habitats, forests or scenic natural features that involves no
buildings other than a nature education and/or study center and customary
maintenance buildings.
NIGHT CLUB — A tavern or restaurant that has a primary or substantial
portion of the total trade in the sale of alcoholic beverages, which frequently
charges admission or cover charges for entertainment or music for dancing
and which has a capacity of more than 250 persons for such entertainment
or dancing. See also "after hours club."
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot which does not conform with the minimum
lot width or area dimensions specified for the district where such lot is
situated, but was lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this
chapter or is legally established through the granting of a variance by the
Zoning Hearing Board, and which is not abutted by other undeveloped land
owned by the same owner.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable lot area, dimensional
and other provisions in this chapter, as amended, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of such ordinance or applicable
amendment. Such nonconforming structures include but are not limited to
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendments heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or applicable
amendment.
NURSING HOME — A facility licensed by the state for the housing and
intermediate or fully-skilled nursing care of three or more persons.
OFFICE — A use that involves administrative, clerical, financial,
governmental or professional operations and operations of a similar
character. This use shall include neither retail nor industrial uses, but may
include business offices, medical or dental offices, clinics or laboratories,
photographic studios and/or television or radio broadcasting studios.
OFFICIAL MAP — Any official map that may be adopted or amended by the
Borough Council in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code, 53
P.S. § 10101 et seq.
OFFICIAL STREET CLASSIFICATION MAP — The map as adopted by the
Borough Council classifying the streets of the Borough. See definition of
"street classification." This map may be amended by resolution of the
Borough Council.
OFFICIAL ZONING MAP — The map as adopted by the Borough Council
which designates the location and boundaries of zoning districts.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:684
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land within a tract which
meets all of the following standards:
ORDINANCE, THIS — The Emmaus Borough Zoning Ordinance [this
chapter], including the Official Zoning Map and Official Street Classification
Map, as amended.
PA — Pennsylvania.
PARKING — Off-street parking and aisles for vehicles unless otherwise
stated.
PAVED AREA — All areas covered by stoned surfaces and/or impervious
surfaces, other than areas covered by buildings, bicycle paths and
pedestrian sidewalks. See § 27-603(5) regarding setbacks.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, or its
successor, and its subparts.
PENNSYLVANIA DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH — For purposes of this
chapter, this shall also be referred to as "DOH."[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/
2017]
PERMIT — A document issued by the proper Borough authority authorizing
the applicant to undertake certain activities.
Is designed, intended and suitable for active or passive recreation by
residents of a development or the general public.
A.
If not intended to be publicly owned, is covered by a system for
perpetual maintenance.
B.
Will be deeded to the Borough and/or deed restricted to permanently
prevent uses of land other than "common open space" and
noncommercial recreation.
C.
Does not use any of the following areas to meet minimum open space
requirements:
(1) Existing or future street rights-of-way.
(2) Vehicle accessways.
Buildings (other than accessory buildings and pools clearly
intended for noncommercial recreation).
(3)
Off-street parking (other than that clearly intended for
noncommercial recreation.
(4)
(5) Any area needed to meet a requirement for an individual lot.
Any area deeded over to an individual property owner for his/her
own use.
(6)
Land within rights-of-way intended eventually for overhead
electrical transmission of 35 kilovolts or greater capacity.
(7)
D.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:685
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT - A permit indicating that a proposed
construction, alteration or reconstruction of a structure is, to the best
knowledge of the Borough staff, in accordance with the provisions of the
Building Code which may be adopted by the Borough [Chapter 5, Part 1].
OCCUPANCY PERMIT - A permit that may be required by the Borough that
is issued upon completion of the construction of a structure, or change in
use of a structure or parcel of land, or reoccupancy of a structure or land
indicating that the premises, to the best knowledge of the Building and
Zoning Officers, complies with the provisions of Borough ordinances. This
shall have the same meaning as a "certificate of use and occupancy."
ZONING PERMIT - A permit that may be issued indicating that a proposed
use, building or structure is, to the best knowledge of the Borough staff, in
accordance with this chapter and which authorizes an applicant to proceed
with said use, building or structure, within all other applicable laws and
regulations. For the purposes of this chapter, a zoning permit or "a permit
under this chapter" shall mean the applicable portions of a construction
permit, unless a specific system of zoning permits has been established.
PERMITTED BY RIGHT USES — Uses that do not have to be approved
by the Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council. However, a site
plan review may be required for certain permitted uses by right to insure
compliance with Borough ordinances. A non-conforming use shall not be
considered to be a permitted use.
PERSONAL CARE HOME OR CENTER — A residential use providing
residential and support services primarily to persons who are over age 60,
physically handicapped and/or mentally retarded and that is licensed as a
personal care center by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service oriented
to personal needs of the general public and which does not involve primarily
retail or wholesale sales or services to businesses. Personal services include
barber and beauty shops, state-licensed massage therapists, photography
studios, shoe repair shops, household appliance repair shops, and other
similar establishments, but shall not include any "adult uses."
PETS, KEEPING OF — The keeping of domestic animals that are normally
considered to be kept in conjunction with a dwelling for the pleasures of the
resident family. This shall include dogs, cats, small birds, gerbils, rabbits
and other animals commonly sold in retail pet shops.
PLACE OF WORSHIP — A building, synagogue, church, mosque, religious
retreat, monastery or shrine used primarily for religious or spiritual worship
and operated for nonprofit and noncommercial purposes. If a place of
worship is primarily residential in nature, then it shall be regulated as a
dwelling, as that term is defined in this Part. See also § 27-402, Subsection
1II, relating to additional requirements for specific principal uses, place of
worship.[Amended by Ord. No. 1191, 8/19/2019]
PLAN, CERTIFIED — A plan which is prepared by one of the following
professionals who is registered by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
professional engineer, architect, landscape architect or surveyor.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:686
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OR PRD — A residential
development meeting all of the requirements of § 27-307, Article IX and the
PRD requirements of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Emmaus.
PLANT NURSERY — The indoor and/or outdoor raising of trees, plants,
shrubs or flowers for sale, but not primarily including commercial forestry
for lumber. A plant nursery may include the growth of trees for sale for
internal decoration of homes, such as a Christmas tree farm.
PORCHES — A covered entrance to a building usually with a separate roof.
This includes colonnades, porticos, stoops and verandas.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING — The building in which the principal use of a lot is
conducted. Any building that is physically attached to a principal building
shall be considered part of that principal building.
PRINCIPAL USE — A dominant use(s) or main use on a lot, as opposed to an
accessory use.
PROPERTY LINE — Has the same meaning as "lot line."
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
PUBLICLY-OWNED RECREATION — Land and/or facilities that are owned
by a government agency or the Borough and are available for use by the
general public for leisure and recreation.
QUARRY — A mine from which construction materials, slate or various ores
have been taken.
RECREATION, PRIVATE — Noncommercial leisure-time uses that are only
open to members, guests or some specific group.
RECREATION, COMMERCIAL — Leisure time uses that are principally
operated for commercial purposes.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is designed primarily to
transport a person for primarily recreational instead of transportation
purposes, or a vehicle that serves as a mobile, temporary dwelling. This may
include a vehicle that is self-propelled, towed or carried by another vehicle,
but shall not include camper cabs that fit over pickup trucks. This term shall
also include the following: watercraft with a hull longer than 15 feet, motor
homes, travel trailers, all terrain vehicles and snowmobiles.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE STORAGE AREA — An outdoor area used for the
storage of three or more recreational vehicles. Retail sales or major repair
work shall only be allowed if those uses are permitted in that zoning district.
RECYCLING COLLECTION CENTER — A use for collection and temporary
storage of more than 500 pounds of common household materials for
recycling, but that does not involve processing or recycling, other than
routine sorting, baling, and weighing of materials. This term shall not
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:687
include the indoor storage of less than 500 pounds of household recyclable
and their customary collection, which is permitted by right, accessory use
in all zoning districts, without additional regulations. A recycling collection
center is also a permitted by right accessory use to a public or private
primary or secondary school, a place of worship, a Borough-owned use, an
emergency services station, or a college or university.
REGISTRY — The registry established by the DOH for all medical marijuana
organizations and practitioners.[Added by Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
RELATED OR RELATIVE — Persons who are closely related by blood,
marriage, adoption or formal foster relationship to result in one of the
following relationships: brother, sister, parent, child, grandparent, greatgrandparent,
grandchild, great-grandchild, uncle, aunt, niece, nephew,
sister-in-law, brother-in-law, parent-in-law or first cousin. This term shall not
include relationships such as second, third or fourth cousins.
REPAIR OF HOUSEHOLD ITEMS — Shops for the repair of appliances,
watches, televisions, guns, bicycles and other items commonly used in the
inside of dwellings or offices.
RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY BUILDING, STRUCTURE OR USE — A use or
structure that is clearly accessory, customary and incidental to a principal
residential use on a lot, including the following uses and uses that are very
similar in nature: garage (household), carport, tennis court, garage sale,
basketball backboard, household swimming pool, volleyball court, gazebo,
storage shed, greenhouse, children's playhouse and children's play
equipment. For skateboard ramps, see "Residential Accessory Structure"
standards in § 27-403.
RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT — The C-R, R-L, R-M, R-HO and R-P Zoning
Districts.
RESIDENTIAL LOT LINES — The lot line of a lot that:
RESTAURANT FAST FOOD/DRIVE-IN OR DRIVE-THROUGH —
Contains an existing primarily residential use a lot of less than three
acres; or,
A.
Is undeveloped, zoned as a residential district and is not approved by
the Borough for a principal nonresidential use. Additional setbacks or
buffering shall not be required from a "residential lot line" if that lot
is currently owned by the same landowner as the use that would be
required to provide the additional setbacks or buffering.
B.
An establishment that sells ready to consume food or drink, that
routinely involves the consumption of at least a portion of such food
on the premises, and that does not meet the definition of a "standard
restaurant".
A.
A fast food restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:688
RESTAURANT, STANDARD —
RETAIL STORE — A use in which merchandise is sold or rented to the
general public, but not including the following: sales of motor vehicles
or boats, adult movie theater, adult bookstore, manufacturing, tavern, car
wash, auto service station, auto repair garage, convenience store or any
restaurant.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for the public or others for use as a street
or other purpose. Unless otherwise stated, "right-of-way" shall mean the
existing street right-of-way line.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, EXISTING OR LEGAL - The line separating a lot from
the established official street right-of-way that either the Borough or the
Commonwealth will own after the completion of any proposed subdivision,
land development or development of a use under this chapter.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, FUTURE - Land that is dedicated or is required to be
defined or reserved for future dedication for use as a street and for related
public improvements. The terms "ultimate right-of-way," "right-of-way
reserved for future dedication" and "future right-of-way" shall have the
same meaning. See § 27-805. If a future right-of-way is not required to be
defined, then future right-of-way shall have the same meaning as existing
right-of-way.
SANITARY LANDFILL (OR SOLID WASTE LANDFILL) — A type of "solid
waste disposal area" involving the depositing of solid waste on land,
compacting the waste, covering the waste with soil and then compacting
of the total trade, the requirements of a "tavern" or nightclub, as
applicable, must be met.
A drive-in or drive-through restaurant includes any restaurant where at
least a portion of patrons order and are served food and non-alcoholic
drinks while seated in their vehicles for consumption outside the
confines of the principal building or vehicles parked upon the premises.
C.
A use meeting the definition of a "nightclub" shall not be considered a
restaurant.
D.
An establishment that serves ready-to-consume food or drink for
compensation in which the clear majority of sales involve the following:
the customers order their food from a waiter or waitress while seated
inside a building and then the food is delivered to the customer's table
while the customers are seated and then the food is consumed at the
table.
A.
A standard restaurant may include the accessory sale of alcoholic
beverages. However, if such sale is a primary or substantial portion of
the total trade, the requirements of a "tavern" must be met.
B.
A use meeting the definition of a "nightclub" shall not be considered a
restaurant.
C.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:689
the soil, and which has a permit to operate as a sanitary landfill from the
state.
SATELLITE DISH ANTENNA OR SATELLITE ANTENNA — A ground-based
reflector, usually parabolic in shape, that receives electronic signals from a
satellite. This term shall also include any pedestal or attached structure.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PRIMARY OR SECONDARY SCHOOL — An
educational institution primarily for persons between the ages of five and 19
that primarily provides state-required or largely state-funded educational
programs. This term shall not include "trade schools" (such as privately
operated schools of trade, vocation or business).
SELF-STORAGE DEVELOPMENT — A building or group of buildings divided
into individual separate access units which are rented or leased for the
storage of personal and small business property.
SETBACK LINE —
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A system to collect, treat and dispose of
sewage. No such system shall be permitted that does not comply with local,
state and federal requirements.
ON LOT OR NONPUBLIC SEWER SERVICE - Any form of sewage service
permitted under local, state and federal law that does not meet the
definition of "public sewer service."
PUBLIC SEWER SERVICE - Service at the time of occupancy of a use by
a central sewage treatment plant that is owned by a municipality or a
municipal or county authority.
SHOPPING CENTER — A use involving five or more retail or personal
service uses or establishments and that primarily involves retail sales. If
two or more abutting lots each include five or more retail sales uses and
are developed under common or closely related ownership, then those lots
shall together be considered as one shopping center. A shopping center may
The line within a lot defining the required minimum distance between
any structure to be erected or use to be developed and the adjacent
future street right-of-way or exterior lot line (when the property is not
abutted by a right-of-way). Such line shall be measured at right angles
from and parallel to the front lot line.
A.
Any building setbacks shall be measured from the foundation, exterior
wall or other component of a structure that is closest to the right-ofway
line or lot line from which the setback is being measured. See
exceptions for eaves and cornices in § 27-803(2).
B.
Unless otherwise stated, setback distances are for both accessory and
principal structures.
C.
Private Streets. For a building setback measured from a private street,
the setback shall be measured from the existing right-of-way of such a
street, if a right-of-way exists. If a private street does not have a rightof-
way, the setback shall be measured from the edge of the cartway.
D.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:690
also include a mix of permitted personal service, office and/or commercial
recreation uses.
SIGHT DISTANCE — An area required to be kept free of visual obstruction.
See § 27-803.
SIGN — Any physical device for visual communication that is used for the
purpose of attracting attention from the public and that is visible from
beyond an exterior lot line, including all symbols, words, models, displays,
banners, flags, devices or representations. This shall not include displays
that only involve symbols that are clearly and entirely religious in nature,
and which do not include advertising. See definitions of types of signs in
Part 7.
SIGN AREA — See Part 7.
SIGN, OFF-PREMISES — A sign which directs attention to an object,
product, service, place, activity, person, institution, organization, or
business that is primarily offered or located at a location other than the lot
upon which the sign is located. This type of sign is commonly known in most
cases as a "billboard."
SINGLE-FAMILY CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A residential development
meeting all of the requirements of § 27-308.
SINKHOLE — A localized sinking of land surface to a variable depth
generally characterized by a roughly circular outline and a downward
movement of soil into bedrock voids.
SITE PLAN REVIEW — Review of a site plan by the Planning Commission
and/or the Borough Council that is required for certain uses under § 27-116.
SLAUGHTER HOUSE — A use involving the killing of animals for the
production of food or some other commercial product. A commercial
stockyard or similar facility that primarily involves the bulk storage or
transferring of animals on the way to slaughter shall also be considered a
slaughter house. This shall not include a custom "butcher shop" that does
not involve killing of animals (which is a retail sales use).
SLOPE — The vertical change of an area of land divided by the horizontal
change, measured in percent.
SOLICITOR — Unless otherwise stated, shall mean the appointed Solicitor
to the Emmaus Borough Council.
SOLID WASTE —
Any garbage, refuse, sewage sludge or other discarded material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material
resulting from industrial, institutional, public, household, commercial
or mining activities.
A.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following materials shall not be
considered to be solid waste:
(1) Portions of trees or shrubs, leaves, mulch and rocks.
B.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:691
SOLID WASTE FACILITY —
SOLID WASTE-TO-ENERGY FACILITY — A type of "solid waste disposal
facility" that utilizes waste (such as trash, sludge or any other nonhazardous
commercial, residential or industrial materials) as a fuel to produce usable
energy (such as steam or electricity) in bulk to be marketed for reuse to
offset disposal costs. Also see the definitions of each of these terms in Title
25 of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
SOLID WASTE TRANSFER FACILITY — A type of "solid waste disposal
facility" which receives and temporarily stores solid waste at a location
other than the generation site, and which facilitates the bulk transfer of
accumulated solid waste to a facility for further processing or disposal,
and which may or may not involve the separation of recyclables from
solid waste. Also see the definitions of each of these terms in Title 25 of
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection regulations.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use for which the Zoning Hearing Board may
grant permission following a public hearing and findings of fact consistent
with this chapter, provided the use complies with the conditions and
standards required by this chapter. See § 27-119.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — One or more of the following:
STABLE, NON-HOUSEHOLD — Keeping of more than two horses, which
may include a commercial or private riding club. The housing of one or two
horses shall be considered an accessory use under the "keeping of pets"
(see § 27-403).
Substances legally disposed of into the air or water through a
federal or state pollution discharge permit.
(2)
Customary residual wastes from a permitted mineral extraction
use.
(3)
Materials of a character such as paper, plastic, aluminum and metal
that have been separated from the waste stream for recycling.
(4)
Land or structures where solid waste is processed, incinerated or
disposed of. This shall only include the following facilities, each of
which shall be required to have all permits required by the state in
place prior to initiation of the use: sanitary landfill, solid waste transfer
facility or solid waste-to-energy facility.
A.
The following uses for the purposes of this chapter shall not be
considered to be a solid waste disposal facility: junkyard, recycling
collection center, leaf composting, clean fill or septage or sludge
application.
B.
A. Human male genitals in a visible state of sexual stimulation.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse, oral sex or sodomy.
C. Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:692
STATE — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and its agencies.
STORAGE SHED — An enclosed accessory building maintained primarily for
the convenience of the occupant(s) of the principal building on the lot and
which is not used for the housing of a motor vehicle.
STORY (AND HALF STORY) — A level of a building routinely accessible
to humans having an average vertical clearance six feet or greater shall
be considered a full story, except as provided for in the definition of
"basement." Any level of a building having an average vertical clearance
from floor to ceiling of less than six feet shall be considered a "half-story."
STREET — A public or private thoroughfare which provides the principal
means of access to abutting lots or that is an expressway, but not including
an "alley" (see definition) or a driveway. The terms "street," "highway" and
"road" have the same meaning and are used interchangeably.
STREET CLASSIFICATION — The functional classification of streets into
the following types, as shown on the Official Street Classification Map at the
end of this chapter for existing streets and as determined by the Borough
Engineer for future streets.
ARTERIAL STREET - Intended for large volumes of traffic, especially
including traffic traveling between different municipalities.
COLLECTOR STREET - Designed to carry a moderate volume of traffic
to intercept local (residential) streets, to provide routes to minor arterial
streets and to community facilities and to provide access to the abutting
properties.
EXPRESSWAY - Designed for large volumes and high speed traffic with
access limited to grade separated intersections.
LOCAL STREET - Designed to provide access to the abutting properties
and a route to collector routes.
STREET, PROPOSED — A street which is planned in a proposed subdivision
or land development plan or approved within a subdivision or land
development plan, but not yet open to traffic.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on, below or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land,
subject to the following specific standards.
SUBDIVISION — See the definition in the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
The following specifically shall be considered to be structure: buildings,
signs, stadiums, platform, communications towers, walkways, porches
or decks that are covered by a permanent structure; swimming pools
(whether above or below ground); storage sheds, carports and garages.
A.
Any structure shall be subject to the principal or accessory setbacks
of this chapter, as applicable, unless specifically exempted or unless a
specific setback is established for that particular type of structure by
this chapter.
B.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:693
SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OR SUBDIVISION AND LAND
DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — The Emmaus Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], as amended.
SWIMMING POOL, HOUSEHOLD OR PRIVATE — A man-made area with
walls of man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches
deep for bathing or swimming and that is intended to serve the residents of
only one dwelling unit and their occasional guests.
SWIMMING POOL, NON-HOUSEHOLD — A man-made area with walls of
man-made materials intended to enclose water at least 30 inches deep for
bathing or swimming and that does not meet the definition of a "house-hold"
swimming pool. This includes:
(A) A "semi-public" pool that serves only residents of a development or
members of a club and their occasional guests; or,
(B) A "public" pool intended to serve the general public. See also the
provisions for "recreational facilities" limited to use by employees of
a use or residents of a development as an accessory use, which may
include a swimming pool, at the end of § 27-306.
See also the provisions for "recreational facilities" limited to use by
employees of a use or residents of a development as an accessory use,
which may include a swimming pool, at the end of § 27-306.
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary or
substantial portion of the total trade and which does not meet the definition
of a "nightclub" or an "after-hours club." The sale of food may also occur.
See also the definition of restaurant.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
motion pictures or theatrical or performing arts productions as a principal
use, but not including an outdoor drive-in theater or adult movie theater.
TIRE STORAGE, BULK — The storage of more than 250 tires on a lot, except
for manufacture or wholesale or retail sales of new tires.
TOWNHOUSE — See "dwelling types."
TRACT — In certain zoning districts, the tract is the minimum amount of
adjacent land area (which may be separated by alleys, streets or waterways)
within the Borough that is required to be approved as part of an overall
preliminary subdivision or land development plan in order to allow either
certain types of uses or to allow the creation of lots smaller than a certain
specified lot area. An area of land shall meet the following requirements in
order to be considered a "tract":
Shall only include lands within an approved subdivision or land
development plan that includes a well-defined internal circulation
system, maximum coordination between lots and carefully limited
points of vehicular access onto streets exterior to the tract; and,
A.
Shall only include lands that at the time of the approval of the
preliminary plan have one "landowner" (as defined by Part 2), unless
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:694
TRADE SCHOOL — A facility that is primarily intended for education of a
work-related skill or craft or a hobby and that does not primarily provide
state-required education to persons under age 16. This shall include a
dancing school, martial arts school or ceramics school.
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a prison or a permitted
accessory use in a "hospital") providing housing facilities for persons who
need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling for stays of less than
one year and who need such facilities because of:
TRUCKING COMPANY TERMINAL — A use involving a large variety of
materials, including materials owned by numerous corporations, being
transported to a site to be unloaded primarily from tractor-trailer trucks and
reloaded onto tractor-trailer trucks, and that does not involve substantial
processing or repackaging of the materials.
TRUCK STOP — A commercial use that primarily involves providing fuel and
other services to tractor-trailer trucks. This use may also involve providing
repair services, sale of gifts and various household items, a restaurant,
showers and a motel.
UNIT FOR CARE OF RELATIVE — A living area especially created for
and limited to occupancy by a "relative" (see definition) of the permanent
residents of the principal dwelling unit. Such unit shall be restricted to a
person or two persons who need such care and supervision because of old
age, developmental disability, physical illness, physical handicap or mental
illness that does not threaten physical harm to others. See standards in
§ 27-403.
the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that there
is a legally binding commitment between two or more "landowners" to
coordinate the access and development of the tract as shown in the
approved preliminary plan.
Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal half-way house or a
treatment/housing center for persons convicted of driving under the
influence of alcohol; or,
A.
B. Addiction to alcohol and/or a controlled substance; or,
A type of mental illness or other behavior that could cause a person to
be a threat to the physical safety of others.
C.
A use that primarily involves either loading materials from tractortrailers
onto smaller trucks or loading materials from smaller trucks
onto tractor-trailers shall be considered a "distribution" use.
A.
A trucking company terminal may include the following as clearly
accessory uses if they are closely related to the principal use: repair,
washing, refueling and maintenance facilities for trucks using the
terminal, administrative uses for the terminal and rest facilities for
truck drivers using the terminal.
B.
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:695
USE — The purpose, activity, occupation, business or operation for which
land or a structure is designed, arranged, intended, occupied or maintained.
Uses specifically include but are not limited to the following: activity within
a building, activity outside of a building, any structure, recreational vehicle
storage or parking of commercial vehicles on a lot.
VARIANCE — The granting of specific permission by the Zoning Hearing
Board to use, construct, expand or alter land or structures in such a way
that compliance is not required with a specific requirement of this chapter.
Any variance shall only be granted within the limitations of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
VETERINARIAN OFFICE — A building routinely used for the treatment
of animals and related housing or boarding of sick animals. Treatment of
"small animals" includes only small domestic animals, including but not
limited to dogs, cats, rabbits, birds or fowl. Treatment of "large animals"
includes all types of animals including horses, cows and pigs. Housing
primarily healthy animals shall be considered a "kennel" and shall meet the
requirements of that use.
WALL — See "fence."
WAREHOUSE — A building or group of buildings primarily used for the
indoor storage, transfer and distribution of products and materials, but not
including retail uses or a truck terminal, unless such uses are specifically
permitted in that zoning district.
WATER SYSTEM — A system designed to transmit water from a source
to users, in compliance with the requirements of the appropriate state
agencies and the Borough.
WETLANDS — An area of land and/or water meeting one or more definitions
of a "wetland" under federal and/or Pennsylvania law and/or regulations,
whichever is more inclusive.
WHOLESALE — Sales that primarily involve transactions with other
businesses and their agents and not to the general public.
YARD — An area not covered by buildings and that is on the same lot as the
subject structure or use. Regulations of specific districts prohibit principal
and accessory structures within specified required minimum yards.
YARD, FRONT — A "yard" between the front lot line (which usually is
the future street right-of-way line) and the closest portion of the subject
structure or use that extends the full width of the lot from side lot line to
side lot line.
PUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Central water service by a system owned
by a municipality or a municipal or county authority and which serves
more than 30 dwellings or principal uses.
A.
ON-LOT or NONPUBLIC WATER SERVICE — Service by a water system
that does not meet the definition of a "public water serve." In most
cases, this would involve an individual well serving an individual lot, but
may also include a common well or another duly approved system.
B.
§ 27-202 EMMAUS CODE § 27-202
FWD:696
YARD, REAR — A "yard" extending the full-width of the lot and situated
between the rear line and the closest portion of the subject structure, and
stretching between the side lot lines parallel to the rear lot line. (A principal
building shall not extend into the required rear yard for a principal building,
and an accessory structure shall not extend into the required rear yard for
an accessory structure, except as provided in this chapter.)
YARD, SIDE — A "yard" situated between the closest portion of the subject
structure and the entire length of the side lot line, and extending from
the front lot line to the rear lot line. A structure shall not extend into the
applicable minimum side yard, except as provided for in this chapter.
ZONING MAP — The Official Zoning Map of Emmaus Borough, Lehigh
County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — The administrative officer(s) charged with the duty of
enforcing the provisions of this chapter, or his or her officially designated
assistant(s).
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Emmaus Borough Zoning Ordinance [this
chapter], as amended.
The front yard shall be on a side that faces towards a public street,
whenever one public street abuts the lot.
A.
When a lot abuts onto two or more public streets, the applicant may
choose which is the front yard, unless the Zoning Officer determines
that the front yard should follow the clearly predominant front yard
orientation of the development of abutting lots.
B.
No accessory or principal structure shall extend into the required front
yard, except as provided in this chapter.
C.
D. Corner Lots. See § 27-803(2)(C).
§ 27-202 FOREWORD § 27-202
FWD:697

Part 3
DISTRICTS
§ 27-301. Designation of Districts and Purposes. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 301; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 3]
1. For the purpose of this chapter, Emmaus Borough is hereby divided into
the following zoning districts:
C-R Conservation - Residential District
R-L Low Density Residential District
R-M Medium Density Residential District
R-HO High Density Residential District Office
R-P Planned Residential District
B-H Highway Commercial District
B-L Limited Commercial District
B-C Central Commercial District
I-L Light Industrial District
2. The zoning districts stated in subsection (1), above, shall be of the
number, size, shape and location shown on the Official Zoning Map. Any
use of the abbreviations listed in subsection (1), above, shall mean the
district name that is listed beside the abbreviation.
3. Floodplain. The floodplain area, as defined by the Floodplain Area Part
of this chapter, shall serve as an overlay area to all of the underlying
Districts.
4. Purpose of Each District. The following are summaries of the purposes
of each zoning district, in addition to the overall purposes of this
chapter as stated in Part 1 and the Comprehensive Plan:
A. C-R District. To provide for development only at low intensity on
areas that are very environmentally sensitive or that have
inadequate road access. To seek to preserve the water quality of
important creeks. To recognize areas that include significant
amounts of wetlands, high water table soils and floodplain areas. To
direct development towards areas of the Borough that are more
environmentally suitable.
B. R-L District. To provide for the orderly expansion of neighborhoods
of single-family detached houses at a low density. To carefully
protect these areas from uses that may not be fully compatible. To
encourage similar development next to existing neighborhoods.
C. R-M District. To provide for the orderly expansion of areas that
offer residential neighborhoods at a medium density. To recognize
older residential areas of the Borough. To provide for a selected
§ 27-301 FOREWORD § 27-301
FWD:699
§ 27-302. Application of District Regulations. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 302]
variety of housing types. To carefully protect these areas from uses
that may not be fully compatible.
D. R-HO District. To provide for a full variety of carefully-designed
housing types at medium high densities. To make sure that varied
housing types are compatible with any existing single-family
detached houses. To make sure that the street system of the
Borough and other community facilities and services are fully able
to handle moderately dense growth in an area. To work to
encourage affordable housing, especially for young families, senior
citizens and nontraditional types of households.
E. R-P District. To provide for residential development that protects
important natural features of the site while permitting flexibility in
certain lot requirements.
F. B-L District. To provide for a carefully controlled selection of light
"convenience" commercial uses that will be compatible with
adjacent residences, areas of smaller lots and historic areas. To
recognize that many of these areas include a mix of homes and
businesses.
G. B-H District. To provide for a wide range of needed commercial
uses in locations that are less likely to involve conflicts with
existing residences and that have excellent access to major
highways. To use special care and control on access onto arterial
and collector streets to avoid traffic hazards.
H. B-C District. To encourage a pedestrian-scale of development that
respects the historic character of the downtown. To seek to
strengthen service, office, retail and restaurant businesses. To
provide for a mix of residential and commercial uses.
I. I-L District. To provide sufficient space in appropriate locations to
meet current and anticipated future regional needs for light
industries, offices and limited types of related commercial
development. To carefully control uses to protect the public health
and safety. To maintain an attractive physical environment that will
aid in attracting new businesses.
1. The regulations set by this chapter shall apply uniformly to each class
or kind of structure or land, except as provided for in this chapter.
2. No structure or land shall hereafter be erected, used, constructed,
reconstructed or structurally altered and no structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be used or occupied unless it is in conformity with the
regulations herein specified for the use and district in which it is
located.
§ 27-301 EMMAUS CODE § 27-302
FWD:700
§ 27-303. Zoning Map. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 303; as amended by
Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
§ 27-304. District Boundaries. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 304]
3. No yard or lot existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be
reduced in dimension or area below the minimum requirements set
forth herein. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this chapter
shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this
chapter.
4. Annexation. Any territory which may hereafter be annexed to the
Borough shall be classified as the zoning district of the Borough most
similar to the zoning of such territory before annexation (as determined
by the Zoning Hearing Board) until otherwise classified.
1. A revised map entitled "Emmaus Borough Zoning Map" accompanies
this chapter and is declared a part of this chapter. The Official Zoning
Map should bear the adoption date of this chapter and the words
"Official Zoning Map." This Map shall be retained in the Borough
Offices. If the Official Zoning Map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost or
difficult to interpret because of changes and additions, or needs to have
drafting errors or omissions corrected, Borough Council may, by
resolution, adopt a new copy of the Official Zoning Map which shall
superseded the prior Official Zoning Map.
2. Amendments. See § 27-108.
1. Where uncertainty exists as to boundaries of any district as shown on
the Zoning Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. District boundary lines are intended to follow or be parallel to the
center line of street rights-of-ways, streams and railroads, and lot
lines as they existed on a recorded deed or plan of record in the
County Recorder of Deeds office at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, unless such district boundary lines are fixed by dimensions
as shown on the Zoning Map.
B. Where a district boundary is not fixed by dimensions and where it
approximately follows lot lines, such boundary shall be construed
to follow such lot lines unless specifically shown otherwise.
C. In unsubdivided land or where a district boundary divides a lot, the
location of such boundary, unless the same is indicated by
dimensions, shall be determined by the use of the scale appearing
on the maps.
D. Interpretation of Boundaries. See § 27-105(4).
§ 27-302 FOREWORD § 27-305
FWD:701
§ 27-305. Setbacks and Buffers Across Municipal Boundaries. [Ord.
776, 6/21/1993, § 305]
This chapter requires additional setbacks and the provision of buffer yards
when certain uses would abut an existing dwelling or a residential zoning
district. These same setback and buffer yard provisions shall be provided
for uses proposed within Emmaus Borough if such an abutting dwelling
or abutting primarily residential zoning district is located in an abutting
municipality.
§ 27-306. Table of Permitted Uses by Zoning District.28 [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 306; as amended by Ord. 830, 5/6/1996, § 2; by Ord. 937,
11/5/2001, § 1; by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 1, 2; by Ord. 994, 7/6/2005,
§ 5; by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006; and by Ord. 1083, 12/19/2011]
1. For the purposes of this § 27-306, the following abbreviations shall have
the following meanings:
P = Permitted by right (zoning decision by Zoning
Officer)
C = Conditional use (zoning decision by Borough
Council with review by Planning Commission)
SE = Special exception use (zoning decision by Zoning
Hearing Board)
N = Not Permitted
(§ 27-402) = See additional requirements in § 27-402
(§ 27-403) = See additional requirements in § 27-403
2. Unless otherwise provided by law or specifically stated in this chapter
(including § 27-105(2)), any land or structure shall only be used or
occupied for a use specifically listed in this chapter as permitted in the
zoning district within which the land or structure is located. Any use
shall also only be permitted if the use complies with all other
requirements of this chapter.
3. Permitted Accessory Uses in All Districts. The following accessory uses
are permitted by right as accessory uses to a lawful principal use in all
districts, within the requirements of § 27-403 and all other
requirements of this chapter:
A. Air conditioning equipment, other than central equipment for a
commercial or industrial use.
B. Adult day care center, including care of up to four persons.
C. Antennae, private.*
28.Editor's Note: The Tables of Permitted Uses are included as attachments to this chapter.
§ 27-305 EMMAUS CODE § 27-306
FWD:702
D. Basketball backboard, which may be within a required setback
area, provided it is a minimum of two feet from any lot line of an
abutting residence.
E. Crop storage as an accessory use to crop farming.
F. Day care center as an accessory use, within the limits on number of
children in § 27-403.*
G. Fence* or wall.*
H. Flag pole.
I. Garage, household.
J. Garage sale.*
K. Indoor storage that is customarily accessory to a permitted use.
L. Keeping of pets.*
M. Loading, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted in that
district.
N. Parking, off-street, only to serve a use that is permitted in that
district.
O. Recreational facilities limited to use by employees of a lot or a
development and their occasional guests.
P. Recreational facilities limited to use by residents of a development
and their occasional invited guests.
Q. Recreational vehicle, storage of one or two.
R. Residential accessory structure (see definition in Part 2).
S. Satellite antennae.*
T. Signs, as permitted by Part 7.
U. Solar energy system.
V. Stable, household.*
W. Swimming pool, household.
X. Tennis/racquetball court.
Y. Volleyball court.
Z. Windmill.
AA. Such other accessory use or structure that the applicant proves to
the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer is clearly customary and
incidental to a lawful principal use.
§ 27-306 FOREWORD § 27-306
FWD:703
NOTE:
* See standard for each in § 27-403.
4. Permitted Accessory Uses to Nonresidential Uses. The following are
permitted by right accessory uses only to a lawful commercial,
industrial, municipal or institutional use, provided that all requirements
of this chapter are met:
A. Three or fewer amusement machines, coin or token operated, but
not including an "adult use" (see also "amusement arcade").
B. Food, beverage and toy machines, coin operated.
C. Newspaper sales machines, coin operated.
D. Telephones, coin operated.
E. Storage of fuels for on-site use or to fuel company vehicles.
F. The following accessory uses, provided that the use is clearly
limited to employees, patients, residents and families of employees
of the use:
(1) Standard or fast-food restaurant without drive-through
service.
(2) Day care center.
(3) Noncommercial recreational facilities.
(4) Meeting facilities.
G. Recycling collection center as an accessory use.
5. Essential Services; Not Required to Meet Lot Requirements. The
following are essential services that are permitted by right as a
principal or as an accessory use in all districts. The following essential
services are not required to meet the accessory or principal setback, lot
area or other lot requirements of this chapter, except that any newly
created lot shall meet the applicable lot requirements if future building
or subdivision of the lot would reasonably be possible for a different
use.
A. Oil pipelines and natural gas transmission and distribution lines
and accessory compressing stations.
B. Electrical transformers as an accessory use to dwellings.
C. Electrical, telephone and street light poles.
D. Electrical transmission and distribution lines and meters.
E. Wells, standpipes, water transmission lines, cisterns and meters.
§ 27-306 EMMAUS CODE § 27-306
FWD:704
F. Sewage pumping stations, but not including a central sewage
treatment plant; provided, that such use be setback a minimum of
75 feet from any dwelling or any residential lot line.
G. Cable television and telephone lines.
H. Stormwater pipes, outfalls, detention basins, swales and catch
basins.
I. Shelters and benches for buses that transport school children or
that are owned, operated or financed by a public transit authority,
and that do not include off-premises signs.
J. U.S. mailboxes.
K. Boxes for receiving individual newspapers.
L. Railroad lines.
M. Fire hydrants and emergency callboxes.
N. Engineered retaining walls that are clearly necessary to hold back
slopes.
O. Sidewalks and curbs.
P. Residential driveways.
Q. Ramps primarily intended for handicapped access.
R. Ground level porches that are not covered by a permanent roof.
S. Steps leading into the entrance of a building.
T. Construction. Temporary storage of vehicles, roll-off dumpsters,
materials and/or construction office trailers that are clearly needed
and being actively used for current construction or renovation
work on the same or an adjacent lot or within the same subdivision,
provided such items are removed from the site within 20 days of
completion of the portion of the construction that they relate to.
Construction vehicles and materials shall only be stored outdoors
on a lot while the related Borough construction permit is actively
still in effect.
6. Essential Services; Required to Meet Lot Requirements. The following
are permitted by right essential services in all districts and are required
(except within § 27-106) to meet all of the applicable requirements of
this chapter:
A. Electrical substations and bulk industrial or commercial
transformers that are not an accessory use to dwellings. Electric
substations involving outdoor structures at least 10 feet in height
shall be required to provide evergreen screening within the
requirements of § 27-803 on sides that are within 150 feet of a
§ 27-306 FOREWORD § 27-306
FWD:705
§ 27-307. Additional Requirements for the R-P District. [Ord. 776,
6/21/1993, § 307]
dwelling, undeveloped residentially zoned land or an expressway
or an arterial street.
B. Water towers (see height exemption in § 27-802), water filtration
plants and pressure stations.
C. Emergency and other electrical generators and compressors.
D. Solid waste bulk dumpsters and bulk compactors.
E. Telephone switching stations.
F. Industrial or commercial central air conditioning equipment.
G. Central sewage treatment facility meeting all Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection and Borough regulations.
7. Additional Requirements. See the following sections:
A. Additional Requirements for Specific Types of Principal Uses.
Section 27-402.
B. Additional Requirements for Specific Types of Accessory Uses.
Section 27-403.
C. Off-Street Parking. Part 6 (including paved area setbacks in
§ 27-603).
D. Signs. Part 7.
E. Buffer Yards. Section 27-803.
F. Environmental Protection. Part 5.
G. Temporary Structures. Section 27-807.
H. Site Plan Review for Certain Uses. Section 27-116.
I. Outdoor Storage and Display as an Accessory Use. Section 27-403.
1. In addition to the provisions for the R-P district in Part 9, and in addition
to other requirements of this chapter, the following requirements shall
apply to all development in the R-P district:
A. Purpose. To serve the purposes for a planned residential
development ("PRD") as stated in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq. To recognize that the R-P
District includes lands that have previously been approved as a
PRD. To provide a simpler process for any future minor adjustments
to the approved plans or the construction of accessory structures.
§ 27-306 EMMAUS CODE § 27-307
FWD:706
B. Uses. See § 27-306. Development in the R-P district shall occur
within an PRD plan.
C. Lot, Setback, Density and Height Requirements. See Part 9.
Customarily incidental accessory structures and uses may be
constructed or developed within the same requirements as would
apply within the R-M district.
D. Minimum Common Open Space.
(1) A minimum of 25% of the total tract area shall be common open
space. Such common open space shall not include parking
areas, streets, street rights-of-way and areas within 25 feet
around all buildings.
(2) Common open space shall be located to maximize the
preservation of significant natural features, especially
including land along waterways and wooded areas. The
common open space shall be contiguous to the maximum
extent possible.
(3) At its option, the Borough Council may include permanently
preserved land within a golf course to serve as a portion of the
required open space.
(4) Borough Council may require the establishment and
preservation of paths along waterways, with a public access
easement.
E. Site Layout.
(1) The setbacks between structures and from streets may be
varied; provided, that no building is erected within a distance
less than its height from any other structure.
(2) Dwellings shall be located to (a) promote pedestrian and visual
access to the common open space; and, (b) promote privacy for
residents within and adjacent to the PRD.
(3) All buildings shall be located a minimum of 50 feet from
exterior lot lines (including street rights-of-way) of the PRD
and a minimum of 20 feet from the right-of-way of any collector
street within the PRD.
F. Phasing. Development shall be constructed in phases that is
coordinated with the dedication and improvement of common open
space. The order of phasing shall be clearly stated on the
development plans. The density of any one phase shall not exceed
the maximum average density of the entire PRD, considering the
accompanying dedication of open space.
G. Streets, Parking and Walkways.
§ 27-307 FOREWORD § 27-307
FWD:707
(1) Internal streets and access drives shall be designed with a
hierarchy of local and collector functions and to maximize
separation of pedestrian and vehicle movement.
(2) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided wherever feasible.
(3) Collector streets within the PRD shall have a minimum right-ofway
width of 60 feet and a minimum cartway width of 36 feet.
Local streets shall have a minimum right-of-way width of 40
feet and a minimum cartway width of 21 feet.
(4) Cul-de-sac streets shall have a maximum length of 600 feet and
a turning circle with a minimum right-of-way width of 50 feet
and an outer paved width of 40 feet.
(5) Curbs shall be provided where determined to be needed by
Borough Council.
(6) Streets shall comply with the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
(7) Parking shall comply with Part 6 of this chapter.
H. Additional Requirements. Unless otherwise specifically stated, all
development within the R-P district shall comply with the
requirements of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22] and all other requirements of this chapter.
I. PRD Utilities.
(1) Telephone, electric and cable TV utilities shall be installed
underground.
(2) Solid waste refuse stations shall be suitably screened and
located to be convenient for use by but not objectionable to
residents.
J. Ownership and Maintenance of PRD Open Space.
(1) Adequate provisions shall be established by the developer to
ensure permanent preservation and maintenance of the
common open space. For portions of a PRD that are not
retained and maintained as part of a contiguous rental
development, this shall involve the establishment of an
organization to own, maintain and preserve the open space,
conforming to the following standards:
(a) The organization shall be established by the developer
prior to the occupancy, sale or rent of any dwellings.
Membership in the organization shall be binding upon all
property owners in the PRD.
(b) The form, financial capability, rules of membership, ability
to hire staff or contractors and methods of cost assessment
§ 27-307 EMMAUS CODE § 27-307
FWD:708
of the organization shall be sufficient to ensure the
maintenance, preservation and improvement
responsibilities of the organization. Such organization may
be granted certain other maintenance responsibilities in
addition to oversight of the open space, if approved by
Borough Council.
(c) Required open space shall be owned by such organization,
unless an alternative form of ownership is approved by
Borough Council.
(d) If such organization shall fail to adequately maintain the
common open space in reasonable order and condition in
accordance with the approved development plan, then
Borough Council may authorize written notice upon such
organization or upon the residents or owners of property
within the PRD setting forth the shortcomings of such
maintenance. Such notice shall state that deficiencies shall
be corrected within 30 days, or a longer period as may be
established by Borough Council. Such notice shall state
the date and place of a Borough Council public meeting on
such subject.
(i) If the deficiencies are not corrected within the time
limit established by Council after such public meeting,
then the Borough, at its option, shall have the
authority to accomplish or have accomplished such
maintenance for such time as determined to be
necessary by Borough Council. Such maintenance
shall not constitute a taking of the property, nor vest in
the public any rights to use the property.
(ii) The Borough Council may end such maintenance at its
option. Borough Council may at any time determine
that the property owners association is now able to
maintain the open space, and may return maintenance
responsibilities.
(iii) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be
assessed ratably against the properties within the
PRD that have the right of use of the common open
space, and may be enforced through liens.
(2) The Borough Council may at any time, at its option, voluntarily
accept dedication of all or part of the common open space or
permit dedication to another appropriate governmental agency
or an established incorporated nature conservation
organization, if Borough Council deems appropriate, and if
officially offered by the entity currently responsible for
ownership and maintenance.
K. Enforcement and Modifications of Provisions of a PRD.
§ 27-307 FOREWORD § 27-307
FWD:709
(1) Provisions of an approved PRD plan relating to (A) the use,
bulk and location of structures; (B) the amount and location of
common open space; and, (C) the density of development shall
run in favor of the Borough and shall be enforceable in law or
in equity to the Borough without limitation on any powers of
regulation otherwise granted the Borough by law.
(2) All provisions of an approved PRD plan shall run in favor of the
property owners of the PRD, but only to the extent expressly
provided in the development plan, and to the extent such
provisions, whether recorded by plat, covenant, easement or
otherwise may be enforced by law or equity by said residents
acting individually, jointly or through an organization
designated in the development plan to act on their behalf;
provided, however, that no provisions of the development plan
shall be implied to exist in favor of residents of the PRD except
as to those portions of the development plan which have been
finally approved and have been recorded.
(3) All provisions of the development plan authorized to be
enforced by the Borough under this section may be modified,
removed or released by Borough Council for good cause,
except grants or easements relating to the service or
equipment of a public utility subject to the following
conditions:
(a) No such modification, removal or release of the provisions
of the development plan by the Borough shall affect the
rights of property owners within the PRD to maintain and
enforce those provisions, at law or equity, as provided in
this section.
(b) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of
the development plan by the Borough shall be permitted
except upon a finding by Borough Council at a regular
public meeting or a public hearing on such matter that
such change is: (i) consistent with the efficient
development of the entire PRD and the preservation of the
open space; (ii) does not adversely affect the public
interest or the enjoyment of land adjacent to the PRD; and,
(iii) is not granted solely to confer a special benefit upon
any person.
(4) Property owners within the PRD may, to the extent and in the
manner expressly authorized by provisions of the development
plan, modify, remove or release their rights to enforce the
provisions of the development plan that are granted to them,
but no such action shall affect the right of the Borough to
enforce the provisions of the development plan in accordance
with the provisions of this section.
§ 27-307 EMMAUS CODE § 27-307
FWD:710
§ 27-308. Single-Family Cluster Development "SFCD". [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 308]
(5) Minor Adjustments to a PRD. Minor adjustments to a
previously approved PRD (such as but not limited to the minor
shifting in the location of principal buildings, off-street parking
areas, driveways, accessways or common open space or
adjustments in phasing) shall require review of the Planning
Commission and approval by the Borough Council under the
same requirements that would apply to a revision to a final
subdivision plan under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Chapter 22]. Such adjustments shall not require a
new final approval as a PRD, unless the overall scheme of
development is altered, as determined by the Planning
Commission.
1. Purposes. To allow flexible development of areas with sensitive natural
features so as to (A) avoid severe soil erosion and sedimentation; (B)
avoid severely increased stormwater flows and speeds; (C) steer
development to those areas that are more physically suited for it; (D)
avoid construction of steep roads that are difficult, time-consuming,
and expensive to maintain and plow snow upon; (E) avoid increased use
of steep roads and driveways that are dangerous to drive upon in snow
and ice, (F) conserve forested areas that are an important part of the
ecological cycle, providing for groundwater recharge, air pollution
reduction and wildlife habitats; and, (G) reduce construction costs
while (H) allowing each property owner a reasonable use of his/her
land, related directly to the natural features and location and
accessibility of the land. To encourage the preservation of significant
areas of common open space.
2. Applicability. This section allows an applicant the option to reduce the
minimum lot areas on tracts of land if the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Borough Council that all of the requirements of this
section will be complied with.
A. The term "SFCD" shall mean a single-family detached cluster
development meeting the requirements of this section as a
conditional use.
B. A tract may be eligible for approval for a single-family cluster
development if it includes a minimum of one acre in common
ownership in a permitted district.
C. Tract Area. For the purposes of this section, the term "total area of
the tract" shall mean the total lot area or the total lot area of
contiguous lots in common ownership minus areas within the
existing and future rights-of-way of existing streets. The total area
of the tract may include: (1) the right-of-way of any new future
streets proposed within the tract; and (2) any proposed open space.
§ 27-307 FOREWORD § 27-308
FWD:711
D. The SFCD shall be designed as a unified, coordinated residential
development, and shall be approved within a development plan
controlled by a single developer. After final subdivision approval
and within an approved development agreement, a developer may
sell individual lots to different builders or home buyers, provided
that the developer or his/her successor remains responsible for
ensuring the compliance with the approved development plan.
E. The application shall be submitted and decided upon as a
conditional use, within the procedures of Part 1. The application
shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and be approved or
disapproved by the Borough Council.
3. Reduction of Lot Width and Lot Area. If approved as a SFCD, then the
minimum lot area and minimum lot width of the following districts may
be reduced as follows for single-family detached dwellings; provided,
that the minimum average lot area per dwelling unit on the entire tract
meets the requirement stated below:
Zoning
District
Conventional
Min. Lot
Area***
(square feet)
Permitted
Min. Lot
Area In A
SFCD***
(square
feet)
Permitted
Min. Lot
Width In A
SFCD
(feet)
Min.
Average Lot
Area Per
Dwelling
Unit
Permitted
In A SFCD**
C-R* 20,000 15,000 100 17,000
R-L* 9,000 8,000 70 8,000
R-M* 7,000 6,000 55 6,400
NOTES:
SFCD = Single-family cluster development.
* A SFCD shall only be permitted if all dwellings are served by both
public sewage and public water service.
** Shall be calculated based upon the "total area of the tract,"
which includes the common open space and area of proposed
streets (see definition above).
*** Except where the steep slope regulations of § 27-505 apply. This
section shall not allow the reduction of lot area below what may
be required by § 27-505 for steep slope areas. However, through
the use of the smaller minimum lot areas in this section, the
lot layout may be able to be revised to move proposed building
sites away from steeply sloped portions of a tract so that the
requirements of § 27-505 no longer apply.
Min. = Minimum
Max. = Maximum
§ 27-308 EMMAUS CODE § 27-308
FWD:712
4. Other Requirements. All of the same regulations in this chapter and
other Borough ordinances that would apply to any other development
shall also apply to a SFCD, except for those requirements that are
specifically stated in this section as being adjusted.
5. Conditions for Approval. In addition to the specific requirements of this
section, a SFCD shall only be approved as a conditional use if the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Borough Council, based upon
review by the Planning Commission, that the following conditions will
be met:
A. That the SFCD would clearly serve a valid public purpose that
would result in a development that would be superior to what
would result if the land would be development as a conventional
development. Such valid public purposes include but are not
limited to the following:
(1) The permanent preservation through deed restrictions of
dense forests, steep slopes, wetlands, creek valleys, highly
scenic areas or other sensitive natural features.
(2) The permanent preservation of a substantial area of land in
agricultural uses, in a sized tract that allows for efficient
agricultural use.
(3) The dedication of public parkland at a site along a perennial
waterway or that is adjacent to existing public parkland or
where a proposed park is recommended by the Borough's
Comprehensive Plan or Park and Recreation Plan or that is
otherwise deemed by the Borough Council to be clearly
suitable for active or passive recreation.
(4) The clustering of homes in a location that will be substantially
buffered from highly-noxious nuisance generating uses, such
as an existing or planned expressway or major arterial
highway.
B. That the SFCD has been designed in full consideration of important
natural features, including mature woodlands, creek valleys, steep
slopes and wetlands. Areas along creeks shall be preserved in their
natural state, except for landscaping, erosion control
improvements and needed utility, street and driveway crossings.
6. Open Space.
A. Minimum Amount of Open Space.
(1) A minimum of 20% of the tract area within a SFCD shall be
permanently preserved as public, semipublic or private open
space, which shall be preserved by a conservation easement or
dedication within the requirements of this section.
§ 27-308 FOREWORD § 27-308
FWD:713
(2) The required open space under this section shall be in addition
to any open space required to be preserved or dedicated or
fees in lieu of recreation land that may be required under other
sections of this chapter or the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
B. Method of Preserving Open Space.
(1) The method of ownership and preservation of the required
open space shall be determined prior to conditional use
approval. The Borough shall be given right of first refusal at
the time of the conditional use review to accept proposed open
space as public open space. Required open space shall be
permanently preserved by one of the following methods:
(a) Dedication to Emmaus Borough as public open space, if
the Borough Council agrees in writing to such dedication
and agrees to maintain such land for public open space.
(b) Dedication to the County of Lehigh as public open space, if
the County government agrees in writing to such
dedication and agrees to maintain such land for public
open space.
(c) Dedication to the East Penn School District if the school
district agrees in writing to accept such dedication and to
use and maintain the land for public school buildings and
public open space.
(d) Dedication to a legally binding homeowner association as
common nonpublic open space, with such homeowners
being legally bound to ensure the maintenance and
preservation of such land.
(e) Dedication of the land itself or dedication of a permanent
conservation easement to an established nature
conservation organization acceptable to the Borough
Council. (Such dedication may or may not involve actual
ownership by such organization and may or may not
provide for public access.) If only a conservation easement
is to be dedicated, then such open space may remain
privately owned within certain lots that are larger than
would otherwise be required.
(f) Dedication of a permanent conservation easement to the
Borough, with such land remaining privately owned and
part of individual lots. The Borough may also require that
duplicate conservation easements be provided through
agreements with both the Borough and a nature
conservation organization to provide increased assurance
that the land will be preserved.
§ 27-308 EMMAUS CODE § 27-308
FWD:714
(2) The Borough Council shall only approve a SFCD if such Council
determines that there will be an acceptable method to ensure
permanent preservation of the required open space. Narrow
stretches of isolated publicly-owned open space stretching
between residential lots should be avoided because of limited
usefulness and to ensure the security and privacy of nearby
residents.
C. Open Space Standards. Required open spaces shall meet all of the
following requirements:
(1) Such open space shall be permanently deed restricted to
prevent the construction of buildings or the use for any
commercial purposes or the use of the land for commercial
forestry.
(2) Stormwater detention basins and areas within 25 feet of
existing or proposed buildings shall not count towards the
required open space, except for areas that the applicant proves
to the satisfaction of the Borough Council will clearly be
suitable and safe for active or passive recreation.
(3) Wetlands as defined by current federal or state regulations
shall not count towards the required open space.
(4) Land immediately beneath or within 50 feet of electric
overhead transmission lines of 35 or more kilovolts of intended
capacity and towers shall not count towards the required open
space.
(5) Open space intended to be open to the public shall meet one of
the following two requirements:
(a) Have pedestrian access a minimum of 20 feet width to a
public street or a private street to which the public is
permanently granted access and be a minimum of three
contiguous acres in area; or,
(b) Directly abut an existing common open space area which
has such access.
(6) Any homeowner association agreement shall be subject to
review by a Solicitor appointed by the Borough Council, and
the Borough Council may require reasonable adjustments to
such agreement based upon such review. The provisions of
§ 705(f) parts (1) and (2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10705(f) or such
successor sections, shall serve as a general guide for such
agreement.
(7) Improvements to Open Spaces. The application shall include a
detailed and legally binding (if approved) description of what
§ 27-308 FOREWORD § 27-308
FWD:715
§ 27-309. Additional Requirements for the B-C District. [Ord. 776,
6/21/1993; as added by Ord. 937, 11/5/2001, § 6]
improvements the applicant will make to any land intended
to be publicly dedicated to make it suitable for its intended
purpose.
(a) Examples of such improvements for areas intended for
passive recreation include preservation and planting of
trees, development of nature, bicycle or jogging trails, the
stabilization of creek banks and the removal of undesirable
vegetation.
(b) Examples of such improvements for areas intended for
active recreation include rough grading of land to create
land suitable for free-play fields for youth.
(c) All proposed open spaces shall be cleared of construction
debris, materials from illegal dumping and any rocks that
were not naturally on the land, unless those rocks are
incorporated into landscaping improvements.
7. Uses. A SFCD may only include single-family detached dwellings, golf
course (with areas within the SFCD having a 3% maximum impervious
coverage), nature preserves, Borough-owned recreation and their
customary permitted accessory uses.
8. Phasing. The development shall include a phasing system that shall be
approved by the Borough Council. Such phases shall ensure that the
requirements of this Part would be met after the completion of any one
phase, and that the development could properly function without the
construction of additional phases.
1. In addition to the provisions for the B-C District in Part 9, and in
addition to other requirements of this chapter, the following
requirements shall apply to all development in the B-C District:
A. Porches. No front porch in the B-C District shall be enclosed in any
manner above the height of 42 inches as measured from the floor of
the porch.
B. Fences. Chain link fencing surrounding parking lots that are a
principal use or an accessory use to a business use shall not be
permitted.
C. Temporary Outdoor Encroachments. Outdoor cafe style seating,
including tables, chairs, planters and one A-frame sign no larger
than three feet wide by four feet high are permitted. Sidewalk cafes
are permitted as of right. No temporary encroachment permit fee
shall be collected from property owners. Encroachments shall not
be a hazard to the public, shall not impair pedestrian access and
§ 27-308 EMMAUS CODE § 27-309
FWD:716
shall be easily removable. A Borough sidewalk width of six feet
must be maintained.
D. Awnings. Canvas retractable awnings are permitted. Back lit
awnings with interior illumination shall be prohibited.
E. Height of Buildings. With the exception of mid-rise apartment
buildings as described in the Table of Uses, newly constructed
buildings shall be a minimum of two stories high and a maximum of
50 feet high.
F. Windows. All windows above the first floor shall be vertically
oriented as demonstrated by the graphic below:
G. Build to Lines/Front Setback. Newly constructed principal
structures must be built within eight feet of the property line.
There is a zero foot front setback.
§ 27-309 FOREWORD § 27-309
FWD:717

Part 4
ADDITIONAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SPECIFIC USES
§ 27-401. Applicability. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 401]
§ 27-402. Additional Requirements for Specific Principal Uses.
[Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 402; as amended by Ord. 830, 5/6/1996, § 3;
by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 1, 2; by Ord. 994, 6/6/2005, § 6; and by
Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
1. This Part establishes additional specific requirements for certain
specific uses, in addition to the sign, parking, environmental and other
general requirements of this chapter and the requirements of each
district. Wherever two requirements conflict, the stricter requirement
shall apply.
2. For uses allowed within a specific zoning district as special exception or
conditional uses, see the procedures and general standards in § 27-118
and § 27-119. These §§ 27-402 and 27-403 list a set of additional
standards to be used in determining whether a proposed special
exception or conditional use should be approved.
1. Each of the following uses shall meet all of the following requirements
for that use:
A. Adult Use. This is limited to the following: adult bookstore, adult
movie theater, massage parlor or adult live entertainment use:
(1) No such use shall be located within 500 lineal feet of the lot
line of any primary or secondary school, place of worship,
public park, day care center, child nursery, library, existing
dwelling, or any site marked as a proposed future park location
on any Borough Official Map.
(2) No such use shall be located within 1,500 lineal feet of any
other existing or approved adult use.
(3) A thirty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning
district, along the side and rear lot lines in accordance with
§ 27-803, but with plantings of an initial minimum height of six
feet.
(4) No pornographic material, display or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside of the establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from
entering the premises.
(5) The applicant must prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that such use would not in any way adversely
affect the character of the surrounding area, including
property values.
§ 27-401 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:719
(6) No such use shall be used for any purpose that violates any
federal, state or Borough law. Any violation of this zoning
requirement involving a serious criminal offense that the
proprietor has continuing knowledge of and allows to occur
shall be sufficient reason for the Borough to revoke Borough
permits.
(7) See § 27-709, "Prohibited Signs."
(8) No such use shall be allowed in combination with the sale of
alcoholic beverages.
(9) The use shall not include the sale or display of "obscene"
materials, as defined by state law, as may be amended by
applicable Court decisions.
(10) These uses are specifically prohibited in all districts except
where specifically permitted by Part 3.
(11) A minimum lot area of one acre is required.
(12) For public health reasons, private or semiprivate viewing
booths of any kind are prohibited. This specifically includes,
but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult movies or nude
dancers. No room of any kind accessible to customers shall
include less than 150 square feet, other than required
restrooms.
(13)No use may include live actual or simulated sex acts or any
sexual contact between entertainers or between entertainers
and customers.
(14) Only "lawful" massages as defined by state court decisions
shall be performed in a massage parlor.
(15) All persons within any adult use other than a permitted adult
live entertainment use shall wear non-transparent garments
that cover their genitals and the female areola.
(16) The applicant shall provide receipts showing that he/she has
mailed by certified mail a written notice of the proposed
hearing date to all property owners of record within 500 feet of
the subject property at least 10 days prior to the hearing date.
(17) Adult Use Owners and Managers. The applicant shall submit a
written list of all persons having an ownership interest of more
than 1% in the business, including shareholders and partners
of any corporation. The applicant shall also submit the name of
the manager who is responsible to ensure that all Borough and
state regulations are enforced on a day-to-day basis. Such
manager shall reside within a twenty-five-mile radius of the
use. Such information shall include the person's business and
home addresses and phone numbers and shall be a matter of
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:720
public record. Such information shall be kept up-to-date.
Failure to keep such information up-to-date shall be a violation
of this chapter and be reason for suspension of Borough
permits.
B. Adult Day Care Center.
(1) Shall be fully licensed by the state, if required by the state.
(2) Shall include constant supervision during all hours of
operation.
(3) Shall not meet the definition of a "treatment center."
C. Amusement Arcade.
(1) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that there will be adequate supervision and
design measures to adverse affects upon residential properties
in the area.
(2) The operator shall keep children of ages six to 15 from being
within the use during school hours and/or on school days.
(3) The use shall be setback a minimum of 300 feet from any place
of worship and 150 feet from any residential district.
D. Auditorium, Commercial or Nightclub.
(1) A forty-foot buffer yard shall completely separate the structure
and all off-street parking areas from any lot line of any
residential use or undeveloped residentially zoned lot.
(2) A commercial auditorium shall have a minimum lot size of one
acre for each 150 persons of capacity.
(3) Any such use that allows the consumption of alcohol and that
has a capacity of 250 or more persons shall be setback a
minimum of 300 feet from any residential lot line.
E. Auto Repair Garage.
(1) All major repair, welding and paint work shall be performed
within a building, with a fume collection and ventilation system
that directs fumes away from any adjacent dwellings.
(2) All reasonable efforts shall be made to prevent or minimize
noise, odor, vibration, light or electrical interference to
adjacent lots.
(3) Outdoor storage of autos and other vehicles shall not be within
a paved area setback required by § 27-603 nor closer than 20
feet from a lot line of an existing dwelling.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:721
(4) Overnight outdoor storage of junk, other than junk vehicles,
shall be prohibited within view of a public street or a dwelling.
(5) An individual junk vehicle (as defined by Part 2) shall not be
stored within view of a public street or a dwelling for a total of
more than 20 days. No junk vehicles shall be stored within 20
feet of an existing street right-of-way line. A maximum of six
junk vehicles may be parked on a lot outside of an enclosed
building at any one time.
(6) Service bay doors shall not face directly towards an abutting
dwelling, not including a dwelling separated from the garage
by a street.
(7) A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three or
more axles or tractor-trailer trucks shall have a minimum lot
area of five acres, and all areas used for repairs, fueling and
serving of such vehicles shall be setback a minimum of 250 feet
from a residential lot line.
F. Auto, Boat or Manufactured Home Sales.
(1) No vehicle or home on display shall occupy any part of the
existing or future street right-of-way or required customer
parking area or any paved area setback required by § 27-603.
(2) See light and glare standards in § 27-511.
G. Auto Service Station.
(1) See definition in Part 2 and definition of Auto Repair Garage.
(2) All activities, except those customarily performed at fuel or air
pumps, shall be performed within a building. Spray painting or
body or fender work is prohibited.
(3) Fuel pumps shall be at least 25 feet from the existing street
right-of-way. The minimum lot width shall be at least 150 feet.
(4) Overnight outdoor storage of junk and vehicle parts, other than
permitted whole junk vehicles, shall be prohibited within view
of a public street or dwelling.
(5) An individual junk vehicle (as defined by Part 2) shall not be
stored within view of a public street or a dwelling for more
than a total of 20 days. No junk vehicles shall be stored within
20 feet of an existing street right-of-way. No more than three
junk vehicles shall be stored on the lot outside of an enclosed
building at any point in time.
(6) There shall be an ability for a minimum of three vehicles to be
serviced at each cluster of gasoline pumps or to be lined up
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:722
behind cars being serviced, without obstruction of access into
or out of the driveways from public streets.
(7) A use that is primarily intended to serve trucks with three or
more axles or tractor-trailer trucks shall have a minimum lot
area of five acres, and all areas used for fueling and servicing
shall be setback a minimum of 250 feet from all residential lot
lines.
H. Bed and Breakfast Use.
(1) Within a primarily residential district, a maximum of four
rental units shall be provided and a total maximum of 10 guests
may occupy the facility at one point in time. A maximum of four
persons may occupy one rental unit. Uses with a capacity of
more than 20 guests shall be considered a hotel or motel.
(2) The off-street parking spaces for the bed and breakfast shall be
located: (A) to the rear of the principal building; or, (B)
screened from the street and abutting dwellings by evergreen
screening; or, (C) on another lot within the requirements of
Part 6.
(3) At least one bathroom shall be provided for use by guests.
(4) There shall not be any signs, show windows or any type of
display or advertising visible from outside the premises, except
for a single sign, which shall not be internally illuminated, with
a maximum sign area of four square feet on each of two sides
and with a maximum height of eight feet.
(5) The use shall have a residential appearance and character.
(6) The use shall be operated by permanent residents of the lot.
(7) There shall not be separate cooking facilities in any guest
room. Food shall only be served to guests who are staying
overnight, unless a restaurant is also permitted by the district
regulations.
(8) No guest shall stay for more than 14 days in any month.
(9) The use of any amenities provided by the bed and breakfast,
such as swimming pool or tennis court, shall be restricted in
use to the clientele and permanent residents of the
establishment and their occasional invited guests, unless
commercial recreation is also permitted by the district
regulations.
(10) Any on-lot septic system shall be recertified as being adequate,
in accordance with state regulations.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:723
(11) In a residential district, shall be restricted to buildings that
existed prior to January 1, 1950.
I. Betting Use.
(1) Shall be located abutting an arterial or collector street, as
defined by the Official Street Classification Map.
(2) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(3) Minimum building setback from the lot line of any place of
worship or residential zoning district: 300 feet.
J. Boarding House (Includes Rooming House).
(1) Minimum lot area: 35,000 square feet.
(2) Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. Minimum setback from
all other lot lines: 40 feet.
(3) Minimum lot width: 125 feet.
(4) Density. A minimum of 5,000 square feet of lot area per
sleeping room or rental unit, whichever is more restrictive.
(5) Each sleeping room shall be limited to two persons each. A
minimum of one full bathroom shall be provided for every four
sleeping rooms.
(6) A fifteen-foot wide buffer yard, with screening meeting
§ 27-803(4), shall be provided between any boarding house
building and any abutting single-family detached dwelling that
is within 100 feet of the proposed boarding house building.
(7) Interior Space. A minimum of 250 square feet of interior floor
area per resident.
(8) Maximum number of residents: 20.
(9) See also standards for personal care homes which is a separate
use.
(10) Signs shall be limited to one wall sign with a maximum of two
square feet per side.
(11) Rooms shall be rented for a minimum period of five
consecutive days.
K. Bus Terminal, Inter-City. For regular scheduled service between
metropolitan areas; bus stations and bus stops for local bus service
and occasional charter service are not regulated by this chapter.
(1) Street access from the bus station to an arterial street or an
expressway shall not require driving on a local street that is
primarily residential.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:724
(2) Shall provide an area for the loading and unloading of buses
separate from required off-street parking areas, and a separate
area for pick-up and drop-off of persons from private vehicles.
(3) May be an accessory use to a permitted shopping center or
restaurant; provided, that the applicant proves to the Zoning
Officer that there is adequate room for movements by the bus
on the site or an adequate street shoulder for stops.
L. Car Wash.
(1) Traffic flow and ingress-egress shall not cause traffic hazards
on adjacent streets.
(2) On-lot traffic circulation channels and parking areas shall be
clearly marked.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made for the proper and
convenient disposal of refuse.
(4) Water used in the operation shall be collected and recycled,
and shall not flow into any storm sewers or waterways.
(5) Water from the car wash operation shall not flow onto
sidewalks or streets, to prevent hazards from ice.
(6) Any car wash that is located within 250 feet of an existing
dwelling shall not operate between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m.
(7) Any chemicals that may be hazardous to aquatic life shall be
stored within an area that will completely contain any leaks or
spills.
M. Cemetery.
(1) Minimum lot area for any new cemetery: two acres.
(2) A crematorium, where allowed, shall be setback a minimum of
250 feet from all residential lot lines.
(3) All structures and graves shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet
from all residential lot lines, 20 feet from the future right-ofway
of any public street and 10 feet from the cartway of an
internal driveway.
(4) No grave sites shall be located within the one-hundred-year
floodplain.
(5) The applicant shall provide evidence that, in the determination
of the Zoning Officer, the use will include an appropriate
permanent system to ensure perpetual maintenance. Such
determination shall be based upon a review by the Borough
Solicitor.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:725
N. Communications Antennae, Commercial.
(1) If the antennae is not attached to a building:
(a) The antennae shall be setback a minimum distance equal
to 2/3 of its height from all lot lines and existing street
right-of-way lines; and,
(b) If the antenna will have a height greater than 65 feet
above the natural ground level, it shall not be located in a
residential district.
(2) The base of a freestanding antennae shall be surrounded by a
secure fence with a minimum height of eight feet.
(3) Any freestanding antennae higher than 50 feet that is within
100 feet of a public street or dwelling shall be surrounded
(except at the driveway crossing) by evergreen screening or
preserved woods meeting the requirements of § 27-803.
O. Conversions of an Existing Building into Dwellings or into an
Additional Number of Dwelling Units.
(1) Applicable state fire safety requirements shall be met.
(2) The following regulations shall apply to the conversion of an
existing single-family detached dwelling into a greater number
of dwelling units:
(a) The building shall maintain the appearance of a singlefamily
detached dwelling with a single front entrance.
Additional entrances may be placed on the side or rear of
the structure. The dwelling units may internally share the
single front entrance.
(b) The conversion shall not be permitted if it would require
the placement of an exterior stairway on the front of the
building, or would require the placement of more than
three off-street parking spaces in the required front yard
abutting an arterial street.
(3) A previously residential building shall maintain a clearly
residential appearance, except as may be necessary for
restoration of a historic building or for handicapped access.
(4) Separate cooking and sanitary facilities shall be provided for
each dwelling unit.
(5) Off-street parking lots with four or more spaces shall be
buffered from abutting dwellings by evergreen screening
meeting the requirements of § 27-803.
(6) Dumpster screening - see § 27-513.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:726
(7) A site plan shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer.
(8) Minimum floor area - see § 27-801.
P. Day Care Center, Child (as a Principal Use).
(1) See also day care center as an accessory use in § 27-403.
(2) The use shall comply with any applicable county, state and
federal regulations, including having an appropriate
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare registration
certificate or license.
(3) Convenient parking spaces within the requirements of Part 6
shall be provided for persons delivering and waiting for
children.
(4) In residential districts, where permitted as a principal use,
shall have a minimum lot area of 12,000 square feet and a
minimum setback of 15 feet from an abutting residential lot
line.
(5) Shall include adequate measures to ensure the safety of
children from traffic or other nearby hazards. This shall
include a secure fence around any outdoor areas abutting
streets that are routinely used for outdoor play.
(6) Outside play areas in residential districts shall be limited to
use between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m. if located within 150 feet
of an abutting dwelling.
(7) Outdoor play areas of a day care center involving the care of 25
or more children at any one time shall be setback a minimum of
20 feet from the exterior walls of an abutting existing occupied
dwelling.
(8) A day care center as a principal use shall not be conducted in a
dwelling that is physically attached to another dwelling that
does not have a common owner.
(9) In residential districts, any permitted day care center shall
maintain an exterior appearance that resembles and is
compatible with any existing dwellings in the neighborhood.
(10) A day care center may occur in a building that also includes
permitted or nonconforming dwelling units.
(11) See also the standards for a place of worship in this section,
which allows a day care center as an adjunct use. See also
§ 27-306(4), which allows day care centers limited to
employees of a business or institution.
Q. Financial Institution. Any drive-in window(s) and waiting lanes
shall be located and have capacity for sufficient numbers of
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:727
vehicles to ensure that traffic conflicts and hazards are avoided
within the site and along the streets and highways adjoining the
use.
R. Forestry, Commercial (Excluding Plant Nursery).
(1) See definition in Part 2.
(2) A forestry management plan shall be prepared and followed for
any commercial forestry involving more than 1/3 acre. This
plan shall be prepared by a professional forester.
(3) The forestry management plan shall be consistent with the
timber harvesting guidelines of the Pennsylvania Forestry
Association.
(4) Clearcutting shall be prohibited except on areas to be forested
of less than 5,000 square feet.
(5) On areas to be forested that are larger than 5,000 square feet,
at least 25% of the forest cover (canopy) shall be kept and the
residual trees shall be well distributed. At least 25% of these
residual trees shall be composed of higher value species as
determined by a professional forester.
(6) An erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted
to the County Conservation District for any review and
recommendation.
(7) The forestry management plan shall include an appropriate
method to ensure re-forestation, except for areas approved for
a permitted use. See § 27-515.
(8) Commercial forestry is prohibited on areas with slopes greater
than 25% or within the one-hundred-year floodway. See
permitted thinning of woods in § 27-515.
S. Funeral Home. Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet.
T. Golf Course.
(1) The course shall be designed so that golf balls are highly
unlikely to enter public streets or property that is not part of
the golf course.
(2) A clubhouse, retail sales of golf supplies, nonhousehold
swimming pool and/or restaurant may be permitted as an
accessory use. Any building or swimming pool shall be located
a minimum of 100 feet from any residential lot line, unless the
owner of such lot grants a waiver in writing from such setback.
(3) Minimum lot area: 25 acres in a residential district.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:728
(4) Any outdoor lighting shall be located and designed in such a
way that it does not generate more light onto residential
properties than what is customary in a residential
neighborhood.
(5) Maximum building coverage: 5%.
(6) Maximum impervious coverage: 10%.
(7) Fairways and greens shall be setback a minimum of 30 feet
from the lot line of any existing dwelling.
U. Group Home (Permitted Within any Lawful Dwelling Unit).
(1) See definition in Part 2.
(2) Supervision. There shall be adequate supervision as needed by
an adequate number of person(s) trained in the field for which
the group home is intended.
(3) Certification. The use shall be licensed or certified under an
applicable state, county or federal program for group housing,
if applicable. A copy of any such license or certification shall be
filed with the Borough, and shall be required to be shown to
the Zoning Officer in the future upon request. The group home
shall notify the Borough within 14 days if there is a change in
the type of clients, the sponsoring agency, the maximum
number of residents or if an applicable certification/license
expires, is suspended or is withdrawn.
(4) Registration. The group home shall register its location,
general type of treatment/care, maximum number of residents
and sponsoring agency with the Borough. Such information
shall be available for public review upon request.
(5) Counseling. Any medical or counseling services provided on
the lot shall be limited to residents and a maximum of no more
than four non-residents per day.
(6) Parking. One off-street parking space shall be provided for: (a)
each employee on duty at any one time; and, (b) every 1.5
residents who have a current, valid driver's license. Off-street
parking areas of more than four spaces shall be buffered from
adjacent existing single-family dwellings by a planting screen
meeting the requirements of § 27-803.
(7) The use shall not meet the definition in Part 2 of a "treatment
center."
(8) Appearance. If the group home is within a residential district,
the building shall be maintained and/or constructed to ensure
that it is closely similar in appearance, condition and character
to the other residential structures in the area. No exterior
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:729
signs or other features visible from the exterior shall identify
the type of use.
(9) The following maximum number of persons shall reside in a
group home, including the maximum number of employees and
care-providers routinely in the group home at any point in
time:
(a) Single-family detached dwelling with minimum lot area of
15,000 square feet and minimum building setbacks from
all residential lot lines of 15 feet: six total persons.
(b) Single-family detached dwelling with minimum lot area of
25,000 square feet and minimum building setbacks from
all residential lot lines of 20 feet: eight total persons.
(c) Any other lawful dwelling unit: five total persons.
(10) Septic. If a group home will use an on-lot septic system and will
involve six or more persons routinely on the premises at any
one time, the septic system shall be required to be reviewed by
the Borough Sewage Enforcement Officer to determine if it is
adequate.
(11) Employees of the group home shall be prohibited from having
visitors on the premises, except for visitation necessary for the
operation of the group home and except for emergencies.
(12) The use shall provide smoke detectors, illuminated "exit" signs,
emergency battery-powered lighting and a minimum of two
"ABC" rated fire extinguishers.
V. Hospital.
(1) The use shall be served by at least two accessways or
driveways with a minimum width of 20 feet. One of these
accesses shall be from an arterial or collector street. The
second access may be limited to emergency vehicles.
(2) Reasonable consideration shall be given to design methods
that may be able to minimize serious noise conflicts from
emergency sirens in the vicinity of a residential district.
(3) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(4) See definition in Part 2.
W. Hotel/Motel.
(1) Recreational facilities limited to guests of the use and a
standard restaurant may be permitted accessory uses to a
hotel or motel.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:730
(2) See definition in Part 2, which distinguishes between a hotel/
motel and a boarding house.
(3) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet.
X. Junkyard (Includes Automobile Salvage Yard).
(1) Storage of garbage or biodegradable material is prohibited,
other than what is customarily generated on site and routinely
awaiting pick-up.
(2) Outdoor storage of junk shall be at least:
(a) Eighty feet from any residential lot line; and,
(b) Forty feet from any other lot line and the existing right-ofway
of any public street.
(3) The site shall contain a minimum of two exterior points of
access, each of which is not less than 20 feet in width. One of
these accesses may be limited to emergency vehicles. Cleared
driveways shall be provided throughout the entire use to allow
access by emergency vehicles. A minimum of one off-street
parking space shall be provided for each 25 junk vehicles on
the lot.
(4) Outdoor storage shall be completely enclosed (except at
approved driveway entrances) by a forty-foot wide buffer yard
which complies with § 27-803, unless such storage is not
visible from an exterior lot line or street. The initial height of
the evergreen planting shall be six feet. Secure wood or chain
link fencing with a minimum height of eight feet shall be
provided and well-maintained around all outdoor storage
areas. Such fencing shall be provided inside of the evergreen
screening.
(5) Burning or incineration of vehicles or junk is prohibited.
(6) See the noise or dust regulations of Part 5.
(7) All gasoline and oil shall be drained from all vehicles and
properly disposed of. All batteries shall be removed from
vehicles and properly stored in a suitable area on an
impervious, properly drained surface.
(8) Lot area: three acres minimum; 20 acres maximum.
(9) Tires - see the "Outdoor Storage and Display" standards in
§ 27-403.
Y. Kennel.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:731
(1) All buildings in which animals are housed and all runs shall be
located at least 150 feet from all residential lot lines and 30
feet from all other lot lines.
(2) Buildings shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds
generated within the buildings cannot routinely be heard
within any adjacent dwelling.
(3) No animal shall be permitted to use outdoor runs from 8:00
p.m. to 8:00 a.m. that are within 300 feet of an existing
dwelling. Runs for dogs shall be separated from each other by
visual barriers a minimum of four feet in height, to minimize
dog barking.
(4) See state law regulating kennels.
(5) A kennel may be used for breeding.
(6) Minimum lot area: two acres.
(7) An evergreen screen meeting the requirements of § 27-803
shall be required between any outdoor animal runs and any
residential lot line.
Z. Livestock, Raising of (or Animal Husbandry).
(1) Minimum lot area: seven acres.
(2) Any newly developed indoor area used for the keeping of
animals or indoor or outdoor manure storage areas or feeding
areas that are part of a raising of livestock use shall be located
a minimum of 250 feet from the following: lot lines of existing
dwellings (except the dwelling of the operator of the livestock
use), undeveloped residentially zoned lots, existing restaurants
and existing office uses and a minimum of 100 feet from all
other exterior lot lines.
(3) Any additions to an existing indoor area used for the raising of
livestock or indoor or outdoor manure storage areas or feeding
areas that are part of raising of livestock use shall be located a
minimum of 200 feet from the lot lines of existing dwellings
(except the dwelling of the operator of the livestock use) and
undeveloped residentially zoned lots.
(4) Any area used for the keeping of animals as part of a raising of
livestock use that is not regulated by the standards of
subsections (2) and (3), above, shall be separated by a fence or
wall and setback 50 feet from any lot line of an existing
dwelling or an undeveloped residentially zoned lot.
(5) The keeping of minks or garbage-fed pigs shall be setback a
minimum of 300 feet from all lot lines.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:732
AA. Low-Rise Apartments. See "Townhouses and Low-Rise
Apartments."
BB. Mid-Rise, Apartments. Such building may only have a maximum
height of greater than 45 feet in areas that are setback greater
than 250 feet from the existing right-of-way of Main Street and
Chestnut Street.
CC. Manufactured Home (on an Individual Lot or Within a
Manufactured Home Park).
(1) Shall be manufactured, constructed, and installed in
accordance with the safety and construction standards of the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development.
This standard supersedes the ICC Code (Chapter 5) for the
actual construction of the unit itself.
(2) Shall have a site graded to provide a level, stable and welldrained
area.
(3) Shall have wheels, axles and hitch mechanisms removed.
(4) Foundation. Shall be securely attached to the ground in such
as way as to prevent overturning, shifting or uneven settling of
the home. This shall involve the following method, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning officer that
another method will be used that (a) is recommended by the
manufacturer of the home or by the manufacturing housing
industry; or, (b) is specified by a future edition of the Borough's
BOCA Code:
(a) The foundation system shall consist of ten-inch diameter
concrete piers, concrete footing perpendicular to the main
longitudinal frame, or equivalent and shall be installed
from ground level to below the frost line (36 inches
minimum). This foundation system shall be placed on eight
feet centers (unless another length is specified by the
manufacturer) along each of the two main longitudinal
frames for each section of the home with no more than
three feet overhang at each end of the section. The
Borough Building inspector may approve other
appropriate equivalent foundation methods, such as
concrete trench piers placed perpendicular to the main
longitudinal frame or concrete slabs under the entire
home footprint.
(b) One-half-inch diameter by twelve-inch long eyebolts, Ushaped
bars or equivalent metal bars shall be cast in place
at each corner and at two midpoints in the concrete piers,
concrete footing, slab or equivalent. Concrete blocks shall
be used to support the home on the foundation system and
wood shims may be used for final leveling. The concrete
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:733
support blocks shall not be wider than the support
foundation.
(c) The manufactured home shall be securely anchored or tied
down with cable and turn buckles or equivalent connecting
the frame to the cast in place eyebolts on at least four
corners and two midpoints. The tiedown shall also be in
accordance with the manufacturers' recommendations
furnished with each home.
(d) Manufactured homes shall not be placed more than four
feet above the supporting ground area.
(5) Shall be enclosed from the bottom of the home to the ground or
stand using either:
(a) Industry-approved skirting material compatible with the
home; or,
(b) If a slab foundation is used, masonry walls underneath the
home with soil backfill to result in the surrounding ground
level to be flush or one normal step in height below the
first floor elevation. If this alternative is used, a service
access area through the masonry wall shall be installed.
(6) Shall have a pitched instead of a flat roof.
(7) Should be located with the longest side facing the public
street.
DD. Manufactured Home Park.
(1) Shall comply with all of the provisions of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] that apply to a land
development, including the submission, approval and
improvements provisions, other than specific provisions
altered by this section. The placement of each manufactured
home unit shall require a building permit.
(2) Minimum tract size of five contiguous acres, which shall be
under single ownership.
(3) Maximum average overall density - four dwelling units per
acre. To calculate this density, land in common open space or
proposed streets within the park may be included, but land
within the one-hundred-year floodway or that has slopes of
15% or greater shall not be included.
(4) Shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer yard around the perimeter
of the site, meeting the requirements of § 27-803. This buffer
yard shall be 50 feet wide abutting lots including existing
single-family detached dwellings.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:734
(5) Minimum separation between structural walls of dwelling
units: 20 feet.
(6) Minimum principal and accessory building setbacks:
(a) From the exterior lot lines of the manufactured home park:
60 feet.
(b) From the cartways of streets within the manufactured
home park that serve 10 or more homes: 25 feet.
(c) From the cartways of parking courts or streets within the
manufactured home park that serve less than 10 homes:
10 feet.
(d) From the lot lines of existing single-family detached
dwellings: 100 feet.
(7) Recreation Area.
(a) The manufactured home park shall meet the requirements
of the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Chapter 22] for the payment of recreation fees
or the provision of recreation land.
(b) Areas that would not be suitable for recreation shall not be
counted towards the required common open space. Also,
areas within 15 feet of any principal building, other than a
recreation building, shall not count towards the required
open space.
(8) Each unit shall comply with the requirements for
manufactured homes, in § 27-402.
(9) A manufactured home park may include a recreation center for
residents, a rental/management office, maintenance buildings
for the park, a swimming pool(s) and the sale of manufactured
homes that will be placed on the tract. A manufactured home
park shall not include the sale of homes for placement off the
tract.
(10) If any of these requirements conflict with those of the
manufactured home park regulations of the Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], as amended, then
the regulations of this section shall apply instead.
(11) In addition to the required parking per dwelling, an
appropriate area shall be set aside for the parking of
recreational vehicles of residents and for overflow guest
parking.
(12) The maximum height, building coverage and impervious
coverage of the applicable zoning district shall apply.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:735
(13) All manufactured home spaces shall be wired underground for
cable television and telephone lines.
EE. Nightclub. Shall meet the requirements for an "auditorium,
commercial."
FF. Nursing Home.
(1) Licensing - see definition in Part 2.
(2) A minimum of 10% of the lot shall be suitable and developed
for passive recreation. This area shall include outdoor sitting
areas and pedestrian walks.
(3) The density shall not exceed more than one resident or bed per
100 square feet of total lot area.
(4) Setback. Principal and accessory buildings shall be setback a
minimum of 20 feet from a residential lot line.
GG. Parking Lot as a Principal Use.
(1) The parking lot shall not be used for parking of heavy
construction equipment, for vehicle repairs or for sales unless
such uses are specifically permitted by the applicable district
regulations.
(2) See lighting and glare standards in Part 5 and buffer yard
standards in § 27-803.
(3) Any permitted parking area within a residential district that
abuts a residential lot line and that serves a principal business
use shall not permit the routine movement of vehicles such
dwelling between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
HH. Personal Care Home. The standards for nursing homes in this
section shall apply.
II. Place of Worship. [Amended by Ord. No. 1191, 8/19/2019]
(1) Minimum lot area: 20,000 square feet.
(2) A single dwelling unit may be an accessory use, provided that it
is located on the same lot as the place of worship.
(3) Additional accessory uses include classrooms for religious
education or instruction, meeting or fellowship facilities,
kitchen, indoor/outdoor gymnasium or recreation area, child or
elderly day care, stage or theater and parking lot. All accessory
uses authorized hereunder shall be for the exclusive use of
members of the place of worship or their guests or visitors and
shall be made available solely for noncommercial use and
without consideration or stipends of any kind.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:736
(4) Accessory uses identified in Subsection 1II(3), above, may be
made available to persons, groups or other entities for
commercial purposes or consideration; provided that the place
of worship shall first obtain conditional use approval for such
accessory use or uses pursuant to § 27-118 of this chapter. In
addition to the standards set forth in § 27-118, the Borough
Council may consider the following:
(a) Availability of on-site parking;
(b) Hours of operation;
(c) Exterior lighting;
(d) Solid waste handling;
(e) Kitchen use and impact on the sanitary sewer system; and
(f) Alcohol.
(5) Each use authorized hereunder shall be subject to the
requirement that it be customarily incidental to and
subordinate to the place of worship.
(6) Noncommercial buses used primarily to transport persons to
and from the place of worship in connection with a religious
service or event or a permitted school on the same lot shall be
permitted to be parked on the lot.
JJ. Plant Nursery.
(1) Evergreen screening and buffer yards are not required around
the outdoor storage of trees or shrubs.
(2) The only retail sales that shall be permitted shall be trees and
plants that were primarily grown upon the lot and clearly
customary and accessory sales of closely related items (such as
mulch, topsoil and tools) unless retail sales or a retail store are
specifically permitted in the district.
(3) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet if there is any retail sales
within a primarily residential district.
KK. Recycling Collection Center.
(1) This use shall not be bound by the requirements of a solid
waste disposal facility.
(2) All materials shall be kept in appropriate containers, with
appropriate sanitary measures and frequent enough emptying
to prevent the attraction of insects or rodents and to avoid fire
hazards.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:737
(3) Adequate provision shall be made for movement of trucks if
needed and for off-street parking.
(4) A twenty-foot buffer yard with screening as described in
§ 27-803 shall be provided between this use and any abutting
residential lot line.
(5) This use may be a principal or accessory use, including being
an accessory use to a commercial use, an industrial use, a
public or private primary or secondary school, a place of
worship or a Borough-owned use, subject to the limitations of
this section.
(6) Materials to be collected shall be of the same character as the
following materials: paper, fabric, cardboard, plastic, metal,
aluminum, glass and yard waste. No garbage shall be stored as
part of the use, except for that generated on site and that
accidentally collected with the recyclables. Only materials
clearly being actively collected for recycling may be stored on
site.
(7) The use shall only include the following operations: collection,
sorting, baling, loading, weighing, routine cleaning,
composting and closely similar work. No burning or landfilling
shall occur. No mechanical operations shall routinely occur at
the site other than operations such as baling of cardboard and
such operations as are necessary for permitted composting.
(8) The use shall not routinely include the collection or processing
of pieces of metal that have a weight greater than 50 pounds,
except within an industrial district.
(9) The use, other than a Borough-owned use, shall include the
storage of a maximum of 50 tons of materials on the site if the
use is within a residential district and within 300 feet of an
existing dwelling.
(10) In the C-R district, a recycling center may include the
composting of yard waste if: (a) the facility is owned by a
municipality or a municipal authority; and, (b) if composting
areas are setback a minimum of 50 feet from any occupied
dwelling on an adjacent lot.
LL. Restaurant, Fast Food or Standard.
(1) Dumpster screening and waste containers - see § 27-513.
(2) If a drive-through is provided, a maximum of two outdoor menu
boards are permitted, beyond the signs normally permitted,
with a maximum sign area of 40 square feet each, if the words
on such signs are not readable from beyond the lot line.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:738
(3) Traffic circulation onto, within and off of the lot shall be clearly
marked. A drive-through use shall be designed with space for
an adequate number of waiting vehicles while avoiding
conflicts with traffic onto, around and off of the site.
MM.School, Public or Private, Primary or Secondary.
(1) Minimum lot area: 30,000 square feet, unless a larger acreage
is required by another section of this chapter.
(2) No children's play equipment, basketball courts or illuminated
recreation facilities shall be within 25 feet of a residential lot
line.
(3) The use shall not include a dormitory unless specifically
permitted in the district.
NN. Self-Storage Development.
(1) All storage units shall be fire-resistant and water-resistant.
(2) Outdoor storage shall be limited to recreational vehicles, boats
and trailers. No junk vehicles shall be stored within view of a
public street or a dwelling.
(3) Trash, radioactive or highly toxic substances, garbage, refuse,
explosives or flammable materials, hazardous substances,
animal carcasses or skins, or similar items shall not be stored.
(4) Nothing shall be stored in interior traffic aisles, required offstreet
parking areas, loading areas or accessways.
(5) Major body work on vehicles shall not be permitted. The use
shall not include a commercial auto repair garage unless that
use is permitted in the district and the use meets those
requirements.
(6) Adequate lighting shall be provided for security, but it shall be
directed away or shielded from any adjacent residential uses.
(7) The use shall be completely surrounded by a buffer yard
including screening as specified in § 27-803, except along the
abutting lot lines of another principal business use, unless the
Planning Commission approves alternative landscaping that
the applicant proves is superior.
(8) Maximum building length: 250 feet.
(9) Minimum separation between buildings: 20 feet.
OO. Solid Waste Transfer Facility.
(1) All solid waste storage, disposal and incineration shall be at
least 250 feet from the following: public street right-of-way,
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:739
exterior lot line, one-hundred-year floodplain, edge of a surface
water body (including a water filled quarry) or wetland of more
than two acres in area.
(2) All areas to be used for the storage, disposal or incineration of
solid waste shall be a minimum of 500 feet from any residential
lot line or publicly-owned recreation area or the banks of any
perennial creek or river.
(3) The use shall be served by a minimum of two paved access
roads, each with a minimum cartway width of 24 feet. One of
these roads may be restricted to use by emergency vehicles.
(4) No burning or incineration shall be permitted. Any solid waste
that is to be stored for more than three hours shall be stored in
an enclosed structure.
(5) The operation and day-to-day maintenance of the solid waste
disposal area shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations as a condition of the continuance of any permit of
the Borough. Violations of this condition shall also be
considered to be violations of this chapter.
(6) Open dumps and open burning of refuse are prohibited.
(7) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the existing street network can handle the
additional truck traffic, especially without bringing
extraordinary numbers of trash hauling trucks through or
alongside existing residential or residentially zoned areas.
(8) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that the use would not routinely create noxious
odors off of the tract.
(9) A chain-link or other approved fence with a minimum height of
eight feet shall surround active solid waste disposal areas to
prevent the scattering of litter and to keep out children. The
Board shall require earth berms, evergreen screening and/or
shade trees as needed shall be used to prevent operations from
being visible from an expressway or arterial streets or
dwellings.
(10) A minimum total lot area of five acres (which may include land
in an adjoining municipality) is required for the first 200 tons
per day of capacity to treat or dispose of waste, plus two acres
for each additional 100 tons per day of capacity. The facility
shall have a maximum total capacity of 400 tons per day.
(11) Health Hazards. Any facility shall be operated in such a
manner to prevent the attraction, harborage or breeding of
insects, rodents or vectors.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:740
(12) Attendant. An attendant shall be present during all periods of
operation or dumping.
(13) Gates. Secure gates, fences, earth mounds and/or dense
vegetation shall prevent unauthorized access.
(14) Emergency Access. The operator of the use shall cooperate
fully with local emergency services. This should include
allowing practice exercises on the site and the provision of all
information needed by the emergency services to determine
potential hazards. Adequate means of emergency access shall
be provided.
(15) Under authority granted to the Borough under the Municipal
Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S.
§ 4000.101 et seq., the hours of operation shall be limited to
between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(16) Tires. See "Outdoor Storage and Display" in § 27-403.
(17) Litter. The operator shall regularly police the area of the
facility and surrounding streets to collect litter that may
escape from the facility or trucks.
(18) Dangerous Materials. No radioactive, hazardous,
chemotherapeutic or infectious materials maybe stored or
processed in any way. Infectious materials are defined as
medical wastes used or created in the treatment of persons or
animals with seriously contagious diseases.
(19) The applicant shall provide sufficient information for the
Borough to determine that the requirements of this chapter
will be met.
(20) The applicant shall provide the Zoning officer with a copy of all
written materials and plans that are submitted to Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection at the same time as
they are submitted to the Department of Environmental
Protection.
(21) All loading and unloading of solid waste shall only occur within
an enclosed building, and over an impervious surface drained
to a holding tank that is then adequately treated.
PP. Stable, Nonhousehold.
(1) Minimum lot area: three acres.
(2) Any horse barn, corral, fenced-in area or stable shall be a
minimum of 25 feet from any lot line, except 150 feet from any
residential lot line.
QQ. Swimming Pool, Nonhousehold.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:741
(1) The water surface shall be setback at least 50 feet from any
existing dwelling.
(2) Minimum lot area: 1.5 acres.
(3) Any water surface within 100 feet of an existing dwelling shall
be separated from the dwelling by evergreen screening
meeting the requirements of § 27-803.
(4) The water surface shall be surrounded by a secure, wellmaintained
fence at least six feet in height.
(5) Water Service. Any inlet from a central water system shall be
above the overflow level of the pool.
(6) Nuisances. A pool shall not include illumination of adjacent
residential properties beyond what is customary in a
residential neighborhood. A pool shall also not include the
playing of a radio or recorded music at a volume louder than is
necessary for the convenient hearing of persons at the pool.
RR. Target Range.
(1) All target ranges shall have a barrier behind the target area
which is of sufficient height and thickness that is more than
adequate to protect the public safety. This barrier shall be
made of earth for an outdoor firearms range.
(2) An outdoor firearms target range shall comply with National
Rifle Association standards and other applicable federal, state
and local regulations.
(3) An outdoor firearms target range shall be located a minimum
of 500 feet from a residential lot line.
(4) An outdoor firearms target range shall be fenced and be
properly posted.
(5) The applicant shall show that the noise limits of Part 5 will be
met.
(6) An indoor firearms target range shall be adequately ventilated
to allow the building to remain completely enclosed.
SS. Tavern. Any place serving alcoholic beverages that also has a
capacity of more than 250 persons for entertainment or dancing
shall also meet the standards of a nightclub. See noise standards in
Part 5.
TT. Townhouses and Low-Rise Apartments.
(1) Maximum number of dwelling units within any building or
within attached buildings - 16 for any building including lowrise
apartments, seven for any other attached building(s).
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:742
(2) Variety in Design. Developments of more than 40 dwelling
units should include a variety of complimentary designs and
colors between buildings or clusters of buildings to avoid
extreme repetition. Extreme design and color variations on
different parts of the same building are discouraged. Variation
in roof lines of structures is strongly encouraged.
(3) Changes in Facade. For every attached grouping of four or
more townhouses, a minimum of two changes in the front wall
plane shall be provided. Such change shall involve a minimum
variation or offset of four feet. This requirement may be met by
differing setbacks between an attached garage and a dwelling,
or differing setbacks among different dwellings or differing
setbacks along the front of a dwelling.
(4) Buffer Yard. A 10 feet wide buffer yard with screening shall be
provided by the developer of the townhouses or low-rise
apartments, as described in § 27-803, between any townhouse
or low-rise apartment principal buildings and any of the
following features that are at least partially within 100 feet of
such buildings:
(a) Any abutting existing single-family detached dwelling; or,
(b) The right-of-way of an expressway; or,
(c) The right-of-way of an arterial street that abuts the rear of
townhouse units.
(5) Lot Requirements.
(a) See Part 9.
(i) Condominiums. Within the tract, the setbacks stated
in § 27-901 shall establish the minimum separation
distances between buildings. However, townhouses
may have condominium ownership, with only the
building footprint and any abutting private area being
privately owned establishing minimum separation.
(ii) Each principal low-rise apartment building shall be
separated by a minimum of 20 feet from any other
principal building on the same lot.
(b) Maximum building length: 200 feet.
(c) Maximum building height: see § 27-902.
(d) Minimum tract depth: 60 feet.
(e) Floor area: see § 27-801.
(f) Minimum tract area: see § 27-901.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:743
(6) See § 27-403 and § 27-306 for regulations on specific accessory
uses. To avoid incompatible structures in a higher density
environment, townhouse developers are strongly encouraged
to establish deed restrictions or homeowner association
regulations controlling the general types and materials of
attached decks, fences and accessory structures that may be
added or constructed in the future.
(7) Minimum Width of Townhouses. Each townhouse dwelling unit
shall have a minimum width of 18 feet, except the minimum
width shall be 24 feet for any townhouse that:
(a) Has two or more off-street parking spaces located within
20 feet of the front of the townhouse; or,
(b) Has garage door(s) for two or more motor vehicles facing
onto a street.
(8) Minimum Private Area.
(a) For each townhouse, there shall be a yard, balcony, patio
or other outdoor area other than a driveway immediately
adjacent to the front, back or side of each dwelling of not
less than 200 square feet for the exclusive use of the
occupants of that dwelling.
(b) If townhouses are subdivided into individual lots, the
minimum lot area shall be the building footprint plus this
200 square feet.
(c) Design measures shall be used to seek an appropriate level
of privacy in any rear yard. Such measures might include
landscaped screening, compatible fencing or earthen
berming. The intent is to avoid the placement of
incompatible fencing by individual lot owners in the
future.
(d) Storage. If the maintenance of grass yards in front of or
behind a townhouse would be the responsibility of an
individual homeowner, a small storage area of 20 square
feet suitable for storing lawn maintenance equipment or
an outside storage shed shall be provided with appropriate
access.
(9) Additional Requirements; For Construction of Private Streets.
See § 27-801. For preservation of natural buffers - see
§ 27-803(4). For dumpster screening - see § 27-513.
(10) Architectural Renderings. Preliminary architectural
renderings, models or photos are required for any garden
apartment or townhouse development of more than 15 units.
Such information shall be provided to the Planning
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:744
Commission for an advisory review, but shall not be the basis
for any approval or denial by the Borough.
(11) Paved Area Setback. All off-street parking spaces, except
spaces on driveways immediately in front of carport or garage
entrance, of principal buildings approved after the adoption of
this chapter shall be setback a minimum of eight feet from any
dwelling.
(12) Garages. It is strongly recommended that all townhouses be
designed so that garages and/or carports are not an overly
prominent part of the view from public streets. For this reason,
parking courts, common garage or carport structures or
garages at the rear of dwellings are encouraged instead of
individual garages opening onto the front of the building,
especially for narrow townhouse units.
(13) Mailboxes. Any mailboxes provided within the future street
right-of-way should be clustered together in an orderly and
attractive arrangement or structure. Individual freestanding
mailboxes of noncoordinated types at the curbside are
discouraged.
(14) Access. Vehicular access points onto all arterial and collector
streets shall be minimized to the lowest reasonable number. No
townhouse dwelling within a tract of five or more dwelling
units shall have its own driveway entering onto an arterial
street.
(15)Common Open Space or Fees. See the requirements of the
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
(16) Utilities. Both public sewage and public water service shall be
provided to each dwelling unit. All utilities within the
development, including cable television, shall be placed
underground.
UU. Treatment Center.
(1) The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of
residents the use is intended to include over the life of the
permit. Any future additions or modifications to this list shall
require approval of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special
exception.
(2) The applicant shall prove, with the full burden of proof upon
the applicant, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board
that such use will involve adequate supervision and security
measures to protect public safety.
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:745
(3) The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the use as
necessary to protect public safety, including conditions on the
types of residents and security measures.
VV. Veterinarian Office (Includes Animal Hospital).
(1) Minimum lot area: 10,000 square feet, unless a more
restrictive requirement is established by another section of
this chapter.
(2) Any structure in which animals are treated or housed shall be a
minimum of 60 feet from any residential lot line. Buildings
shall be adequately soundproofed so that sounds generated
within the buildings cannot routinely be perceived within any
adjacent dwellings.
(3) Outdoor animal runs may be provided for small animals for use
between 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., provided the runs are at least
150 feet from any existing dwelling and provided that the runs
for dogs are separated from each other by visual barriers a
minimum of four feet in height, to minimize dog barking.
(4) A commercial kennel shall only be an accessory and not a
principal use, unless a kennel is permitted in that district and
the applicable requirements are met.
WW.Warehouse or Wholesale Sales.
(1) See off-street loading requirements in § 27-605.
(2) No storage of trash, garbage, refuse, highly explosive or
flammable materials, hazardous or highly toxic substances,
animals, animal carcasses or similar items shall be permitted.
(3) Uses that would involve the entrance to the use of an average
of more than 100 tractor-trailers per weekday shall be required
to meet the additional standards in this section for a trucking
company terminal.
(4) See requirements in § 27-403 for "Outdoor Storage or Display."
XX. Institutional Parking Lot as a Principal Use.
(1) The parking lot shall not be used for parking of heavy
construction equipment, for vehicle repairs or for sales unless
such uses are specifically permitted by the applicable district
regulation.
(2) See "lighting and glare" standards in Part 5 and "buffer yard"
standards in § 27-803.
(3) Any permitted parking area within a residential district shall
be located within 500 lineal feet of the property line of the
institutional use which it serves.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-402
FWD:746
(4) Parking lot may be used for parking and such other uses as are
normally associated with the institution, provided that such
activities do not occur after the hour of 11:00 p.m. nor before
the hour of 6:00 a.m.
YY. All commercial high-speed internet antennas are subject to the
following:
(1) The antennas must be attached to either an existing
commercial communications tower or an existing tall structure
building of at least 50 feet in height. The building shall be nonresidential
or an apartment or other multi-family shall be nonresidential
or an apartment or other multi-family building. The
antennas are not permitted on a single-family detached, singlefamily
semi-detached or townhouse dwelling.
(2) The attachment to a structure or building shall not extend
more than 15 feet above the highest point of the structure or
building.
(3) Antennas on a building or structure shall be installed in a
manner to blend with the building or structure as best possible
and, if feasible, any accessory equipment shall be located in
the building or structure's existing utility room building.
ZZ. Craft Beverage Restaurant. A craft beverage restaurant, as defined
herein, is a conditional use and as such shall meet all of the
requirements of a conditional use under §§ 27-118 and 27-120 of
this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinance requirements
of the district(s) in which the use is located. For the purpose of
parking, the use shall meet, in addition to all other applicable
requirements of Part 6 of this chapter, the specific parking
requirements for a "restaurant"; except that where the use is
located in the Central Commercial (B-C) Zoning District, the
parking regulations of § 27-602, Subsection 6, shall apply. In
addition, and notwithstanding the definition, in the Central
Commercial (B-C) Zoning District, a craft beverage restaurant
which manufactures in whole or in part malt or brewed beverages
shall be limited to the production of 30,000 gallons of malt or
brewed beverage product annually. [Added by Ord. 1111, 9/2/
2014; amended by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015; and by Ord. No.
1183, 12/17/2018]
AAA. Craft Beverage Production Facility. A craft beverage production
facility, as defined herein, is a conditional use and as such shall
meet all of the requirements of a conditional use under §§ 27-118
and 27-120 of this chapter as well as all other applicable ordinance
requirements of the district(s) in which the use is located. For the
purpose of parking, the use shall meet, in addition to all other
applicable requirements of Part 6 of this chapter, the specific
parking requirements for a "tavern or nightclub," except that
§ 27-402 FOREWORD § 27-402
FWD:747
§ 27-403. Additional Requirements for Accessory Uses. [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 403; as amended by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
where the use is located in the Central Commercial (B-C) Zoning
District, the parking regulations of § 27-602, Subsection 6, shall
apply. In addition, and notwithstanding the definition, in the
Central Commercial (B-C) Zoning District, a craft beverage
production facility which manufactures in whole or in part malt
or brewed beverages shall be limited to the production of 30,000
gallons of malt or brewed beverage product annually. [Added by
Ord. 1111, 9/2/2014; amended by Ord. 1128, 7/27/2015 and
by Ord. No. 1183, 12/17/2018]
1. General. Accessory buildings, structures or uses that are clearly
customary and incidental to a permitted by right, special exception or
conditional use are permitted by right, except as is provided for in this
chapter.
2. Accessory Setbacks. The accessory setback requirements of the
applicable district shall apply to every accessory building, structure or
use unless a standard that is clearly meant to be more restrictive or less
restrictive is specifically stated in this Part for a particular accessory
use.
3. Front Yard Setback. No accessory structure, use or building shall be
permitted in a required front yard in any district, unless specifically
permitted by this chapter .See the list of essential services in § 27-306.
4. Special Standards. Each accessory use shall comply with all of the
following standards listed for that use:
A. Antenna, Private.
(1) Height. No private antenna, including its supporting structure,
shall have a total height above the average surrounding
ground level of greater than 75 feet.
(2) Anchoring. Any private antenna shall be properly anchored to
resist high winds. See the Borough BOCA Code [Chapter 5].
B. Composting.
(1) Shall be limited to the composting of biodegradable vegetative
material, including grass clippings, trees, shrubs, leaves and
vegetable waste. The composting shall not include animal
wastes or fats.
(2) Shall be conducted in such a way that a fire, rodent or diseasecarrying
insect hazard or seriously noxious odors are not
created for occupants of dwellings.
(3) See also recycling collection center in this section.
§ 27-402 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:748
C. Day Care Center as Accessory Use to a Residential Use.
(1) The following shall be the maximum number of children under
age 15 that may be cared for in any dwelling unit:
(a) In a single-family detached dwelling with a minimum lot
area of 10,000 square feet and a 10 feet setback from all
existing dwellings - maximum of six children who are not
related (see definition in Part 2) to a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(b) In any other dwelling unit - maximum of three children,
beyond those children who are related to a permanent
resident of the dwelling.
(2) The dwelling shall retain a residential appearance with no
change to the exterior of the dwelling to accommodate the use,
other than cosmetic improvements.
(3) Any day care center involving seven or more children shall be
considered a principal use and meet the standards of § 27-402
for such use, if permitted. See also day care centers as an
accessory to a place of worship (§ 27-403) or to a place of
employment (§ 27-306).
(4) The use shall be actively operated by a permanent resident of
the dwelling.
(5) If four to six children who are not related to a permanent
resident of the dwelling are cared for, then the following
requirements shall be met:
(a) Smoke detectors shall be provided throughout the
building, an "ABC" rated fire extinguisher shall be
provided, and exit lights shall be provided at outdoor exits
and at least one exit/window shall be provided with an
opening within six feet of the adjacent exterior grade level.
(b) A minimum of 100 square feet of safe exterior play area
shall be available.
D. Fences, Walls and Hedges.
(1) Fences, walls, and hedges are permitted by right in all
districts. Any fence or wall shall be constructed of durable
material and be well maintained. Fences that have deteriorated
shall be replaced or removed. A zoning permit is required for
all fences and walls other than temporary fences around active
construction sites. Such temporary fences may have a
maximum height of eight feet in a residential district.
(2) Sight Distance, Stormwater and Easements. No fence, wall or
hedge shall obstruct the sight distance requirements of
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:749
§ 27-803 (3), nor obstruct safe sight distance within an alley.
No fence or wall shall obstruct the flow of stormwater, except
as part of a Borough approved stormwater system. No fence,
wall or continuous hedge shall be constructed within an
easement in such a way that it would prevent use of the
easement for its intended purpose.
(3) Setbacks. No fence or wall shall be built within the existing
right-of-way of a street. A fence or wall may be constructed on
a lot line, except:
(a) A fence or wall of a nonresidential use shall be setback a
minimum of five feet from any abutting lot line of a
residential lot line; and,
(b) No fence or wall shall be located within the paved area
setback required under § 27-603.
(4) Fences.
(a) Front Yard. Any fence located in the required front yard of
a lot in a residential district or the B-C district, shall have a
minimum ratio of one to one of open to structural areas,
shall not exceed four feet in height, and shall be
constructed entirely of decorative wrought iron or metal
that has the appearance of decorative wrought iron, wood
or vinyl material (plus any required fasteners).
(b) A fence shall not be required to comply with minimum
setbacks for accessory structures.
(c) Height. A fence located in a residential district in a
location other than a required front yard shall have a
maximum height of six feet, except:
(i) A maximum height of 10 feet is permitted to enclose a
tennis or racquet sport court or a nonhousehold
swimming pool or an electric substation provided that
such fence is set back a minimum of 10 feet from all
residential lot lines; or
(ii) A maximum height of 10 feet is permitted around any
hazardous nonresidential outdoor storage (if such
storage is lawful).
(iii) A maximum height of eight feet is permitted for
nursing homes, personal care facilities, or any other
permitted and licensed facility housing and providing
outdoor areas for patients suffering from Alzheimer's,
dementia, or any other memory impairment or
disorder provided that the fence is not located in a
front yard and is a minimum of five feet from property
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:750
lines. This provision shall apply to all zoning districts
where the use is permitted. [Added by Ord. No.
1172, 6/18/2018]
(d) Fence Materials. Barbed wire shall not be used as part of
fences around dwellings. Electrically charged fences shall
only be used to contain farm animals, and shall be of such
low intensity that they will not permanently injure humans.
No fence shall be constructed out of fabric, junk, junk
vehicles, sheet metal, scrap materials, appliances, tanks or
barrels.
(5) Walls.
(a) Engineered retaining walls necessary to hold back slopes
are exempted from setback regulations and the
regulations of this section, and are permitted by right as
needed in all districts.
(b) A wall shall have a maximum height of three feet within
the required front yard in a residential district, except as a
backing for a permitted sign at an entrance to a
development.
(c) A wall in a residential district outside of a required front
yard shall have a maximum height of three feet if the wall
is within the minimum accessory structure setback.
(d) Walls that are attached to a building shall be regulated as
a part of that building.
(6) Gates. All fences, walls or continuous hedges more than four
feet in height shall be equipped with gates or other suitable
passageways at intervals of not more than 250 feet.
(7) Hedges. Continuous hedges shall be planted a minimum of two
feet from a lot line and shall not be planted in the street rightof-
way.
E. Garage Sale. Shall comply with the Borough Garage Sale
Ordinance [Chapter 13, Part 2], which among other regulations,
limits garage sales and similar sales to two per property per year.
F. Home Occupation. See definitions in Part 2.
(1) The following standards shall apply to both light and general
home occupations:
(a) The burden of proof shall be upon the applicant to prove
that the standards of this section will be met, especially
regarding possible nuisances and truck traffic. Based upon
the potential nuisances of a proposed home occupation,
the Zoning Hearing Board may determine that a particular
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:751
type or intensity of use is unsuitable to be a home
occupation or that the proposed lot area or setbacks are
not sufficient.
(b) The home occupation shall be conducted completely
indoors, and may be within a principal or accessory
residential building. The total amount of floor area of all
buildings used for a home occupation shall not be greater
than 25% of the total floor area of the principal dwelling
unit.
(c) There shall be no outdoor operations or outdoor storage of
materials, products or equipment.
(d) Signs and Displays. There shall be no use of show
windows, business display or advertising visible from
outside the premises, except as is specifically permitted
for a general home occupation.
(e) Truck Traffic. The use shall not require the parking or
servicing by a vehicle with more than one ton loading
capacity, except for deliveries a maximum of two times per
day. The use shall not involve the parking of more than two
trucks of any type on the lot or on adjacent streets at any
period of time. The use shall not need servicing by,
deliveries by or parking of tractor-trailer trucks.
(f) Uses permitted as a home occupation include, but are not
limited to, art studio, office, custom sewing, tax
preparation or musical instruction.
(g) The following uses shall not be permitted as a home
occupation: veterinarian office, stable, kennel, funeral
home, retail store, restaurant, auto repair or trucking
company terminal.
(h) Nuisances. No machinery or equipment shall be permitted
that produces noise, noxious odor, vibration, glare,
electrical interference or radio or electromagnetic
interference beyond the boundary of the property. Only
general types and sizes of machinery that are typically
found in dwellings for hobby or domestic purposes shall be
permitted. No use shall generate noise or glare in excess
of what is typical in a residential neighborhood.
(i) The use shall also comply with all environmental and
nuisance control regulations of this chapter, including Part
5.
(j) Parking and Loading.
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:752
(i) In any case, a home occupation shall include an
absolute minimum of one off-street parking space
(which may be the same space as serves the dwelling).
(ii) The applicant shall prove to the satisfaction of the
Zoning Hearing Board in the case of a general home
occupation that the use will include adequate offstreet
parking and loading spaces. The amount of
parking in the required front yard should be held to a
minimum to maintain a residential character.
Therefore, the Board may allow appropriate, safe onstreet
areas to be used to meet a portion of parking
needs.
(iii) If additional parking is needed beyond what can be
accommodated using appropriate on-street spaces
and a residential-style driveway, then the Board may
require that such parking be provided in the rear of
the home if practical and may deny the use if such rear
parking cannot be accommodated.
(iv) Any required off-street spaces shall be conveniently
located to reach the door of the home occupation.
(k) Building Appearance. The exterior of the building and the
lot shall not be changed in such a way as to decrease its
residential appearance, except for permitted parking
spaces and the permitted sign.
(l) Hours. A home occupation shall not be conducted in a way
that is perceptible from beyond the lot line between the
hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. This time limit shall also
apply to any loading or unloading of vehicles on the
property or on a street that causes noise to adjoining
residents.
(m) Hazardous Substances. The use shall not involve the
storage or use of hazardous, flammable or explosive
substances, other than types and amounts commonly
found in a dwelling. The use shall not involve the use or
storage of toxic substances.
(n) Advertising. The address of the home occupation shall not
be advertised in such a way that would encourage
customers or salespersons to come to the property without
an appointment.
(o) Law or Medical Office. The main office of a medical doctor,
chiropractor, dentist or attorney shall only be allowed as a
home occupation if the property abuts an arterial or
collector street.
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:753
(2) General Home Occupation. In addition to the standards in
subsection (1), above, the following shall apply to a general
home occupation:
(a) Only the following sign shall be permitted - one
nonilluminated sign with a maximum sign area of two
square feet on each of two sides, with a maximum height of
eight feet. Such sign shall not be located within the
existing right-of-way of a street, unless it is attached to a
mailbox.
(b) Number of Employees. A total maximum of one person
shall work on the premises who is not a permanent
resident of the dwelling, except a barber, beauty shop or
hairstylist may not include any nonresident employees.
(c) Instruction. Any instruction or tutoring shall be limited to
a maximum of three students on the property at any one
time and six students on the property on any day.
(d) If the home occupation involves work occurring on a
vehicle(s), no more than one such vehicle(s) shall be
parked on the lot or on abutting streets overnight.
(e) Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than 10
vehicles per day or the parking of more than four vehicles
of nonresidents at any one time.
(3) Home Occupation, Light. In addition to the standards in part
subsection (1), above, the following standards shall apply to a
light home occupation:
(a) Traffic. The use shall not routinely involve the arrival at
the property for business purposes of more than four
vehicles per day. The use shall not require a need for
parking beyond what is typically provided for a dwelling.
(b) Only persons who are permanent residents of the dwelling
shall work on the premises.
(c) No sign shall identify the business.
G. Outdoor Storage and Display. Commercial or industrial as a
principal or accessory use.
(1) Location. Outdoor storage or display shall not occupy any part
of any of the following: the existing or future street right-ofway,
sidewalk or other area intended or designed for
pedestrian use, required parking area or required paved area
setback (see § 27-703).
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:754
(2) No such storage or display shall occur on areas with a slope in
excess of 15% or within the one-hundred-year floodway.
(3) Screening. See § 27-803(4), "Buffer Yards."
(4) Tires. If more than 250 tires are stored on a lot, each stack
shall be a maximum of 20 feet high, and cover a maximum of
400 square feet. Each stack shall be separated from other
stacks by a minimum of 75 feet.
(5) No commercial or industrial outdoor storage or display shall
occur within a required front yard, except: (a) vehicles for sale
or rent; and (b) trees, shrubs and plants for sale.
(6) See also this use listed under the "accessory use" portion of
§ 27-307.
H. Pets, Keeping of. (NOTE: This does not apply to "raising of
livestock" which is regulated by § 27-402 nor to keeping of animals
permitted as an accessory use under the definition of "crop
farming" in Part 2).
(1) This is a permitted by right accessory use in all districts. Only
those pets that are domesticated and are compatible with a
residential character shall be permitted as keeping of pets.
Examples of permitted pets include dogs, cats, rabbits, frogs,
gerbils, snakes that could not be poisonous to humans, and
fish. Bears, goats, cows, wolves, wolf-dog hybrids, snakes that
could be poisonous to humans, pigs (other than miniature
breeds) or sheep are not permitted as "pets" under this section.
(2) No use shall involve the keeping of animals or fowl in such a
manner or of such types of animals that it creates a serious
nuisance (including noise or odor), a health hazard or a public
safety hazard. The owner of the animals shall be responsible
for collecting and properly disposing of all fecal matter from
pets. No dangerous animals shall be allowed outdoors in a
residential district, except within a secure, completely
enclosed cage or on a leash under full control of the owner.
(3) The total number of dogs and cats shall be a combined
maximum of five, unless the animals would be regularly kept at
least 200 feet from a residential lot line. No numerical
restriction shall apply to cats and dogs of less than three
months age, although commercial breeding shall only be
permitted as a general home occupation. Keeping of more than
the specified number of cats or dogs shall be considered a
kennel.
(4) A maximum total of two pigeons, chickens, ducks, geese and
similar fowl shall be kept on lots of less than two acres. A
maximum of 12 such fowl shall be permitted under this section
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:755
for lots of two acres of more. Such animals shall be kept on
the property of the applicant. If there is more than two such
fowl on a lot, they shall be kept a minimum of 75 feet from any
dwelling other than that of the owner of the animals. Keeping
of more than the specified number of pigeons or fowl shall be
considered keeping of livestock.
(5) Rabbits may be kept provided they do not create a public
health hazard.
(6) Horses. In any zoning district it is permitted to maintain up to
two horses on a lot of two acres or more. Any horse barn,
corral, fenced-in area or stable shall be a minimum of 50 feet
from any abutting lot line (other than a street right-of-way) and
150 feet from any existing dwelling other than that of the
owner of the horses. Keeping of more than the specified
number of horses shall be considered a stable.
(7) Exotic Animals. The keeping of exotic animals not normally
considered to be household pets shall only be permitted by
special exception, except for those animals prohibited as pets
under this section. For such approval, the applicant shall prove
to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that:
(a) Such animal(s) will not pose an unreasonable threat to the
health or safety of persons or property in the Borough
(including the property in question); and,
(b) Adequate safeguards will be in place to prevent the
release or escape of such animal from the property in
question.
(8) Bees. Any area used for the outdoor keeping of bees shall be
setback a minimum of 150 feet from all lot lines. The presence
of such bees shall be well-marked.
(9) Carrier Pigeons. Any keeping of carrier pigeons shall comply
fully with the applicable state law. A maximum of 25 pairs of
carrier pigeons may be permitted on any lot. If a person applies
for a permit to keep carrier pigeons, the Borough Manager
shall appoint a person to periodically inspect the premises as
provided for in the state law to ensure compliance with such
state health regulations. Such person shall ensure that each
carrier pigeon is stamped or banded with identification marks.
The loft shall comply with the Borough's building codes and
this chapter. The loft shall be maintained in a clean, orderly
condition and kept in good repair.
I. Recreational Vehicle, Storage of One or Two.
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:756
(1) A maximum of two uninhabited recreational vehicles in
transportable condition may be stored or parked on a lot
outside of an enclosed building within the following limitations:
(a) A recreational vehicle longer than 20 feet shall not be
stored or parked for more than four days in any seven-day
period within a required front yard.
(b) A recreational vehicle stored or parked on the lot of a
single-family detached house shall be setback a minimum
of three feet from the lot line of an abutting single- family
detached dwelling. A recreation vehicle shall not be stored
within the existing right-of-way of a public street.
(c) Any recreational vehicle that is required to be registered
or licensed under state law to be operated and is not
registered or licensed shall be kept out of view from any
public street or abutting dwelling.
(d) If a recreational vehicle is stored within the required front
yard, it shall be parked on a driveway or asphalt, concrete
or paving block area and not upon a grass yard.
(2) Any recreation vehicle longer than 20 feet stored on a lot shall
be screened from view of any abutting single- family detached
dwelling by attractive landscaping.
(3) A maximum of one recreational vehicle may be inhabited as a
temporary accessory residence to a single-family detached
dwelling for a maximum period of seven days. Such use shall
occur only once in a calendar year.
J. Residential Accessory Structure. See definition in Part 2.
(1) Accessory structures and uses (other than fences) shall not be
within a required front yard or within the required accessory
use setback as stated in § 27-901, unless specifically exempted
by this chapter.
(2) Within corner lots, accessory structures and uses shall not be
located closer to the side lot line than the required distance of
the front yard setback or 40% of the lot width, whichever is
less restrictive.
(3) Accessory buildings on a lot with a lot area of one acre or less
in a residential district shall meet the following requirements:
(a) Maximum total floor area of all accessory buildings 1,000
square feet.
(b) Maximum of two accessory buildings per lot.
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:757
(4) Any skateboard ramp shall be clearly intended for use by
permanent residents of the dwelling and their occasional
guests. Any such skateboard ramp shall be a maximum of five
feet in height and five feet in length and shall be moved inside
when not actively in use.
(5) Maximum height - see § 27-902.
K. Satellite Dish or Satellite Antenna.
(1) Intent. To provide for reception of satellite communications,
while assuring that such uses will not detract from the
character of any area or adversely affect property values. To
recognize that the solidness and visibility of satellite dish
antennas and satellite antennas can create a very strong visual
impact on a neighborhood compared to most other noncommercial
antenna or structures.
(2) Satellite dish antenna and/or satellite antenna shall be
permitted by right accessory use in all districts for all uses
subject to the restrictions in this subsection.
(3) Location and Number of Satellite Antennae.
(a) In a residential district or the B-C district, a satellite dish
antenna or satellite antenna shall not be located within the
required front yard.
(b) A satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna shall comply
with the accessory set-back requirements of the applicable
district.
(c) A satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna may be placed
on the roof of a structure in a residential district or the B-C
district only if (i) it has the diameter of three feet or less;
or (ii) less than 1/3 of such antenna would be visible from a
public street. An antenna or dish may be roof mounted in
any other district, without limitations on visibility.
(d) A maximum of one satellite dish antenna or satellite
antenna shall be permitted on a lot in a residential district.
(4) Size and Height.
(a) A satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna shall have a
maximum diameter or nine feet in a residential district or
B-C district if visible from a public street or a dwelling. No
maximum shall apply within any other districts.
(b) A ground-mounted satellite dish antenna or satellite
antenna shall have a maximum height of 15 feet above the
average ground level in a residential district or the B-C
district if visible from a public street or a dwelling.
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:758
(5) Screening. Any satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna in a
residential district that is ground-mounted and visible from a
public street shall be screen by appropriate evergreen
plantings with a minimum height of three feet between the
antenna or dish in any public street, unless such screening in
such a location would make it impossible to receive the
electronic signals.
(6) Colors. Earth tones are strongly encouraged.
(7) Large Lot Exemption. If a satellite dish antenna or satellite
antenna is to be located a minimum of 200 feet from all
exterior lot lines, the size, height, and placement requirements
of this section shall not be binding.
(8) Mobile Stands. Satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna on
mobile stands of a height of two feet or more are prohibited
except as may be initially needed to determine the best
location for an antenna.
(9) Transmission. No satellite dish antenna or satellite antenna
provided for under this section shall be used for the
transmission of commercial electronic signals within a
residential district.
L. Swimming Pool, Household (Referred hereafter as "Pool."
(1) The pool shall not involve any commercial use.
(2) Enclosure Around In-Ground Pools. A new or existing inground
pool shall be completely surrounded by a secure fence,
wall, portion of a building and/or similar enclosure not less
than four feet in height. This enclosure shall be constructed to
make it very difficult for small children to climb up or slip
through the enclosure. All gates or door openings through such
enclosure (other than a door to a building) shall be self-closing
and include a self-latching device on the pool side for keeping
the gate or door securely closed times when not in use.
(3) Enclosure Around Above Ground Pool. Any existing or new
above-ground pool shall include a secure fence, wall or other
enclosure a minimum of four feet high above the surrounding
average ground level. This enclosure may include the walls of
the pool itself. Such pools shall be equipped with an access
ladder that can be raised and locked in a position so that it is a
minimum of four feet above the surrounding ground level or
otherwise completely inaccessible to children when the pool is
unattended.
(4) Location.
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:759
(a) Any deck or shelter that is elevated above the average
surrounding ground level shall meet the applicable
setback requirement for an accessory building.
(b) Uncovered walkways with a maximum width of five feet
that are level with the average surrounding ground level
and that are around pools are not required to meet
setbacks.
(c) Where practical, a pool shall be located to the rear of a
dwelling. A pool is not permitted within a required front
yard.
(d) The structural walls of a pool shall be setback a minimum
of 10 feet from the lot line of an abutting dwelling.
(5) The Borough does not assume responsibility for guaranteeing
to the public that all new and existing pools fully comply with
these provisions.
(6) Water Service. Any inlet from a central water system shall be
above the overflow level of the pool.
(7) Nuisances. A pool shall not include illumination of adjacent
residential properties beyond what is customary in a
residential neighborhood. A pool shall also not include the
playing of a radio or recorded music at a volume louder than is
necessary for the convenient hearing of persons at the pool.
M. Unit for Care of Relative.
(1) See definition in Part 2.
(2) Shall be restricted to occupancy by a relative (as defined in
Part 2) of a permanent resident of the principal dwelling unit
on the property. A maximum of two persons may inhabit such
unit.
(3) Such relative shall need care and supervision because of old
age, disability, handicap or illness.
(4) Such unit shall be designed and installed in such a way that it
can easily be reconverted into part of the principal dwelling
unit after such relative no longer lives within it. Once such unit
is no longer occupied by such relative, the unit shall be
reconverted into part of the principal dwelling unit or be
completely removed. The unit shall not be within a portable
detached structure.
(5) The owner of the property shall report in writing any change in
the person(s) occupying the unit to the Zoning Officer within
60 days. In case of such change in occupant(s), the owner shall
§ 27-403 EMMAUS CODE § 27-403
FWD:760
provide evidence that the use is still in compliance with this
section.
(6) Once an unit under this section is required to be removed,
there shall be no physical evidence visible from exterior to the
lot lines that such apartment existed.
(7) Such unit shall not decrease the single-family residential
exterior appearance of a dwelling.
(8) Such unit shall not have its own exterior separate entrances.
The unit shall maintain an interior connection to the principal
dwelling unit. The unit shall not have its own electric or water
meter.
(9) Such unit shall be connected to or within the principal dwelling
unit.
§ 27-403 FOREWORD § 27-403
FWD:761

Part 5
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
§ 27-501. Performance Standard Information. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 501]
If the Zoning Officer has reason to believe that the proposed use may
have difficulty complying with the standards of this Part, then the Zoning
Officer may require an applicant to provide written descriptions of proposed
machinery, hazardous substances, operations and safeguards.
§ 27-502. Nuisances and Hazards to Public Safety. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 502]
§ 27-503. Wetlands. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 503; as amended by
Ord. 802, 9/19/1994, § 2]
1. No land owner, tenant or lessee shall use or allow to be used land or
structures in a way that seriously threatens to or creates any of the
following conditions:
A. Communicable disease or other public health hazards, including
activities that would be attractive to or encourage the breeding of
disease-prone insects or rodents (See the Borough Vermin Control
Ordinance, No. 489 [Chapter 10, Part 2]).
B. Significant physical hazards to the public, especially hazards that
would be easily accessible by small children.
C. Activity that prevents a neighboring landowner of ordinary
sensitivities from making reasonable use of his/her property.
D. Activity that creates a significant hazard to public health and safety
because of serious explosive, fire, biological, biogenetic or toxic
hazards. (See § 27-506 "Storage of Hazardous and Explosive
Substances" and the Borough Fire Prevention Code [Chapter 5,
Part 2].)
E. Activity that causes serious pollution to groundwaters or surface
waters.
2. It is the responsibility of every property owner to ensure that his/her
property does not threaten public health or safety, and to remove or
alter any structure or situation that threatens the public health and
safety. This includes, but is not limited to, structurally unsound
structures, including those damaged by fire.
1. If the Borough Engineer, Planning Commission or Borough Council has
reason to believe that a portion of a site proposed to be altered may
possibly meet the state or federal definitions of a "wetland," the
applicants(s) may be required to provide a study, prepared by a
qualified professional, which delineates that location of said wetlands.
§ 27-501 FOREWORD § 27-503
FWD:763
§ 27-504. Setback From Liebert's Creek and Major Drainage
Channels. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 504; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/
2002, § 3]
§ 27-505. Steep Slopes. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 505; as amended by
Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
In addition to this study, all wetlands located on this site shall be
properly identified, via metes and bounds descriptions with a reference
tie to the perimeter property survey, on the corresponding subdivision
and/or land development plan for the proposed development. Please
note, however, that the Borough accepts no responsibility to identify all
wetlands, or to warn all parties of such possibilities.
2. A certification, which states that either the wetland area(s) shown have
been delineated in accordance with current state and/or federal
guidelines or that no wetlands exist on this site, shall be placed on all
subdivision and/or land development plans and signed by a qualified
professional.
3. If it is found that the proposed work will be performed in wetlands, a
Borough permit shall not be issued until such time as all necessary
permits and approvals are first obtained from the appropriate federal
and/or state agencies by the applicant(s). Copies of all federal and state
permits and approvals shall be filed by the applicants(s) with the
Borough at the time of permit application.
1. Purposes. To protect the water quality of surface waters, preserve
physical access to surface waters in case of future public acquisition,
minimize erosion and sedimentation, preserve the natural stormwater
drainage system of the area, conserve sensitive wildlife and aquatic
habitats, preserve vegetation along waterways that will help screen out
eroded soil and other pollutants and provide for setbacks that can be
used as required yard areas for a use.
2. Setback From Liebert's Creek and Major Drainage Channels. No
building or paved area (other than approved street and driveway
crossings) shall be located within: (A) 50 feet of the center of Liebert's
Creek; or (B) within 10 feet of the center of a segment of a drainage
channel if such drainage channel is mapped as floodplain on the Official
Floodplain Map. See the Official Floodplain Map in case a wider area is
regulated under § 27-516 of this chapter.
3. Exemption. The setbacks of this section shall not apply to public utility
facilities or publicly-owned recreational facilities.
4. Setback Areas and Construction. During any filling, grading or
construction activity, all reasonable efforts shall be made to leave the
setback areas of this section undisturbed, except at approved waterway
crossings.
§ 27-503 EMMAUS CODE § 27-505
FWD:764
1. Site Plan. If an area of a lot including slopes of 15% or greater is
proposed for construction of buildings, streets or driveways or
nonagricultural grading, then the applicant shall submit a steep slope
site plan to the Zoning Officer. These submittal requirements may be
met by including the required information on subdivision/land
development plans.
2. Submission Requirements. A steep slope site plan shall meet the
following requirements:
A. Show detailed existing and proposed slope contours for all areas
that potentially may be disturbed and/or constructed upon.
B. Identify all areas of 15% to 25% and greater than 25% slope.
C. Be to scale (such as one inches equals 50 feet).
D. Show substantial areas of trees and dense vegetation proposed to
be removed or preserved prior to or during the development of the
use.
E. Be stamped by a professional surveyor, professional engineer,
registered landscape architect or registered architect.
F. Show proposed locations of principal buildings, streets, driveways,
on-lot septic fields and other areas of soil disturbance.*
G. State the maximum slope of proposed driveways and streets.
H. Show an area of 20 feet around the proposed principal building
locations.
*If the exact location of these features is not definitely determined
at the time of plan submittal, then the plan shall designate the
outer limits of areas where such features may potentially be
located. If different locations outside of the approved location
would be proposed after approval of the site plan, then the
applicant shall prove to the Zoning officer that the revised location
would still meet the requirements of this section.
3. Fifteen Percent to 25%. If, within the C-R district, a proposed principal
building location and any areas within 20 feet of such location on the lot
include more than 500 square feet with 15% or greater slopes, but do
not include more than 500 square feet with slopes greater than 25%,
the following regulations shall apply, unless more restrictive
regulations are stated elsewhere in this chapter:
A. Minimum lot area of one acre per dwelling unit or per principal
nonresidential use; and,
B. Maximum impervious coverage of 20%.
4. Greater Than 25%. If, within the C-R district, a proposed principal
building location and any areas within 20 feet of such location on the lot
§ 27-505 FOREWORD § 27-505
FWD:765
§ 27-506. Storage of Explosive and Hazardous Substances. [Ord.
776, 6/21/1993, § 506]
include more than 500 square feet with slopes greater than 25%,
then the following regulations shall apply, unless more restrictive
regulations are stated elsewhere in this chapter:
A. Minimum lot area of two acres per dwelling unit or per principal
nonresidential use; and,
B. Maximum impervious coverage of 10%.
5. Streets, Driveways and Septic Systems. See applicable slope standards
in the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter
22]. See also Department of Environmental Protection regulations on
slopes of on-lot septic systems.
6. Erosion. See § 27-512.7.
7. Grading. No grading shall occur in such a way that would circumvent
the requirements of this chapter, such as prior to submittal for a zoning
or building permit or subdivision or land development approval. The
steep slope requirements shall apply based on the slope of land at the
time of the adoption of this chapter.
8. Man-made Slopes. This section shall not apply to man-made slopes that
naturally were not 15% or greater slope.
1. Above-Ground Storage. No above-ground or surface storage of highly
flammable or explosive liquids, solids, gases or chemicals shall be
stored in bulk, except tanks or drums of fuel for on-site use and that
involve the following and closely similar substances: building heating
fuels, fire suppression chemicals, fertilizers, janitorial chemicals and
printing supplies. See fencing requirement in § 27-513.
2. Water Quality Hazards.
A. No substance shall be stored in such a way that it could be washed
into the groundwater or surface water, if such substance could
seriously contaminate groundwater or surface water or seriously
harm aquatic life of a waterway.
B. If a substance threatens groundwater or surface water
contamination, it shall be stored within an impermeable
containment. Such storage shall be surrounded if needed by a berm
that would drain any spilled substance to an engineered collection
area, or other method that the applicant proves to the satisfaction
of the Borough Engineer is safe.
§ 27-505 EMMAUS CODE § 27-507
FWD:766
§ 27-507. Sewage Disposal. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 507; as amended
by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
All methods of wastewater disposal shall meet the requirements of the
Department of Environmental Protection, the Borough and the Official
Borough Sewage Facilities Plan, as amended, as applicable. See also the
Borough Ordinance requiring connections to the public sewage system.
§ 27-508. Noise. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 508]
1. No land use or its equipment or business operations shall generate a
sound level exceeding the limits established in the table below, when
measured at the specified locations:
Sound Level Limits By Receiving Land Use/District
Land Use or
Zoning District
Receiving the
Noise Hours/Days
Maximum Sound
Level
10 feet inside the
lot line of a lot
within a
residential district
that includes a
residential use
1) 7:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m.
other than Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, 4th of July,
Labor Day and
Memorial Day
1) 70 dBA
2) 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
plus all day Sundays,
Christmas Day,
Thanksgiving Day, New
Years Day, 4th of July,
Labor Day and
Memorial Day
2) 65 dBA
10 feet inside the
lot line of a lot
within an
industrial district
All times and days 79 dBA
10 feet inside any
lot line not listed
above
All times and days 70 dBA
NOTE: dBA means "A" weighted decibel.
2. For any source of sound which emits a pure tone, the maximum sound
level limits set forth in the above table shall be reduced by five dBA.
3. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth in the above table
shall not apply to any of the following noise sources:
§ 27-507 FOREWORD § 27-508
FWD:767
§ 27-509. Vibration. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 509]
No use shall generate vibration that is perceptible to an average person
through his/her senses, without the use of measuring instruments, on
private property beyond the exterior lot line of the use generating the
vibration. This requirement shall not apply to occasional nonroutine
blasting that may be necessary during construction of streets, structures
and utilities. Any blasting shall be conducted in a manner that protects the
structural integrity of surrounding properties.
§ 27-510. Odors, Dust and Air and Water Pollution. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 510]
§ 27-511. Light, Glare and Heat Control. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 511]
A. Sound needed to alert people about an emergency.
B. Repair or installation of utilities or construction of structures,
sidewalks or streets between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.,
except for clearly emergency repairs which are not restricted by
time.
C. Household power tools and lawnmowers between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
D. Agricultural activities, including permitted raising of livestock.
E. Railroads and aircraft.
F. Public celebrations specifically authorized by Borough Council or a
county, state or federal government agency or body.
G. Unamplified human voices or dogs, other than from a commercial
kennel.
H. Routine ringing of bells and chimes by a place of worship or
municipal clock.
I. Licensed motor vehicles operating on public streets, which are
regulated by decibel levels established by the state.
4. See also the separate Borough noise ordinance, especially for sources
of noise other than land uses.
1. Odors and Dust. No use shall generate odors or dust that are
significantly offensive to persons of average sensitivities beyond the
boundaries of the subject lot.
2. Air and Water Pollution. All uses shall comply with federal and state air
and water pollution regulations as a condition of any Borough permit.
§ 27-508 EMMAUS CODE § 27-511
FWD:768
§ 27-512. Grading and Erosion Control. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 512]
1. Street Lighting Exempted. This § 27-511 shall not apply to street
lighting that is owned, financed or maintained by the Borough or the
state.
2. Control in General. All uses, signs and other sources shall be designed
and operated to reasonably minimize:
A. The heat or glare they generate beyond lot lines of such source;
and,
B. The light they generate at night onto adjacent dwellings.
3. Height of Lights. No luminaire, spotlight or other light source that is
within 200 feet of a dwelling or residential district shall be placed at a
height exceeding 35 feet above the average surrounding ground level.
This limitation shall neither apply to lights needed for air safety nor to
lights intended solely to illuminate an architectural feature of a
building.
4. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly diffused as
needed with a translucent or similar cover to prevent exposed bulbs
from being directly visible from streets, public sidewalks, dwellings or
adjacent lots.
5. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded around
the light source and carefully directed and placed to prevent the
lighting from creating a nuisance to reasonable persons in adjacent
dwellings or undeveloped residentially-zoned areas, and to prevent the
lighting from shining into the eyes of passing motorists.
6. Maximum Candlepower. No lighting source, including signs, shall spill
over a lot line in such a way as to cause an illumination of greater than
the following amounts, measured at night on the surface of the
receiving residential lot line:
A. Three-tenths footcandle spillover at 10 feet inside a residential lot
line between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
B. One footcandle spillover at 10 feet inside a residential lot line
between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
7. Flickering. Flashing, flickering or strobe lighting are prohibited, except
for nonadvertising seasonal lights between October 25th and January
10th.
8. Measurement. The maximum illumination levels of this section shall be
measured with a photoelectric photometer having a spectral response
similar to that of the human eye. A foot-candle is defined as a unit of
measurement equalling the illumination on a surface one square foot in
area where there is a distribution of light having a candlepower of one
candela.
§ 27-511 FOREWORD § 27-512
FWD:769
§ 27-513. Placement and Screening of Waste Containers and
Outdoor Machinery and Fencing of Storage. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 513]
1. Grading and Excavation. See § 22-507 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22]. Bulk amounts of soil or minerals
shall neither be removed from a lot nor shall a lot be regraded unless a
zoning permit is issued for such work or as part of the approved work
within an approved subdivision or land development.
2. Erosion Control. All Borough permits are granted on the condition that
state erosion and sedimentation regulations and any officially
submitted erosion and sedimentation plan are complied with. The
Zoning Officer may require the submittal of an erosion and
sedimentation control plan with review by the County Conservation
District wherever soil will be disturbed. Failure to comply with such
regulations or plan shall be cause for suspension of Borough permits.
3. Unstable Slopes. Slopes that would have the serious threat of
instability, in the determination of the Borough Engineer, shall not be
created. The Zoning Officer may require that the applicant provide
certification from a professional engineer that finished slopes greater
than 4:1 will be stable.
4. Drainage. The ground adjacent to a building shall be graded so that
surface water will be drained away from such building.
5. Grading, excavation or movement of materials shall not be completed in
such a way that soils, rocks or other debris are left in an unsightly
fashion nor in a fashion that interferes with drainage, streets or
utilities.
1. Placement. Whenever reasonable, commercial, industrial and
institutional outdoor machinery that could create a noise nuisance shall
be placed towards a side of a building that does not face an abutting
existing dwelling, residential district, school or other noise sensitive
use.
2. Safety. General types of toxic, biological, electrical and other significant
hazards involving stationary outdoor machinery and storage shall be
marked with signs.
3. Solid Waste Containers.
A. Screening. All trash dumpsters shall be screened on three of four
sides (not including the side it is to be emptied from) as needed to
screen the dumpster from view from public streets or dwellings on
abutting lots. A solid wooden fence, brick wall, evergreen plants or
structure designed to be architecturally compatible with the
principal building shall be used for such screening.
§ 27-512 EMMAUS CODE § 27-513
FWD:770
§ 27-514. Radioactivity and Electrical Disturbances. [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 514; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 2]
§ 27-515. Tree Preservation. (See also, "Forestry, Commercial" in
§ 27-402.) [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 515]
B. Setback from Dwellings. If physically possible, any solid waste
container with a capacity of over 15 cubic feet shall be kept a
minimum of 15 feet from a dwelling unit on an abutting lot.
C. Food Sales. Any use that involves the sale of ready-to-eat food for
consumption outside of a building shall provide and maintain
adequate outdoor solid waste receptacles at convenient locations
on the property for customer use.
D. Vermin Control. Containers that include solid waste which are
stored outdoors shall be adequately enclosed to control the
attraction of rodents and insects. See the Borough Vermin Control
Ordinance [Chapter 10, Part 2].
4. Fencing of Outdoor Storage and Machinery. The following shall be
secured by fencing or walls that are reasonably adequate to make it
extremely difficult for small children to enter:
A. Outdoor industrial storage areas involving storage covering more
than 5,000 square feet of land.
B. Stationary hazardous machinery and equipment that are outdoors.
C. Outdoor bulk aboveground or surface storage of potentially
explosive or hazardous liquids, gases or substances.
1. No use shall routinely cause electrical, radio or electromagnetic
disturbances to equipment on other lots.
2. No radioactive wastes shall be disposed of in any district, and no
radioactive wastes shall be stored on a lot for longer than 90 days after
their active use is completed. See also Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
1. Intent. To protect wildlife and bird habitats, encourage groundwater
recharge, avoid pollution of creeks by high temperature runoff,
maintain the attractive character of areas and conserve energy.
2. Tree Removal.
A. The provisions of this section shall not apply to:
(1) A permitted commercial forestry use (see § 27-306); or,
(2) Routine selective cutting of up to 15% of the trees throughout a
lot to thin woods that does not involve clearcutting of any
areas; or,
§ 27-513 FOREWORD § 27-515
FWD:771
§ 27-516. Floodplain Area Regulations. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 516;
as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, §§ 1-3, 6, 9]
(3) A permitted Christmas tree farm; or,
(4) The cutting of trees of less than six inches trunk diameter
measured four feet above the original grade.
B. Except as permitted in subsection (A), above, a maximum of 10
trees per lot, or on any combination of adjoining lots in common
ownership, with a trunk diameter of six inches or more (measured
at a height four feet above original grade) shall be removed in any
calendar year, in addition to any additional tree(s) that meets or
will meet one or more of the following conditions:
(1) Is located within 10 feet of an uncurbed vehicular cartway.
(2) Is within a proposed or existing vehicular cartway, shoulder or
sidewalk.
(3) Is within 10 feet of an approved stormwater detention basin,
paved area, driveway or on-lot sewage system.
(4) Is within 25 feet of the foundation of an approved structure.
(5) Is within an approved utility corridor.
(6) Is diseased, dead or poses a clear danger to a structure, utility
or public improvement.
(7) Is a hazard to vehicular sight distance.
(8) Is clearly of old age and unhealthy and cannot reasonably be
expected to live for more than an additional five years.
(9) Is within an area of an approved principal or accessory use that
clearly requires the removal of the tree.
(10) Is within an area that must be cleared to develop an approved
golf course.
(11) Is necessary to allow longer rows for crop farming.
3. Protection of Trees During Construction. See § 22-514(2) of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
4. Applicability. This section shall not apply to an owner of a residential lot
of less than one acre after occupancy.
1. Purposes.
A. To regulate development in areas of the Borough where streams
are known to possess flooding characteristics and/or chronic
wetness which, if indiscriminately developed, could pose hazards to
§ 27-515 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:772
the public health, safety and welfare due to flood and pollution and
to regulate development in areas of known flooding in the Borough.
B. To reduce the financial burden imposed on the Borough, its
governmental units and its individuals by frequent and periodic
floods and overflows on lands.
C. To permit certain uses which can be appropriately located in such
areas and which will not impede the flow of flood waters, or
otherwise cause danger of life and property at, above or below
their locations along areas subject to flooding.
D. To provide sufficient drainage courses to carry abnormal flows of
stormwater in periods of heavy precipitation.
E. To regulate development in flood hazard areas in accordance with
the Federal Insurance Administration's requirements for flood
management and the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, 32
P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
2. Designations. Flood hazard areas are designated and interpreted as
follows:
A. Identification of Floodplain Ares.
(1) Identification. The identified floodplain area shall be those
areas of the Borough of Emmaus which are subject to the onehundred-
year flood, as identified in the Flood Insurance Study
(FIS) dated November 7, 2001, and the accompanying maps
prepared for the Borough by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof.
(2) Description of Floodplain Areas. The identified floodplain area
shall consist of the following specific areas:
(a) FW (Floodway Area). The areas identified as "Floodway" in
the AE Zone in the Flood Insurance Study prepared by the
FEMA. The term shall also include floodway areas which
have been identified in other available studies or sources
of information for those floodplain areas where no
floodway has been identified in the Flood Insurance Study.
(b) FF (Flood-Fringe Area). The remaining portions of the onehundred-
year floodplain in those areas identified as an AE
Zone in the Flood Insurance Study, where a floodway has
been delineated.
The basis for the outermost boundary of this area shall
be the one-hundred-year flood elevations as shown in the
flood profiles contained in the Flood Insurance Study.
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:773
(c) FA (General Floodplain Area). The areas identified as Zone
A in the FIS for which no one-hundred-year flood
elevations have been provided. When available,
information from other federal, state, and other acceptable
sources shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year
elevation, as well as a floodway area, if possible. When no
other information is available, the one-hundred-year
elevation shall be determined by using a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest
the construction site in question.
In lieu of the above, the Borough may require the applicant
to determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional
engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly
reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in
sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review by
the Borough.
(3) Changes in Identification of Area. The identified floodplain
area may be revised or modified by the Council where studies
or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any
such change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administration (FIA).
B. When exact measurements do not exist, the boundaries of the flood
hazard areas shall be determined by scaling distances off the Flood
Insurance Rate Map. A person who contests the location of a
boundary as shown on the map and is denied a permit shall appeal
the denial to the Zoning Hearing Board. The person contesting the
location of a flood hazard area shall have the burden of establishing
that the land does not lie within a flood hazard area.
C. Records of elevations of the lowest floor (including basement) and
floodproofing levels shall be obtained and maintained for all new or
substantially improved structures in the flood hazard areas and
shall indicate whether or not such structures contain a basement.
D. With any FW (Floodway Area), the following provisions apply:
(1) Any new construction, development, use, activity, or
encroachment that would case any increase in flood heights
shall be prohibited.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and Wetlands.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:774
E. Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area) or FA (General Floodplain
Area), the following provisions apply:
(1) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless a permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection, Bureau of Dams,
Waterways and Wetlands.
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse.
(3) Any new construction or development, which would cause any
increase in flood heights, shall be prohibited within any
floodway area.
F. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements.
(1) Residential Structures. Within any identified floodplain area,
any new construction or substantial improvement of a
residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood
elevation.
(2) Non-residential Structures.
(a) Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction
or substantial improvement of a non-residential structure
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated
up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation, or be
designed and constructed so that the space enclosed by
such structure shall remain either completely or
essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
(b) Any non-residential structure, or part thereof, having a
lowest floor which is not elevated to at least 1 1/2 feet
above the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be
floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry manner in
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-
Proofing Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers (June 1972, as amended March 1992) or which
some other equivalent standard. All plans and
specifications for such floodproofing shall be accompanied
by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance
with the above referenced standards.
(3) Space Below the Lowest Floor.
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:775
(a) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) is prohibited.
(b) Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (including
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a
vehicle, building access, or incidental storage in an area
other than a basement, shall be designed and constructed
to allow for the automatic entry and exit of flood waters for
the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior
walls. The term "partially enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
Designs for meeting this requirement must either be
certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(i) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of
not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
(ii) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one
foot above grade.
(iii) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc.,
or other coverings or devices provided that they
permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
3. Permits Required in Flood Hazard Areas.
A. Refer to permit requirements at Chapter 27, § 27-102 herein, in
addition to the requirements that follow.
B. A permit is required for all proposed construction, development
and any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
C. All necessary permits shall have been received from governmental
agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law,
including provisions of the U.S. Water Pollution Control Act of 1972.
4. Definitions. The following terms shall have the following definitions for
the purposes of this section:
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate including, but not limited to, the construction,
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:776
reconstruction, renovation, repair, or alteration of buildings or other
structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other
paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging;
drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and the
subdivision of land.
FIA — U.S. Flood Insurance Administration.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject
to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream,
river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid
accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFED — Watertight with walls substantially impermeable
to the passage of water and with structural components having the
capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects
of buoyancy.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge flood waters of a given magnitude. For the purpose of
this Part, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the
one-hundred-year magnitude.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register.
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined
by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district.
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved
by the Secretary of Interior.
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
(a) By an approved state program as determined by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this Part as being inundated by the one-hundred-year flood.
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:777
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the
lowest floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and
built so that the structure is in violation of the applicable non-elevation
design requirements of this Part.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure transportable in one or more
sections which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the
required utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers,
recreational and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for
more than 180 consecutive days.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective date of this chapter and includes
any subsequent improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD (BASE FLOOD) — A flood that has one
chance in 100 or a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
PERMANENT — Having a life span of six months or more at a particular
location.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is (i) built on a single
chassis; (ii) not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest
horizontal projections; (iii) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light-duty truck; (iv) not designed for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping,
travel, or seasonal use.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood
elevation plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:778
STRUCTURE — For floodplain management purposes, a walled and
roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is
principally above-ground, as well as a manufactured home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual repair
work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or,
A.
Any alteration of a "historic structure," provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
"historic structure."
B.
5. Flood Hazard Use Regulations. On any site or portion of a site which is
located in a flood hazard area, the use regulations of the district in
which the site is located shall apply except that the following uses shall
be prohibited:
A. All new or substantially improved residential dwellings and
commercial, institutional or industrial structures, including
hospitals, nursing homes, jails and manufactured homes and their
accessory structures.
B. Hazardous Substances. Any new or substantially improved
structure which will be used for the production or storage of any of
the following materials or substances, or which will be used for any
activity requiring the maintenance of a supply (more than 550
gallons or other comparable volume, or any amount of radioactive
substances) of any of the following materials or substances on the
premises: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:779
disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid,
magnesium, nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen, petroleum products
(such as gasoline or fuel oil), phosphorus, potassium, sodium,
sulphur and sulphur products, pesticides (including insecticides,
fungicides and rodenticides) and radioactive substances, insofar as
such substances are not otherwise regulated, and substances and
materials defined by applicable federal and state regulations as
toxic or hazardous.
C. The filling of marshlands, dredging, removal of topsoil or damming
or relocation of any watercourse except after the issuance of any
applicable permit from Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the Army Corps of Engineers.
D. Sanitary landfill; dump; junkyard; outdoor storage or disposal of
vehicles and/or materials, including manure and hazardous
substances listed in subsection (B), above.
6. Other Flood Hazard Area Requirements.
A. Any renovations or additions to existing residential structures shall
be made so that the lowest floor (including basement) is elevated to
or above the base flood level unless an exception for the allowance
of basements and/or storm cellars is granted by the FIA.
B. Any renovations or additions to existing nonresidential structures
shall be made so that the lowest floor (including basement) is
elevated to or above the base flood level; or together with the
attendant utility and sanitary facilities, is floodproofed to or above
the base flood level.
(1) Where floodproofing is used in lieu of elevation, a registered
professional engineer or architect shall record and certify that
the floodproofing methods used are adequate to withstand the
forces associated with the base flood; or shall submit to the FIA
for approval, local regulations containing detailed
floodproofing specifications which meet the watertight
performance standards.
C. Data on one-hundred-year flood elevations shall be submitted by
the applicant.
D. New and replacement public and private water, sewer, electrical
and other utility and facility lines shall be designed, located and
constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage. No part of any
on-site sewage system shall be located within any identified
floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state and local
regulations for such systems. If any such system is permitted, it
shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination
from it, during a flood.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:780
E. Renovations or additions to existing structures shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse and lateral movement and be
constructed with flood resistant materials and methods.
F. Manufactured homes shall be prohibited in any location within the
flood hazard area.
G. Pilings or columns rather than fill, for the elevation of structures
within floodplain areas, shall be required in order to maintain the
storage capacity of the floodplain and to minimize the potential for
negative impacts to sensitive ecological areas.
H. Issuance of Building Permit.
(1) The Building Permit Officer shall issue a building permit only
after it has been determined that the proposed work to be
undertaken will be in conformance with the requirements of
this and all other applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building
Permit Officer shall review the application for the permit to
determine if all other necessary government permits required
by state and federal laws have been obtained, such as those
required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act
1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);
and the U.S. Clean Water Act, § 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
(3) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall
be made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities
which may be affected by such action have been notified by the
Borough and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection, Bureau of Dams, Waterways and Wetlands.
In addition, the Federal Insurance Administrator and
Pennsylvania Department of Community and Economic
Development shall be notified by the Borough prior to any
alteration or relocation of any watercourse.
I. Design and Construction Standards. The following minimum
standards shall apply for all construction and development
proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(1) Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed
to convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient
manner. The system shall insure proper drainage along streets,
and provide positive drainage away from buildings. The system
shall also be designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff
onto adjacent properties.
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:781
(2) Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
(a) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
flood waters.
(b) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into flood
waters.
(c) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located
within any identified floodplain area except in strict
compliance with all state and local regulations for such
systems. If any such system is permitted, it shall be located
so as to avoid impairment to it, or contamination from it,
during a flood.
(3) Other Utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical
and telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where
possible) and constructed to minimize the chance of
impairment during a flood.
(4) Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no
more than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
(5) Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive
or, in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or
plant life, and not listed in § 27-516(6)(J), "Development Which
May Endanger Human Life," shall be stored at or above the
regulatory flood elevation and/or flood proofed to the
maximum extent possible.
(6) Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and
structures shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to
offer the minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be
designed to have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of
flood water.
(7) Anchoring.
(a) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(b) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to prevent
flotation.
(8) Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:782
(a) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring
grain without causing structural damage to the building.
(b) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(c) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials
that are "water-resistant" and will withstand inundation.
(d) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be made of metal or other
"water-resistant" material.
(9) Paints and Adhesives.
(a) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be of "marine" or "water-resistant"
quality.
(b) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation
shall be of a "marine" or "water-resistant" variety.
(c) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall
be finished with a "marine" or "water-resistant" paint or
other finishing material.
(10) Electrical Components.
(a) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet
above the one-hundred-year flood elevation.
(b) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and
shall be dropped from above.
(11) Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the
regulatory flood elevation.
(12) Fuel Supply Systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of flood waters into the
system and discharges from the system into flood waters.
Additional provisions shall be made for the drainage of these
systems in the event that flood water infiltration occurs.
J. Development Which May Endanger Human Life.
(1) In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act, and the regulations adopted by the Department of
Community and Economic Development as required by the Act,
any new or substantially improved structure which:
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:783
(a) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or,
(b) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable
volume, of any of the following dangerous materials or
substances on the premises; or,
(c) Will involve the production, storage, or use of any amount
of radioactive substances;
shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of
materials and substances are considered dangerous to
human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus
(n) Potassium
(o) Sodium
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such
substances are not otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any FW (Floodway Area), any structure of the kind
described in Subsection (1), above, shall be prohibited.
(3) Within any FE (Special Floodplain Area) or FA (General
Floodplain Area), any new or substantially improved structure
of the kind described in Subsection (1), above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the
top-of-bank of any watercourse.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:784
(4) Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved structure of the kind described in
subsection (1), above, shall be:
(a) Elevated or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above the onehundred-
year flood and,
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or
activity during the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below
the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for
completely dry floodproofing contained in the publication
"Flood-Proofing Regulations (U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or with
some other equivalent watertight standard.
K. Floodproofing. Any structure, or part thereof, that will be built
below the one-hundred-year flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
flood-proofing contained in the publication "Floodproofing
Regulations" (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as
amended March 1992), or such successor provisions, or with some
other equivalent watertight standard acceptable to the Borough
Building Inspector.
L. Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas.
(1) Existing Structures. The provisions of this Part do not require
any changes or improvements to be made to lawfully existing
structures. However, when an improvement is made to any
existing structure, the provisions of subsection (2) shall apply.
(2) Improvements. The following provisions shall apply whenever
any improvement is made to an existing structure located
within any identified floodplain area:
(a) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall
be allowed within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the elevation of the one-hundred-year flood.
(b) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall
be allowed within any FE area that would, together with all
other existing and anticipated development, increase the
one-hundred-year flood elevation more than one foot at
any point.
(c) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or
improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to an
extent or amount of 50% or more of its market value, shall
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-516
FWD:785
constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of
this Part.
(d) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or
improvement of any kind to an existing structure, to an
extent or amount of less than 50% or more of its market
value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
7. A regulatory floodway is hereby adopted as that area within the flood
hazard area indicated on the Federal Insurance Administrator's Flood
Boundary and Floodway Map. The regulatory floodway shall be
designed to carry the waters of the base flood without increasing the
base flood level more than one foot at any point. In the regulatory
floodway, any development, substantial improvement or encroachment
(including fill) which will result in any increase in flood levels during the
base flood discharge is prohibited.
8. Areas Between the One-Hundred-Year and Five-Hundred-Year
Floodplain. Where permitted within any area lying between the onehundred-
year and a defined five-hundred-year floodplain, any structure
of the kind described in subsection (5), above, shall be:
A. Elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up
to at least 1.5 feet above the one-hundred-year flood; and,
B. Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during,
the course of a one-hundred-year flood.
9. Variances in the Flood Hazard Areas Granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition to the factors stipulated in Part 1 of this chapter for a
variance, the following requirements shall be applicable:
A. Variances shall not be issued within the designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would
result.
B. Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirement
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements of this section.
C. The applicant shall be notified in writing over the signature of a
Borough official that:
(1) The issuance of a decision to allow construction of a structure
below the base flood elevation will result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(2) Such construction below the base flood elevation increase risks
to life and property.
D. Variances.
§ 27-516 EMMAUS CODE § 27-516
FWD:786
§ 27-517. Karst Hazards. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 517; as added by
Ord. 802, 9/19/1994, § 3]
(1) General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this
Part would result in an exceptional hardship to a prospective
builder, developer or landowner, the Borough may, upon
request, grant relief from the strict application of the
requirements.
(2) Variance Procedures and Conditions.
(a) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least
modification necessary to provide relief.
(b) In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it
considers necessary in order to protect the public health,
safety, and welfare, and to achieve the objectives of this
Part.
(c) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(i) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(ii) That failure to grant the variance would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(iii) That the granting of the variance will (i) neither result
in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense, (ii) nor create
nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(d) A complete record of all variance requests and related
actions shall be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual report to the Federal Insurance
Administration.
Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures
shall be designed and constructed so as to have the
capability of resisting the one-hundred-year flood.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to recognize the potential for
damage to public and private improvements, human injury or death,
and the disruption of vital public services which may arise by the
potential for sinkholes and/or subsidence within areas of carbonate
geology. A further purpose of this section is to minimize the potential
for such sinkhole and/or subsidence occurrence and to protect the
§ 27-516 FOREWORD § 27-517
FWD:787
ground water resource. Should the regulations of this and other
applicable regulations conflict, the most stringent regulations shall
apply.
2. Disclaimer of Liability. Wheras the exact occurrence of sinkholes and/or
subsidence is not predictable, the administration of these regulations
shall create no liability on behalf of the Borough Engineer, Borough
employees or Borough agencies as to damages which may be associated
with the formation of sinkholes or subsidence. That is, compliance with
these regulations represents no warranty, finding, guarantee, or
assurance that a sinkhole and/or subsidence will not occur on an
approved property. The Borough, its agencies, consultants and
employees assume no liability for any financial or other damages which
may result from sinkhole activity.
3. Karst Hazard Indicator Map. Areas of the Borough in which Karst
features are believed more likely to be present are shown on the Karst
Indicator Map at the end of this chapter. These areas of the "carbonate"
areas shown on the map. The sinkholes, quarries, limonite excavations,
solution pans, closed, semi-closed or linear depressions and iron
surface mines delineated on the Karst Hazard Indicator Map were
taken from two sources. (1) Sinkholes and Karst related features
mapping for Lehigh County prepared by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources, Bureau of
Topographic and Geologic Survey (open file report 8701); (2) the Little
Lehigh Creek Basin Carbonate Prototype Area Closed Depression Map
prepared by R.E. Wright Associates, Inc. The Karst Hazard Indicator
Map is intended as a tool to assist applicants and the Borough in
identifying Karst hazard areas. However, the Karst Hazard Indicator
Map is not the exclusive tool for locating Karst features. The Borough
shall also utilize generally accepted geological techniques to locate
such features.
4. Procedures.
A. As part of the preliminary plan requirements for all subdivisions
and land developments the applicant shall engage a qualified
professional to review the existing aerial photos, soils, geological
and related data available to him as it may pertain to the subject
property and to make a site inspection of the property.
B. A site inspection by the applicant's professional using all available
data and with such assistance as is needed shall determine the
presence or absence of Karst surface features of the site, and
locate the same if present on a site plan at a scale no smaller than
one inch to 100 feet. In particular, the following features shall be
located, if present on, the site:
Closed depressions;
Open sinkholes;
§ 27-517 EMMAUS CODE § 27-517
FWD:788
Seasonal high water table indicators;
Unplowed areas in plowed fields;
Surface drainage into ground;
Limonite excavations and quarries;
Any Karst feature shown on the Karst Features Indicator Map.
C. The applicant must provide the Borough with a map at a scale of
one inch to 100 feet that shows the Karst features listed in
subsection (4)(B).
D. Based upon the site inspection, the applicant's professional shall
determine what further testing should be done by the applicant to
ensure compliance with performance standards set forth in
subsection (4)(B). Testing methodology shall be reasonable under
the circumstances, including (1) the scale of the proposed
development; and (2) the hazards revealed by examination of
available data and site inspection.
E. The applicant shall cause the additional testing, if any to be
effected, and shall submit test results to the Borough Engineer.
F. The Borough Engineer shall report to the Borough Planning
Commission and/or Council, with a copy to the applicant, his
opinion concerning the adequacy of the report submitted based
upon the scale of the development and the hazards revealed by the
report, and shall make recommendations to the Planning
Commission and/or Council based upon the report submitted
concerning site development, including stormwater management,
the layout of utility lines and building location. The Borough
Engineer may require the applicant to perform such additional
testing as may be appropriate.
5. Performance Standards.
A. All applicants for subdivisions or land developments shall comply
with the requirements of this Part regarding Karst hazards.
B. No stormwater detention facility shall be placed within 100 feet of
the features listed in subsection (4)(B), unless a detailed
geotechnical solution to the subsidence, pollution and safety
problems of the Karst feature has been presented by a competent
professional in carbonate geology.
C. No stormwater swale with design flows in excess of 10 cubic feet
per second for the ten-year flood may be constructed within 100
feet of the features listed in subsection (4)(B), unless a detailed
geotechnical solution to the subsidence, pollution and safety
problems of the Karst feature has been presented by a competent
professional in carbonate geology.
§ 27-517 FOREWORD § 27-517
FWD:789
§ 27-518. Alluvial Soils Areas. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 518; as added
by Ord. 802, 9/19/1994, § 4; as amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 1]
D. No storm sewer pipe shall be constructed within 100 feet of the
features listed in subsection (4) (B) unless it is concrete pipe
utilizing 0-ring joints.
E. No principal or accessory building, no structure and no impervious
surface shall be located closer than 100 feet from the edge of the
features listed in subsection (4) (B) unless a detailed geotechnical
solution to the subsidence, pollution and safety problems of the
Karst feature has been presented by a competent professional in
carbonate geology.
F. No septic systems or tile field, no swimming pool, no solid waste
disposal area, transfer area or facility, no oil, gasoline, salt or
chemical storage area, and no blasting for quarry or well
enhancement activities shall occur within 100 feet of the features
listing in subsection (4)(B) unless a detailed geotechnical solution
to the subsidence, pollution and safety problems of the Karst
feature has been presented by a competent professional in
carbonate geology.
G. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans filed with the County
Soil Conservation Service shall detail safeguards to protect
identified Karst features.
H. All water, sanitary sewer and storm sewer lines located in a Karst
hazard area shall be so constructed as to not permit the flow of
water along the utility line trench, and shall be imperviously diked
at thirty-foot intervals.
1. Determination of Alluvial Soils Areas.
A. The following soil types have been designated as "alluvial soils" by
the Soil Conservation Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, and
are identified as "soils subject to flooding" on the soil maps
published in the Soil Survey for Lehigh County, Pennsylvania,
issued November 1963:
Aw Atkins silt loam
Ln Linside silt loam
Mh Melvin silt loam
MkA Melvin silt loam, local alluvium, 0-3% slopes
MkB Melvin silt loam, local alluvium, 3-8% slopes
B. The Borough Zoning Officer shall require that a detailed on-site
survey be made (by a qualified engineer, soil scientist or qualified
sanitarian approved by the Borough Council) in accordance with
accepted on-site survey techniques to determine the exact extent
§ 27-517 EMMAUS CODE § 27-518
FWD:790
and nature of all areas susceptible to potential problems of
flooding, wetness or pollution before issuing a zoning permit for:
(1) Any proposed use within an "alluvial soils" area; or,
(2) Any underground sewage disposal system which is located
within 100 feet of an "alluvial soils" area.
2. Use Regulations. The following uses shall be prohibited on any portion
of a site which, upon completion of the detailed on-site survey
mentioned in subsection (1)(B), is found to contain potential hazards
due to flooding, wetness or pollution:
A. All new or substantially improved residential dwellings and
commercial, institutional or industrial structures, including
hospitals, nursing homes, jails and manufactured homes and their
accessory structures.
B. Any new or substantially improved structure which will be used for
the production or storage of any of the following materials or
substances, or which will be used for any activity requiring the
maintenance of a supply (more than 550 gallons or other
comparable volume, or any amount of radioactive substances) of
any of the following materials or substances on the premises:
acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide,
celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, hydrocyanic acid,
magnesium, nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen, petroleum products
(such as gasoline or fuel oil), phosphorus, potassium, sodium,
sulphur and sulphur products, pesticides (including insecticides,
fungicides and rodenticides) and radioactive substances, insofar as
such substances are not otherwise regulated, and substances and
materials defined by applicable federal and state regulations as
toxic or hazardous.
§ 27-518 FOREWORD § 27-518
FWD:791

Part 6
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
§ 27-601. Required Number of Parking Spaces. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 601; as amended by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
1. Overall Requirements.
A. Number of Spaces. Each use that is newly developed, enlarged,
significantly changed in type or increased in number of
establishments shall provide and maintain off-street parking spaces
in accordance with Table 6.1 and the regulations of this Part,
except as exempted by § 27-602(6) in the B-C district.
B. Uses Not Listed. Uses not specifically listed in Table 6.1 shall
comply with the requirements for the most similar use listed in
Table 6.1, unless the applicant proves to the satisfaction of the
Zoning officer, after a review by the Planning Commission, that an
alternative standard should be used for that use.
C. Multiple Uses. Where a proposed lot contains or includes more
than one type of use, the number of parking spaces required shall
be the sum of the parking requirements for each separate use,
except as may be allowed under § 27-601(2), below.
D. Calculation. Where the calculation of required parking spaces does
not result in a whole number, the calculation shall be rounded to
the closest whole number.
E. Shared Use. The required parking spaces for any number of
separate uses may be combined through an appropriate long-term
mechanism within a single lot. The required spaces assigned to one
use shall not be assigned to meet the requirements of a second use
except:
(1) As may be authorized by § 27-601(2), below; or,
(2) That 50% of the required parking spaces for a place of worship,
a theater, a membership club, (not including a restaurant or
tavern) or an auditorium whose public attendance would be at
night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will have an
insignificant or no parking demand during such nights or
Sundays.
F. Net Increase. The requirements of this Part shall be based upon the
net increase in parking spaces. If the creation of off-street parking
results in a reduction in the number of legal on-street parking
spaces, then those numbers of reduced parking spaces shall also be
required to be provided, unless the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that those on-street
parking spaces were rarely occupied.
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:793
G. Off-Site Parking. See § 27-602(5) and § 27-602(6).
2. Reduction of Parking Requirements by Special Exception.
A. Purposes. To minimize impervious surfaces, while ensuring
adequate parking; to recognize unique circumstances may justify a
reduction in parking.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board may permit a reduction, through the
special exception process of § 27-119, of the number of parking
spaces required to be developed if the applicant proves to the
satisfaction of the Board that less parking spaces are needed.
(1) Proof. To prove that less parking spaces are needed, the
applicant shall provide existing and projected employment,
customer, resident or other relevant data. Such data may
include a study of parking at similar developments during peak
periods of use.
(2) Shared Parking. Under this section, an applicant may seek to
prove that parking permanently shared with another use or
another lot with shared internal access or another lot within
250 feet of the entrance to the use will reduce the total amount
of parking needed because the uses have different peak times
of parking need or overlapping customers.
(3) Reservation of Future Parking Areas. If a reduction is
permitted under this section, the Board may require as a
condition of the special exception that the lot include the
reservation, permanently or for a specified number of years, of
areas for use if needed in the future for additional parking.
(a) Such reservation shall be provided in a legal form
acceptable to the Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor. A legally
binding deed restriction is recommended.
(b) In such case, the applicant shall be required to submit site
plans to the Zoning Officer showing where and how the
additional parking could be accomplished. Such future
parking areas shall be designed to meet all Borough
requirements, including stormwater runoff. Such future
parking areas shall not be covered by buildings and shall
be attractively landscaped unless needed for parking.
(c) Such additional parking shall be required to be provided
within one year by the owner of the lot at that time after
the Zoning officer may determine in writing to such owner
that such parking has become needed to meet actual use.
Such determination shall be based upon the Zoning
Officer's on-site review on at least three different days.
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-601
FWD:794
Table 6.1
Off-Street Parking Requirements
(See Definition of Employee in Part 2)
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
AGRICULTURAL
USES
1. Crop farming or
raising of
livestock
— Employee
2. Kennel (Min. of
4)
1 per employee 15 animals of
capacity
3. Plant nursery 1 per employee 250 sq. ft. of
indoor sales floor
area and 10,000
sq. ft. of outdoor
sales area
4. Stable,
Nonhousehold
(Min. of 2)
1 per employee 10 animals of
capacity
5. Seasonal sale of
agricultural
products (Min.
of 5)
1 per employee 250 sq. ft. of
sales floor area
RESIDENTIAL
USES
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:795
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
1. Dwelling unit 2 per dwelling
unit (which may
include a
driveway space
and a garage
space). (see also
"Housing for
Persons over Age
55" below)
See also
§ 27-601(1)(F)
entitled "Net
Increase."
In addition, if a
low-rise
apartment
development
includes more
than 20 dwelling
units, then an
additional 0.2
spaces per
dwelling unit
shall be provided
for visitor
parking
2. Home
occupation,
general
As determined to
be necessary by
the Zoning
Hearing Board if
a special
exception use. 2
spaces if the use
is permitted by
right
Nonresident
employee
3. Home
Occupation,
light
None additional
required
4. Housing
permanently
restricted to
persons 55
years and older
and/or the
physically
handicapped
0.6 per dwelling/
rental unit,
except 0.25 per
dwelling/rental
unit if evidence
is presented that
the residents will
primary be
physically
handicapped or
over 70 years old
Nonresident
employee
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-601
FWD:796
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
5. Boarding house 1 per rental unit,
except for a
college fraternity
or sorority: 1 per
2 beds plus 2
spaces.
Nonresident
employee
6. Group home See § 27-402
INSTITUTIONAL
USES
1. Place of worship
or church
1 per 5 seats in
room of largest
capacity. If a
place of worship
shares parking
with a school,
then whichever
use requires the
most parking
shall apply
instead of the
other use
Full-time
employee
2. Care and
treatment
facilities for
children
1 per staff
doctor, plus 1
per 3 employees
on the maximum
shift, plus 1 per
1,000 sq. ft. of
total habitable
floor area for
visitor and
resident parking
Plus such
additional spaces
required by this
Table for any
supplementary
activities that
generate
additional
parking needs
3. Hospital 1 per 2 beds 1.2 employee
4. Nursing home 1 per 4 beds 1.3 employee
5. Personal care
home
1 per 3 beds 1.3 employee
6. Day care as an
accessory use to
a dwelling
1 space -
designed for safe
and convenient
drop-off and
pick-up
Nonresident
employee
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:797
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
7. Day care center
as a principal
use
1 per 10
children, with
spaces designed
for safe and
convenient dropoff
and pick-up
Nonresident
employee
8. School, primary
or secondary
1 per 4 students
aged 16 or older
plus 2 visitor
spaces
1.1 employee
9. Utility facility Vehicle routinely
needed to
service facility
10. Dormitory 2 residents aged
16 or older
Nonresident
employee
11. College,
university or
trade school
2 students not
living on campus
who attend class
at peak times
(plus required
spaces for oncampus
housing)
1.2 employee on
campus during
peak times, other
than those living
on-campus
12. Public library,
community
center or
cultural center
or museum
1 per 5 seats (or
1 per 300 sq. ft.
of floor area of
rooms accessible
to patrons and/
or users if seats
are not typically
provided)
1.2 employee
13. Treatment
center
1 per 2 residents
aged 16 years or
older plus 1 per
nonresident
intended to be
treated on-site at
peak times
Nonresident
employee
14. Swimming pool,
nonhousehold
1 per 40 sq. ft. of
water surface,
other than
wading pools
1.2 employee
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-601
FWD:798
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
COMMERCIAL
USES
All commercial
uses, as
applicable, shall
provide
additional
parking or
storage needed
for maximum
number of
vehicles stored,
displayed or
based at the lot
at any point in
time. These
additional
spaces are not
required to meet
the stall size and
parking aisle
width
requirements of
this chapter
1. Auditorium,
commercial
1 per 4 seats
2. Auto service
station or repair
garage
5 per repair/
service bay and
1/4 per fuel
nozzle with such
spaces separated
from accessways
to pumps
Employee
3. Auto, boat,
recreational
vehicle or
manufactured
home sales
1 per 15
vehicles, boats,
RVs or homes
displayed
Employee
4. Automatic
transaction
machine
3 per machine,
conveniently
located
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:799
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
5. Adult use
(including adult
bookstore, adult
live
entertainment
use or massage
parlor) (Min. of
10)
1 per 30 sq. ft. of
total floor area
Employee
6. Bed and
breakfast use
1 per 1.5 rental
units
Nonresident
employee
7. Betting use 1 per 3 persons
of maximum
capacity of
buildings, as
rated by fire
regulations
1.2 employee
8. Bowling alley 2 per lane plus 2
per pool table
1.2 employee
9. Bus station,
intercity
5 per loading/
unloading stall
for buses
Employee
10. Car wash 2 per washing
lane or stall,
which may be
located in drying
or vacuuming
areas
1.2 employee
11. Financial
institution
(includes bank)
1 per 250 sq. ft.
of floor area
accessible to
customers, plus
3 convenient
spaces for each
automatic
banking
transaction
machine
1.2 employee
12. Funeral home 1 per 5 seats in
rooms intended
to be in use at 1
time for visitors
Nonresident
employee plus
spaces required
for any dwelling
unit(s)
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-601
FWD:800
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
13. Golf driving
range
1 per tee 1.2 employee
14. Miniature golf 2 per hole 1.2 employee
15. Golf course 3 per hole (plus
spaces required
for any
membership club
building or
restaurant)
2 employees
16. Ice skating/
roller
250 sq. ft. of
floor area
accessible to
users
1.2 employee
17. Haircutting/
hairstyling
2 per customer
seat used for
haircutting, hair
styling, hair
washing,
manicuring or
similar work
1.2 employee
18. Hotel or motel 1 per rental unit
plus 1 per 5
seats in any
meeting room
(plus any
parking required
for any
restaurant)
1.2 employee
19. Laundromat 1 per 3 washing
machines
On-site employee
20. Offices or clinic,
medical/dental
5 per each
doctor or dentist
working on-site
at peak times
1.2 employee
21. Offices, other
than medical/
dental (Min. of 3
per
establishment
1 per 300 sq. ft.
of floor area
(other than
warehouse/
storage rooms
not routinely
occupied by
persons)
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:801
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
22. Personal service
use, other than
haircutting/
hairstyling (Min.
of 2 per
establishment)
1 per 300 sq. ft.
of floor area
(other than
warehouse/
storage rooms
not accessible to
customers)
1.2 employee
23. Indoor
recreation
(other than
bowling alley),
membership
club or exercise
club
1 per 250 sq. ft.
of floor area
other than
racquetball
courts accessible
to customers/
members plus
parking required
by any additional
use (such as
restaurant) plus
2 spaces per
racquetball court
1.2 employee
24. Outdoor
recreation
(other than uses
specifically
listed in this
table)
1 per 3 persons
of capacity (50%
may be on grass
overflow areas
with major
driveways in
gravel)
1.2 employee
25. Restaurant 1 per 4 seats 2 employees
26. Retail sales
(other than
types separately
listed) or
shopping center
(Min. of 5 per
establishment)
1 per 250 sq. ft.
of floor area,
other than
accessory
warehouse/
storage rooms
not accessible to
customers
—
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-601
FWD:802
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
27. Retail sales of
only furniture,
lumber,
carpeting,
bedding or floor
covering
1 per 400 sq. ft.
of floor area,
other than
accessory
warehouse/
storage rooms
not accessible to
customers
28. Tavern or
nightclub
1 per 40 sq. ft. of
total floor area
29. Theater or
auditorium
1 per 4 seats, 1/2
of which may be
met by
convenient
parking shared
with other
business uses on
the same lot that
are typically not
routinely open
beyond 9:30 p.m.
1.2 employee
30. Veterinarian
office
5 per
veterinarian
Employee
INDUSTRIAL USES
All industrial uses
(including
warehousing,
distribution and
manufacturing)
In addition to
parking or
storage needed
for maximum
number of
vehicles stored,
displayed or
based at the lot
at any point in
time, which
spaces are not
required to meet
the stall size and
aisle width
requirements of
this chapter
1.3 per employee
working on-site
§ 27-601 FOREWORD § 27-601
FWD:803
§ 27-602. General Regulations for Off-street Parking. [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 602]
Use
Number of Off-
Street Parking
Spaces
Required
Plus 1 Off-
Street Parking
Space For Each:
Self-storage
development
1 per 20 storage
units
Employee
1. General. Parking spaces and accessways shall be laid out to result in
safe and orderly use, and to fully take into account all of the following:
vehicular access onto and off the site, vehicular movement within the
site, loading areas, pedestrian patterns and any drive-through facilities.
No parking area shall cause a safety hazard or impediment to traffic off
the lot.
2. Existing Parking. Structures and uses in existence at the effective date
of this chapter shall not be required to add additional parking spaces to
meet the requirements of this Part unless: (A) the general type of use is
significantly changed; or, (B) the use is expanded a total aggregate over
time of more than 5% or 2,000 square feet in floor area, which ever is
more restrictive. Any parking spaces serving such pre-existing
structures or uses at the time of adoption of this chapter shall not in the
future be reduced in number below the number required by this
chapter.
3. Expansion of Use. If a existing building or use does not currently
conform to the off-street parking or loading requirements of this
chapter, then additional parking and/or loading facilities shall only be
required for any expansion of the use or building, except:
A. If such building or use would expand by a total aggregate of 50% or
more in a measurement of parking need addressed by § 27-601,
then sufficient off-street parking and off-street loading facilities
shall be required not only for the expanded area but also for the
pre-existing use or building.
4. Continuing Obligation of Parking and Loading Spaces. All required
numbers of parking spaces and off-street loading spaces shall be
available as long as the use or building which the spaces serve still
exist, and such spaces shall not be reduced in number below the
minimum required by this chapter. No required parking area or offstreet
loading spaces shall be used for any other use (such as storage or
display of materials) that interferes with the area's availability for
parking to serve a use, except that an owner of a parking area may
allow use of the spaces by another use during specific times of the day
and week when they are clearly not needed for the primary user.
§ 27-601 EMMAUS CODE § 27-602
FWD:804
§ 27-603. Design Standards for Off-Street Parking. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 603; as amended by Ord. 793, 6/20/1994, § 1]
5. Location of Parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be on the
same lot or abutting lot with the principal use served, unless the
applicant proves to the satisfaction of the Zoning Officer that a
guaranteed long-term method of providing the spaces is available using
area of a lot within 500 feet (except as provided in subsection (6),
below) of the entrance of the principal use being served. Such method
may involve a deed restriction allowing using of the spaces during peak
hours of need, or a lease extending 20 years or for the life of use of the
property, whichever is of shorter duration.
6. Downtown Parking Exemption.
A. In recognition the need to strongly encourage new construction
and the reuse of building space in the downtown, and recognizing
the availability of on-street parking areas, the requirements in
§ 27-601 for minimum numbers of off-street parking spaces in this
Part shall not apply within the B-C district, except for:
(1) The new construction of an aggregate total after the adoption
of this chapter of more than 4,000 square feet of building floor
area; or,
(2) Any additional number of dwelling units or boarding house
units.
B. In any case, existing parking in the B-C district shall not be reduced
below a minimum equal to one space per 1.3 employee.
C. Within the B-C District, the provision of § 27-602(5), above,
permitting off-site parking shall be extended to a 700 feet distance.
7. Fees-in-Lieu of Parking. As a conditional use, the Borough Council may
permit all or part of the parking required in the B-C or R-HO district to
be waived if the applicant agrees to provides a fee-in-lieu of parking.
Such fees shall be accounted for separately and shall only be used for
acquisition and/or development of municipal vehicle parking areas.
Such one-time fee shall be $900 per parking space, unless such fee is
modified by future resolution of Borough Council.
1. General Requirements.
A. No parking area shall be designed to require or encourage parked
vehicles to back into a public street or alley in order to leave a
parking space, except for a single-family or two-family dwelling
with its access onto a local street or parking court.
B. Every required parking space shall be designed so that each motor
vehicle may proceed to and from the parking space provided for it
without requiring the moving of any other vehicle, except spaces
§ 27-602 FOREWORD § 27-603
FWD:805
for a single-family detached dwelling, twin dwelling or for approved
"valet" parking areas.
C. Parking areas shall not be within any of the following: a required
buffer yard or a required paved area setback.
D. Defined Traffic Ways. All parking areas shall include clearly defined
and marked traffic patterns. In any lot with more than 30 off-street
parking spaces, raised curbs and landscaped areas shall be used to
direct traffic within the lot. Major vehicular routes shall be
separated as much as is reasonable from major pedestrian routes
within the lot.
E. Separation from Street. All areas for off-street parking, off-street
loading and unloading and the storage or movement of motor
vehicles shall be physically separated from the street by a raised
curb, planting strip, wall or other suitable barrier against
unchanneled motor vehicle entrance or exit, except for necessary
and approved vehicle entrances and exits to the lot. All commercial
and industrial parking areas approved after the adoption of this
chapter shall be separated from the street by a grass or landscaped
strip of land. See § 27-603(7).
F. Stacking. Each lot shall provide adequate area upon the lot to
prevent back-up of vehicles on a public street while awaiting entry
to the lot, or while waiting for service at a drive-through facility.
G. Stormwater Management. The applicant for any new or expanded
parking lot that would result in 5,000 square feet or greater of
impervious coverage (compared to what previously existed),
outside of the B-C District, shall be required to submit stormwater
management calculations to the Borough Engineer and prove to the
satisfaction of the Borough Engineer that stormwater will be
adequately managed.
H. Landscaping. See § 27-603(7).
2. Size and Marking of Parking Spaces.
A. Each parking space shall include a rectangle with a minimum width
of nine feet and a minimum length of 18 feet, except:
(1) The minimum length shall be 21 feet for parallel parking.
(2) Compact. If a lot or parking deck includes more than 30
parking spaces, a maximum of 20% of the required spaces
include a rectangle with a minimum width of eight feet and a
minimum length of 16 feet; provided, that those spaces are
marked as "Compact Cars Only" and provided that those
spaces do not include the most desirable spaces in the lot or
deck.
§ 27-603 EMMAUS CODE § 27-603
FWD:806
(3) If a parking area is permitted to not be paved, then a minimum
width of 10 feet per space shall be used.
(4) If parking spaces serve a use involving more than 10,000
square feet of floor area for the retail sale of groceries, then
such parking spaces shall have a minimum width of 10 feet to
allow for shopping carts.
B. All spaces shall be marked to indicate their location, except those
of a single-family or two-family dwelling.
3. Aisles.
A. Each aisle providing access to stalls for one-way traffic only shall
be at least the minimum aisle width specified as follows:
Angle of Parking Minimum Aisle Width
Parallel or 30° 12 feet
45° 14 feet
60° 18 feet
90° 20 feet
B. Each aisle providing access to stalls for two-way traffic shall be at
least 20 feet in width.
C. Maximum length of parking aisle: 300 feet.
D. Modification. By special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may
reduce the minimum size of parking spaces or aisles to reflect
congested conditions and the need for parking spaces in older
commercial areas of the Borough.
4. Access Drives and Driveways.
A. Width of Driveway/Accessway at Entrance onto Public Street (at
the edge of the cartway).
1-Way Use 2-Way Use
Minimum 12 feet 20 feet
Maximum 35 feet 50 feet
* Unless a different standard is required by PennDOT for an
entrance to a state road.
B. Drainage. Adequate provisions shall be made to maintain
uninterrupted parallel drainage along a public street at the point of
driveway or access drive entry.
C. Separation Between Driveways. At least 50 feet shall be provided
between the center lines of any two accessways or driveways along
one street within one lot.
§ 27-603 FOREWORD § 27-603
FWD:807
D. Separation from Intersection. If a driveway or accessway enters
onto a collector or arterial street, then the center line of that
driveway or accessway where it enters the collector or arterial
street shall be a minimum of 75 feet from the center line of any
other street, where that street enters the collector or arterial street
at a different point than the driveway or accessway.
E. State Permit. Where there will be new or intensified access to a
state street or other work within the right-of-way of a state street, a
state highway occupancy permit shall be obtained, as applicable.
F. Sight Distance for Driveways. See § 27-803(3)(B).
5. Paving, Grading and Drainage.
A. Parking and loading facilities and including driveways shall be
graded and adequately drained to prevent erosion or excessive
water flow across streets or adjoining properties.
B. Paving. Except for landscaped areas, all portions of required
parking, loading facilities and driveways shall be surfaced with
asphalt, concrete or decorative paving block, except that portions
or all of driveways or parking areas may be left in grass or gravel
where the applicant proves to the full satisfaction of the Zoning
Officer that:
(1) The parking or driveway is clearly intended for use for a
maximum of one year or for a maximum of 14 days in a
calendar year; or,
(2) Serves an agricultural use; or,
(3) Involves a residential driveway with a length of over 100 feet.
6. Lighting of Parking Areas. See § 27-511 "Light and Glare Control."
Parking areas for six or more spaces and related pedestrian pathways
intended to be used at night shall be adequately illuminated for security
purposes.
7. Paved Area Landscaping.
A. Purpose. To ensure that parked or moving vehicles within a lot do
not obstruct sight distance or interfere with pedestrian traffic, to
aid in stormwater management along streets and to prevent
vehicles from entering or exiting a lot other than at approved
driveways.
B. See the requirements of § 22-514 through § 22-519 of the Borough
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
C. The requirements of § 22-516 of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] regarding landscaping
around any new or expanded parking area shall apply to any such
§ 27-603 EMMAUS CODE § 27-603
FWD:808
use established or expanded after the adoption of this chapter,
regardless of whether such parking area would otherwise be
regulated by the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
D. Any tractor-trailer truck loading area or any parking lot of six or
more spaces outside of a building shall be screened from any
abutting residential lot line by a solid wood fence, decorative
masonry wall or evergreen landscaping with a minimum height of
four feet. Such screen shall be designed and located to reduce the
visibility of the use from the residential lot line and prevent
headlight glare into an existing or future home.
8. Handicapped Parking.
A. Number of Spaces. Any lot including four or more off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. The
following number of handicapped spaces shall be provided, unless
a revised regulation is officially established under the Federal
Americans With Disabilities Act:
Total No. of Required
Parking Spaces on the Lot
Required Minimum
No./Percent of Handicapped
Parking Spaces
4 to 25 1
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of required number of spaces
1,001 or more 20 plus 1% of required number
of spaces over 1,000
B. Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest reasonable accessible distance to a
handicapped accessible building entrance. Curb cuts shall be
provided as needed to provide access from the handicapped
spaces.
C. Minimum Size. Each required handicapped parking space shall be
a minimum of eight feet by 18 feet. In addition, each space shall be
adjacent to a five feet wide access aisle. Such access aisle may be
shared by two handicapped spaces by being placed between them.
§ 27-603 FOREWORD § 27-603
FWD:809
§ 27-604. Parking and Storage of Junk and Unregistered Vehicles.
[Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 604]
See the applicable Borough Ordinance [Chapter 5, Part 3, § 5-303,
Ordinance 560] concerning parking on private property. See the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., and Borough Ordinance [Chapter 15],
§ 15-404, concerning parking on public streets.
§ 27-605. Off-Street Loading. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 604]
However, one out of every eight required handicapped parking
spaces shall have an adjacent access aisle of eight feet width
instead of five feet.
D. Slope. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located in areas of less
than 6% slope in any direction.
E. Marking. All required handicapped spaces shall be well-marked by
clearly visible signs and/or pavement markings.
9. Parking of Recreation Vehicles in a Residential District. See § 27-403.
1. General Loading Requirements.
A. Each use receiving or shipping material or merchandise by trucks
shall provide off-street loading facilities which meet the
requirements of this section, sufficient to accommodate the
maximum demand generated by the use.
B. At the time of site plan or land development review, the applicant
shall provide evidence to the Planning Commission, who may
advise the Zoning Officer on whether the use will have sufficient
numbers and sizes of loading facilities. For the purposes of this
section, the words "loading" and "unloading" are used
interchangeably.
2. Design and Layout of Loading Facilities. Off-street loading facilities
shall meet the following requirements:
A. Each off-street loading space shall be at least (in feet):
Largest Type of
Truck Intended Minimum Width Minimum Depth
Tractor-trailer 12 (except 11 if
more than 10 such
spaces on a lot)
45 (with 14 feet
clear height)
Trucks other than
tractor-trailers,
pickups or vans
10 25
Pick-up truck or van 9 18
§ 27-603 EMMAUS CODE § 27-605
FWD:810
§ 27-606. Parking in the B-C District. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993; as
added by Ord. 937, 11/5/2001, § 8]
B. Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering room to avoid
conflicts with parking and traffic movements within and outside of
the lot. No facility shall be designed or used in such a manner that
it threatens a safety hazard, public nuisance or a serious
impediment to traffic off the lot.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall be located
entirely on the lot being served and be located outside of required
buffer areas, paved area setbacks and street right-of-ways. An
appropriate means of access to a street shall be provided.
D. Paving, Grading and Drainage. See § 27-603(5).
3. Fire Lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided where required by state or
federal regulations or other local ordinances. The specific locations of
these lanes are subject to review by Borough fire officials.
1. General Provisions.
A. These provisions are specific to the B-C District. Any conflicting
provision in any other part of this Part is superseded by these
provisions.
B. A wall, when used in this section shall mean a structure
constructed of brick, stone or other masonry and/or wrought iron.
2. Off-Street Parking. All off street parking, with the exception of deck
parking, shall be placed to the rear of the building that it is intended to
serve as indicated by the following graphic:
If this is not feasible because of physical limitations of the site, parking
may be placed to the side of the building; provided, that the perimeter
of the parking lot is surrounded by a buffer yard of screening, a fence
or a wall. The buffer yard with screening, fence or wall shall be at
least three feet, but not more than five feet, in height. Such buffer yard
with screening, fence or wall shall be aligned with the building facade.
An opening for pedestrian access shall be provided. In no case shall
parking be placed between a building and the front yard.
3. Parking as a Principal Use. When a parking lot is developed as a
principal use, it shall be surrounded by a buffer yard with screening, a
§ 27-605 FOREWORD § 27-606
FWD:811
fence, or a wall on every side of the lot that abuts a residential lot line
or street right-of-way, subject to all limitations of a clear sight triangle
as defined in this chapter.
4. Parking as an Accessory Use. Parking as an accessory use shall be
required to be located to the rear of the building. A buffer yard with
screening, a fence or wall shall be required when the parking lot abuts
a street. Such buffer yard with screening, fence or wall shall be aligned
with the building facade.
5. Traffic Flow. All parking lots with access from Main or Chestnut Streets
must be one way, egressing to a side street or an alley. Appropriate
signage indicating the flow of traffic must be provided and maintained
by the property owner.
6. Sallie Ports. Access to drive-through facilities, or any parking lots
located to the rear of buildings may be through sallie-ports as
demonstrated by the graphic below.
A proposed sallie port shall be approved by the Fire Chief to insure
that emergency access is not impaired.
7. Deck Parking. Parking decks shall include retail use on their first floor
along all street facades as demonstrated by the graphic below:
First floor facades of parking decks shall be comprised of at least
75% glass display windows. Parking decks shall have visible pedestrian
access.
§ 27-606 EMMAUS CODE § 27-606
FWD:812
Part 7
SIGNS
§ 27-701. Applicability and Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 701; as amended by Ord. 816, 8/7/1995, § 1]
1. Purposes. To recognize that signs perform an important function by
identifying residences and businesses; to exercise the minimum control
of signs that is necessary to promote the health, safety and general
welfare by lessening hazards to pedestrian and vehicular traffic; to
preserve property values by preventing unsightly and detrimental
development which has a blighting influence upon residential, business
and industrial uses; to prevent signs from reaching such excessive size
that they obscure one another to the detriment of all concerned; and to
seek that signs be compatible with the overall character and scale of
the Borough.
2. See definitions of "sign" and "off-premises sign" in Part 2.
3. General. In all permitted districts, tethered balloons used primarily for
advertising purposes and spotlights and signs may be erected, altered,
maintained, used, removed or moved only in compliance with the
provisions of this section and other regulations of the Borough relating
to the erection, alteration, maintenance, use, removal or moving of
signs and similar devices.
4. Sign Permits. All signs (other than real estate and auctioneer signs of
six square feet or less or nonpermanent window signs or permitted
garage sale signs or permitted political signs) shall require the issuance
of a sign permit before erection or replacement unless Borough
Council, by resolution, specifically exempts certain signs in certain
locations from this requirement. All signs must comply with all of the
regulations contained herein, regardless of whether a permit is
required. No permit shall be required for a mere change of copy on a
sign provided the sign is not increased in area or changed in location or
made more nonconforming in any way.
A. Flags. Commercial establishments in all commercial and industrial
districts may display flags (in addition to flags specified in
subsection (2), below) as specified in § 27-704(15) (A), after first
obtaining a sign permit. The fee for such a permit shall be waived
provided such commercial establishment has already obtained a
permit for other signs on the property.
B. Flags of any governmental unit or branch or of any charitable or
religious organization, interior signs not visible from a public rightof-
way or adjoining property and cornerstones built into or
attached to a wall of a building are not regulated by this chapter.
5. Nonconforming Signs and Signs for Business Uses in a Residential
District.
§ 27-701 FOREWORD § 27-701
FWD:813
§ 27-702. Types of Signs. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 702]
A. Signs in any district lawfully existing at the time of passage of this
chapter which do not conform to the requirements of this chapter
shall be considered nonconforming signs and may be continued.
B. If such a lawful on-premises nonconforming signs in a commercial
or industrial district or any off-premises sign is removed, it shall
only be replaced with a conforming sign. If such a lawful onpremises
nonconforming sign in a residential district is removed, it
may be replaced with a new noninternally illuminated sign that is
no more nonconforming in any measurement than the previous
sign.
C. Nonconforming signs may be repainted or repaired (including
lighting) provided such action does not increase the dimensions of
the existing sign. Copy may also be changed.
D. If a lawful principal business use is permitted or exists in a
residential district, the signs for such use shall comply with the
sign provisions of the B-C district.
1. The following definitions shall be used in determining whether signs
meet the measurement and type requirements of this Part:
A. Building Face. The vertical area of a particular side of a building,
but not including the area of any slanted roof.
B. Freestanding Sign. A sign which is self-supporting upon the ground
or which is primarily supported by poles attached to the ground
and not primarily supported by a building.
C. Height of Sign. The vertical distance measured from the average
ground level surrounding a sign to the highest point of the sign and
its supporting structure. Religious symbols, when not accompanied
by lettering, shall not be restricted by the sign heights of this Part
when attached to a tower or spire of a place of worship.
D. Illuminated Sign, Externally. A sign illuminated by light outside of
the sign instead of within the sign.
E. Illuminated Sign, Internally. A sign illuminated by light from within
the sign rather than a source adjacent to or outside of the sign. A
sign within a display case with lights only shining onto the front of
the sign shall be considered to be "externally" illuminated.
F. Off-Premises Sign. See Part 2.
G. Political Sign. A sign that advertises a person or party seeking
political office or a political cause or opinion on a referendum or
matter of political concern and which relates to a scheduled
election or matter of upcoming vote by a governmental body.
§ 27-701 EMMAUS CODE § 27-702
FWD:814
§ 27-703. Sign Area. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 703]
§ 27-704. General Sign Regulations. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 704; as
amended by Ord. 816, 8/7/1995, § 2; and by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
H. Sign. See Part 2.
I. Wall Sign. A sign primarily supported by or painted on a wall of a
building and which does not project more than 18 inches from such
wall.
J. Window Sign. A sign which is readily visible and can be at least
partially read from an exterior lot line and which is attached to a
window or transparent door or that can be read through a window
or transparent door and which is not internally illuminated.
1. The sign area of a sign shall be calculated as follows:
A. The size of any sign shall be computed by multiplying its greatest
height by its greatest length, exclusive of supporting structures,
unless such supporting structure is illuminated or is in the form of a
symbol or contains advertising copy. In the case of signs that have
no definable edges, such as raised letters attached to a building
facade, the sign size shall be that area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or
copy area.
B. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering,
wording and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the
background, whether open or enclosed, on which they are
displayed.
C. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to
or painted on a surface, building, wall or window, the area shall be
considered to be that of the smallest rectangle which encompasses
all of the letters and symbols.
D. In computing square foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side
shall be considered, provided both faces are identical. If the
interior angle formed by the two faces of a double-faced sign is
greater than 45°, then both sides of such sign shall be considered
in calculating the sign area.
E. Unless otherwise specified, all square footages in regards to signs
are maximum sizes.
1. Signs With Zoning Information. No sign shall be erected, containing
information on it which states or implies that a property may be used
for any purpose not permitted under the provisions of this chapter in
the zone in which the property to which the sign relates is located.
§ 27-702 FOREWORD § 27-704
FWD:815
2. Outdated Signs. On-premises signs advertising a use no longer in
existence or a product no longer available shall be removed or changed
to advertise the new use or product within 30 days after cessation of the
original use or offering of the project, except for signs related to
building space that is actively for rent. Signs once removed shall be
replaced only by signs in conformance with this chapter.
3. Hazards. No sign shall be so located or arranged that it interferes with
traffic through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight lines for
streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion with a traffic control
device (by reason of color, location, shape or other characteristic), or
through any other means.
4. Construction. All signs, except temporary signs, shall be constructed of
durable material and kept in good condition and repair. Illuminated
signs shall be subject to the National Electrical Code [Chapter 5].
5. Illumination. Signs may be illuminated by direct lighting but shall have
such lighting shielded so no direct light will shine on abutting
properties or in the normal line of vision of the public using the streets
or sidewalks. No flood or spot lights shall be mounted higher than 25
feet above ground level. See also illumination regulations in the B-C
district.
6. Real Estate Signs. In any district, temporary signs may be permitted
within the lot lines, advertising the prospective or completed sale or
rental of the premises upon which it is located, not exceeding six square
feet in area within any residential or conservation district and not
exceeding 23 square feet in area within business and industrial districts
provided that the sign shall be removed within seven days after
occupancy of a rental unit or settlement of a sale. A maximum of one
such sign shall be permitted per lot, except that if a lot has frontage on
more than one street, then a second such sign shall be permitted.
7. Construction/Proposed Development Signs. In all districts,
nonilluminated temporary signs may be permitted on current, approved
or officially under review construction sites for new buildings or
rehabilitation projects involving a value of more than $100,000
provided such signs do not exceed a total of 32 square feet in total sign
area and provided such signs shall be removed within 14 days after
completion of the construction work and provided not more than one
sign shall be placed on each street frontage of the construction site. See
also § 27-706(A)(6) for other tradesperson's signs.
8. Nonprofit Event Sign. In any district, Borough Council may permit by
simple approved motion nonilluminated temporary signs announcing a
public educational, charitable, civic, religious or similar campaign or
event by a U.S. Internal Revenue Service-recognized nonprofit
organization or a committee or agency sponsored by the Borough,
county or state government for a total period per sign not to exceed 45
days in any calendar year; provided, such signs do not exceed 35 square
§ 27-704 EMMAUS CODE § 27-704
FWD:816
feet in area and are removed within seven days after the conclusion of
the campaign or event.
9. Street Rights-of-Way. No signs except those of a duly constituted
governmental body (including traffic signs and similar regulatory
notices) shall be allowed partially or wholly within the existing street
right-of-way unless specifically authorized by other ordinances and
regulations of the Borough, and in compliance with PennDOT
regulations, or as provided in § 27-707(A)(3) below in the B-C District.
For banners across a state street, see PennDOT regulations.
10. Wall Signs. If an establishment has walls fronting on two or more
streets, the sign area for each street may be computed separately.
11. Roof Signs. No sign except such directional devices as may be required
by the federal and state aviation authorities, shall be extended above or
be inscribed upon the roof or upon any structure which extends above
the roof of any building.
12. Vehicle Signs. Any vehicle to which a sign is affixed in such a manner
that the carrying of such sign or signs no longer is incidental to the
vehicle's primary purpose but becomes a primary purpose in itself shall
be considered a freestanding sign and as such be subject to the
provisions regarding freestanding signs in the district in which such
vehicle is located.
13. Off-Premises Signs. See § 27-708(D).
14. Illumination. No internally illuminated sign shall be located so as to
face any residential or conservation district on the same side of the
street on which the property bearing the sign fronts. This provision
shall not apply to signs at right angles to the street right-of-way line of
such street.
15. Special Event Signs and Displays. Flashing signs, flood lights,
promotional or advertising flags, spotlights, lasers, banners, twirling,
"A" type sandwich signs, sidewalk or curb signs and balloons or devices
shall only be permitted for a new business and an existing business for
special occasions not more than four times a year in a commercial or
industrial district for a period of not more than a total of 15 days in a
calendar year. At no other time shall such device be permitted.
A. Flags. "Open" flags, or flags containing a pictorial representation of
the business or holiday season are permitted in all commercial and
industrial districts, provided such flags are: (1) a maximum of three
feet by five feet, (2) are in good repair, (3) are attached by a pole;
and, (4) are displayed in such a way as not to be an obstruction to
pedestrian traffic nor create a safety hazard. The purpose of such a
flag is to advertise to the public that said commercial establishment
is open for business. The flags shall be displayed only during
operating business hours. A maximum of one such flag shall be
permitted per each commercial establishment.
§ 27-704 FOREWORD § 27-704
FWD:817
16. Setbacks. Freestanding signs shall be setback a minimum of four feet
from the existing street right-of-way line, except for business parking
signs as provided in subsection (21), below. No freestanding sign in
other than a residential or conservation district shall extend within 25
feet of any residential or conservation district boundary line. Signs for
service stations shall not be located within any street right-of-way.
17. Wall Signs. Wall signs shall not extend beyond the edge of the length of
any wall to which they are mounted, and shall not horizontally project
more than 18 inches from such wall or surface.
18. Projecting Signs. No projecting sign shall project more than 3.5 feet
from the wall or surface to which they are mounted, nor in any way shall
they interfere with normal pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
19. Clearance over Sidewalk. All signs projecting more than three inches
from a building shall maintain at least nine feet of vertical clearance
above a sidewalk and shall not project over a street.
20. Miscellaneous Structures. All sign provisions of this chapter shall apply
to smoke stacks, water towers and other similar structures.
21. Parking Signs. In the B-C, B-G, B-L and I-L districts, signs identifying
off-street parking areas associated with a business or other allowable
use in these districts may be permitted, in addition to the other
allowable signs identifying the business or other use; provided, that:
A. The sign is not located within and does not extend into the street
right-of-way.
B. The sign area of each sign does not exceed four square feet.
C. The sign meets all applicable requirements of this Part.
D. The sign contains only the name of the establishment for which the
parking area is provided, plus the word "parking," or "parking in
rear" or "parking" plus an arrow.
22. Political Signs. See definition in § 27-702. Political signs are permitted
in all districts, provided that such signs are not posted on any public
park property, or within the existing right-of-way of public streets:
A. Each sign does not exceed four square feet.
B. Such signs are posted a maximum of 60 days prior to the election or
vote they relate to, and are removed within 14 days after such
election or vote.
C. Provided such signs are not posted: (1) on Borough property, (2)
within the existing right-of-way of public streets; or, (3) on a utility
pole using staples or metal fasteners.
23. Garage Sale Signs. See the Borough Garage Sale Ordinance, as
amended [Chapter 13, Part 2].
§ 27-704 EMMAUS CODE § 27-704
FWD:818
§ 27-705. Signs Prohibited in All Districts. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 705; as amended by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
§ 27-706. Signs Permitted in Residential and Conservation
Districts. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 706]
24. Auctioneer Signs. In any district, temporary signs may be permitted
within the lot lines, advertising the prospective or completed sale or
rental of goods at the premises upon which it is located, not exceeding
six square feet in area within any residential or conservation district
and not exceeding 32 square feet in area within business and industrial
districts, provided that the sign shall be removed within seven days
after the date of sale. A maximum of one such sign shall be permitted
per lot, except that if a lot has frontage of more than one street, than a
second sign shall be permitted.
25. Commercial Advertising Signs. In the B-C, B-H, and B-L Districts, any
on-premise movable sign limited in size to eight square feet, utilized for
promoting or advertising a commercial purpose or use. Only one sign is
allowed per business, and it must be located in front of the business.
There are no restrictions on the hours that the sign can be used. The
business is required to obtain a yearly permit by payment of a fee as
determined by the Borough Council.
1. The following signs are specifically prohibited in all districts, in addition
to any sign that is not specifically permitted in a district:
A. Signs which in any way simulate official, functional, directional or
warning signs erected or maintained by the United States
Government, the state, county, the Borough, or any railroad or
public utility or similar agency concerned with the protection of
public health or safety.
B. Banners, spinners, flags, pennants or any moving object used for
commercial advertising purposes whether containing a message or
not, except as stated in § 27-704(15).
C. Any flashing, electronically changing messages, LED, blinking,
twinkling, animated or electrically moving signs of any type, except
time and temperature signs. This prohibition for LED signs does
not apply to the B-L, B-H, and I-L Districts. This restriction does not
prohibit Christmas lighting displays.
D. Mobile/Portable Signs. On-premises commercial advertising signs
of more than eight square feet in sign area that are not
permanently attached to the ground and that are intended to be
able to be moved from site to site, except as specifically permitted
by this Part.
§ 27-704 FOREWORD § 27-706
FWD:819
1. The following signs shall be permitted in all residential districts and in
the CR District, in addition to signs specifically permitted in all districts
by § 27-704:
A. On-Premises Signs.
(1) Official traffic signs and other official federal, state, county and
Borough governmental signs.
(2) Identification Signs. Signs displaying only the name and
address of the occupant of the premises provided that the area
of any such sign shall not exceed one square foot and not more
than one such sign shall be erected on each premises.
(3) Signs for bulletin or announcement boards for identification of
permitted principal nonresidential buildings (such as places of
worship and schools) provided that the area of any such sign
shall not exceed eight square feet. Not more than two such
signs shall be placed on each lot.
(4) Real Estate Signs. As provided for in § 27-704(6).
(5) No trespassing signs and signs indicating the private nature of
a road, driveway or premises, provided that the area of any
such sign shall not exceed two square feet.
(6) Contractor Sign. One temporary sign per lot erected in
connection with the actual rehabilitation, building addition or
trades person work on the premises by a contractor, painter,
electrician or similar trades person provided that the
aggregate area of such sign shall not exceed 10 square feet.
Such sign shall be removed within 10 days after such work is
completed and shall not be posted prior to the actual initiation
of such work on site after receiving a Borough construction,
plumbing or electrical permit. See § 27-704(7) for construction
signs.
(7) Nonprofit Signs. As specified in § 27-704(8).
(8) Signs for identification of a permitted home occupation
provided that the area of any such sign shall not exceed one
square feet and provided such sign is not illuminated.
(9) Signs for Lawful Business Uses. See § 27-701(5).
(10) Other signs specifically permitted by § 27-704, within the
regulations of that section.
B. Miscellaneous Signs. Signs necessary for direction, regulation and
control of traffic, official street name signs, legal notices, warnings
at railroad crossings and other official signs which are similarly
authorized or erected by a duly constituted governmental body are
permitted.
§ 27-706 EMMAUS CODE § 27-707
FWD:820
§ 27-707. Signs Permitted in the B-C District. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 707; as amended by Ord. 937, 11/5/2001, § 5]
1. The following signs shall be permitted in the B-C district, in addition to
signs permitted in all districts by § 27-704:
A. On-Premises Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in § 27-706(A) at the standards prescribed
therein except as otherwise provided in this section and in
§ 27-704. The number of signs shall be limited to two when
fronting on one street and three when fronting on two streets.
There shall be no more than two signs on any one street.
(2) Wall and projecting signs, as follows:
(a) See § 27-704, subsections (17), (18) and (19).
(b) Wall signs shall not be placed at a height greater than 25
feet.
(c) Except as provided in subsection (e), below, the total area
of all wall signs shall not exceed 40 square feet.
(d) Window signs (other than temporary paper or cardboard
signs) shall be considered wall signs and included in the
maximum sign requirements. Such window signs in any
case shall not exceed 25% of the total window area on
each street.
(e) In the case of a shopping center or two or more stores or
business uses on a lot held in single and separate
ownership, the provisions of this section relating to the
total area of signs permitted on a lot shall apply with
respect to each building or separate principal
establishment. Each individual establishment shall be
permitted one wall sign. However, in such case, the total
building face area permitted to be covered by signs shall
not exceed 15% of the area of the building face.
(f) Only one freestanding business sign shall be permitted in
the B-C district per lot, which shall have a maximum sign
area of 25 square feet on each of two sides and a maximum
height of eight feet. See setbacks in § 27-704(16).
(g) Any new signs shall be of a type which is harmonious with
existing conforming signs.
(3) Projecting Signs. In addition to all other signs and total sign
area permitted in the B-C district, one projecting sign may be
permitted in the B-C district and may extend into the public
right-of-way if such sign meets all of the following
requirements:
§ 27-707 FOREWORD § 27-707
FWD:821
§ 27-708. Signs Permitted in the B-H District. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 708]
(a) Extends a maximum of 3.5 feet into such right-of-way.
(b) Has a maximum sign area of six square feet per side on up
to two sides.
(c) Is constructed completely of wood (other than plywood)
except for a metal support structure and fasteners.
(d) Is not internally illuminated.
(e) Meets the BOCA Code structural and safety requirements.
(f) Meets the clearance requirements of § 27-704(19). Such
sign preferably should have a relief finish.
(g) Up to 10 square feet if the sign does not encroach into the
public right-of-way.
(4) Illumination. No sign erected after the adoption of this chapter
in the B-C district shall be internally illuminated. The use of
neon shall be prohibited, except on properties licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(5) Parking Lot Signs. See § 27-704(21).
B. Off-Premises Signs. No off-premises signs shall be permitted in the
B-C district except those off-premises signs allowed in § 27-706(B).
1. The following signs shall be permitted in the B-H district, in addition to
signs permitted in all districts by § 27-704:
A. On-Premises Wall Signs and Miscellaneous Signs.
(1) Miscellaneous Signs. All signs permitted in § 27-706(A) shall
also be permitted in the B-H or B-L district at the standards
prescribed therein, except as otherwise provided in this
section and in § 27-704.
(2) Wall Signs.
(a) Wall signs may be placed on a maximum of two sides of a
building.
(b) Wall signs shall not be higher than the height of the
building to which the signs are attached (not including
nonstructural extensions of a building).
(c) The maximum sign area of all wall signs on each side of a
building shall not exceed 15% of the total vertical area of
that side of the building (including windows and doors).
§ 27-707 EMMAUS CODE § 27-708
FWD:822
(3) Window Signs. Signs placed within windows and doors of a
building shall not be restricted by the maximum size of wall
signs if the window signs are clearly not permanent in nature
and materials and are not illuminated.
B. Freestanding Signs. (Freestanding sign shall also include a group
of signs on the same single supporting structure, providing that the
total permitted sign area is not exceeded.)
(1) Number of Signs. A lot may include one freestanding sign
structure if the lot has less than 150 feet of total street
frontage, and two such structures if the lot has 150 feet or
more of street frontage.
(2) No portion of any such sign shall have a maximum height of
greater than 25 feet. See also clearance provisions in
§ 27-704(19).
(3) The area of all permitted freestanding signs on a lot (except as
provided in § 27-708(B)(4) and (5), below) shall not exceed 50
square feet of sign area or one square foot of sign area for each
two feet of total street frontage of the lot, whichever is more
restrictive.
(4) No freestanding sign shall be within 15 feet of an abutting side
or rear lot line of a dwelling in a residential district, except
signs that:
(a) Have a maximum sign area of eight square feet on each of
two sides.
(b) Convey information such as parking, entrances and traffic
flow directions.
(c) Which may include the name of the business located on the
premises.
(5) Signs for Multiple Uses. If a lot in single and separate
ownership includes four or more distinct principal business
establishments or includes the sale of motor vehicles that were
not previously owned and were manufactured by three or more
distinct corporations, then:
(a) The total maximum area of freestanding signs on the lot on
each of two sides of the sign(s) shall be 100 square feet,
and a maximum of three freestanding signs may be
permitted on the lot. This sign(s) which may include
individual coordinated attached signs identifying different
establishments, provided that the signs have a coordinated
backing. No sign may extend in any direction beyond the
outside edge of the backing.
§ 27-708 FOREWORD § 27-708
FWD:823
§ 27-709. Signs Permitted in the B-L District. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 709]
All signs permitted in B-H district are also permitted in B-L district, except
billboards/off-premises signs shall be prohibited in the B-L district.
§ 27-710. Signs Permitted in the I-L District. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993,
§ 710]
(b) In addition to all other sign area, such a lot may include an
additional sign area of 20 square feet on each of two sides
to post changeable sign copy on a permanent, nonmobile
freestanding sign. Such additional sign is intended to
replace the demand for a portable sign.
(6) Parking Identification Signs. See § 27-704(21).
C. Signs necessary for direction, regulation and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings and
other official signs which are similarly authorized or erected by a
duly constituted governmental body, and signs provided in
accordance with § 27-704(21) are specifically permitted.
D. Off-Premises Signs (Billboards). Only the following off-premises
advertising signs are permitted, except for other signs specifically
permitted by § 27-704.
(1) Size and Location. Off-premises signs (billboards) shall:
(a) Be restricted to one side, one sign area and one sign per
structure.
(b) Be restricted to one such sign per lot.
(c) Not exceed 300 square feet of sign area per structure.
(2) Setbacks and Spacing. Off-premises signs (billboards) shall be:
(a) Setback a minimum of 30 feet from the street right-of-way.
(b) Setback a minimum of 30 feet from any lot line, except as
provided in subsection (e), below.
(c) Spaced no closer than 500 feet from another billboard.
(d) Have a maximum height greater 50 feet.
(e) Shall be located a minimum of 100 feet from a residential
district and from any residential lot line, unless the
advertisement surface and the illumination of such sign is
not visible therefrom.
(3) Off-premises signs under this section shall require special
exception approval, and be restricted to the B-H district.
§ 27-708 EMMAUS CODE § 27-710
FWD:824
§ 27-711. Sign Area Bonuses. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 711]
1. The following signs are permitted in the I-L district, in addition to all
signs permitted in all districts by § 27-704:
A. On-Premises Signs.
(1) All signs permitted in a B-L district at the standards prescribed
therein except as otherwise provided in this section and in
§ 27-704.
(2) Signs for permitted uses provided:
(a) All parallel and projecting signs shall not exceed two
square feet for each foot of length of the front building
wall or length of that portion of such wall which is devoted
to such establishment, or 300 square feet, whichever is
smaller. Said signs are permitted on a side or rear wall
only if such wall abuts a street, driveway or parking area.
No sign shall be closer than 100 feet to a residential
district.
(b) The total area of freestanding signs on each of two sides
shall not exceed one square foot of sign area for each two
feet of lot frontage, or 50 square feet per permitted sign,
whichever is more restrictive. Not more than one such
sign shall be placed on a property unless it fronts on more
than one street, in which case one such sign may be
erected on each street frontage.
(c) No sign shall project higher than the roof line. No sign
shall be located between the rear or side wall of a principal
business building and the lot line of an abutting residential
district.
(d) Parking Identification Signs. See § 27-704(21).
B. Signs necessary for direction, regulation and control of traffic,
street name signs, legal notices, warnings at railroad crossings and
other official signs which are similarly authorized or erected by a
duly constituted governmental body, and signs provided in
accordance with § 27-704(21) are specifically permitted.
1. Intent. To encourage designs of signs that will be highly compatible
with nearby residences and other attractive natural features and areas.
2. Applicability. These bonuses may apply to any freestanding on-premises
sign in a commercial or industrial district or for a lawful principal
nonresidential use in a residential district.
3. Wood. The maximum sign area(s) permitted by this Part (other than
signs permitted by § 27-707(A)(3) entitled "Projecting Signs") may be
increased by 20% if:
§ 27-710 FOREWORD § 27-711
FWD:825
A. The sign is constructed completely of natural relief-finish wood (not
including plywood; a sign may include needed non-wood fasteners);
and,
B. All freestanding signs on the lot have a maximum height of 10 feet.
§ 27-711 EMMAUS CODE § 27-711
FWD:826
Part 8
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 27-801. Frontage Onto Improved Streets; Number of Uses or
Buildings; Minimum Size of Dwellings. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 801]
1. Frontage Required onto Improved Street.
A. A principal building shall only be built upon a lot with frontage on a
public street improved to meet Borough standards or for which
such improvements have been insured by the posting of a
performance guarantee pursuant to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], except in either of the
following cases:
(1) A single lot that existed as a lawful recorded lot of record prior
to the adoption of this chapter and that is not proposed to be
subdivided and that is to be used for a single-family detached
dwelling shall be permitted to have access onto a public street
by means of a paved public alley with a minimum cartway
width from the subject lot to a public street of 10 feet if all of
the following apply:
(a) Such alley provides legally-permanent access to the
property.
(b) The Zoning Officer determines there are no other feasible
methods of providing access to the property.
(c) Such alley already exists in a satisfactory condition or
would be improved as necessary by the applicant.
(d) A sufficient turning radius is provided for the average size
modern fire pumper truck to turn into the alley and to turn
into the applicant's driveway.
(e) If the integration of nonconforming lots provision of
§ 27-806 does not apply.
(2) A townhouse or condominium apartment development may
have access to individual dwellings using a parking court and a
shared accessway/private street within the tract; provided,
that such shared access/private street guarantees adequate
permanent access (with a method for funding perpetual
maintenance approved by the Borough Council under the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22])
from such dwellings to a public street).
B. Any new lot that is granted subdivision approval shall have
frontage onto a public street, except as permitted in subsection (A),
above, the individual lots within a townhouse or condominium
apartment development are not required to have their own
§ 27-801 FOREWORD § 27-801
FWD:827
§ 27-802. Height Exceptions; Airport Approaches. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 802]
§ 27-803. Special Lot and Yard Requirements; Sight Distance;
Buffer Yards. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 803; as amended by Ord. 1009,
12/4/2006]
frontage onto a public street if the overall tract has frontage onto a
public street.
2. Multiple Uses in a Building. Occupancy of a principal commercial or
industrial building by more than one permitted use is specifically
allowed, provided that all other requirements of this chapter are
satisfied.
3. Multiple Buildings on a Lot. An approved commercial, institutional,
industrial, townhouse or apartment lot may include more than one
principal building. In such case, the minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements shall only apply at lot lines of the property. Individual
buildings or portions of such buildings may be held in approved
condominium ownership, but the lot shall be owned by a single legal
entity. In cases not meeting this subsection only one principal building
shall be permitted per lot.
4. Minimum Size of Dwellings. Each dwelling unit shall include the
following minimum habitable indoor heated floor area:
A. Five hundred square feet for apartment dwelling units; and,
B. Seven hundred square feet for any other dwelling units.
1. Height Exceptions. The maximum structure height specified for each
district shall not apply to: farm silos and associated agricultural
structures, commercial communications antennas, amateur radio
antenna (see § 27-403), water towers, clock or bell towers, steeples or
spires of places of worship, electrical transmission lines, elevator
shafts, ventilators, skylights, windmills, chimneys or other
appurtenances usually required to be and customarily placed above the
roof level and not intended for human occupancy.
2. Height and Airport Approaches. At a minimum, any structure proposed
to have a height of 75 feet or more above average surrounding ground
level shall present sufficient information to the Zoning Officer to prove
that the structure would comply with all applicable federal, state and
Borough requirements regarding airport approaches and warning
lights. See § 27-809 regarding airport approaches.
1. In General.
A. No lot, structure or use shall be created or developed in such a way
that it would result in another lot, building or use not being able to
meet the requirements of this chapter. This includes, but is not
§ 27-801 EMMAUS CODE § 27-803
FWD:828
limited to, setback areas, nonimpervious areas and off-street
parking areas.
B. Emergency Access. All uses and structures shall have adequate
provisions for access by emergency vehicles. The Zoning Officer,
Borough Council or Planning Commission may request advice from
the Borough emergency services staff on whether this requirement
is met.
C. Accuracy. The applicant is responsible to make sure that all
measurements, certifications, reports and statements submitted to
the Borough are accurate.
2. Exceptions to Minimum Lot Areas, Lot Widths and Yards.
A. Nonconforming Lots. See § 27-806.
B. Through Lots. Any lot having frontage on two approximately
parallel streets (not including an alley) shall provide a required
front yard setback abutting each of these streets.
C. Corner Lot Setback. A corner lot (as defined in Part 2 under "Lot,
Corner"):
(1) Is not required to have a rear setback yard, but may instead
have two side yards on the sides that are not abutting the
streets.
(2) Shall have one yard meeting the required front yard setback
abutting one street, and a 15 feet minimum principal building
setback yard abutting the second street, except that such 15
feet setback is not required in the B-C district.
D. Triangular Lots. If a three-sided lot does not have a rear lot line,
then the required rear yard shall measured from the corner that is
furthest away from the front lot line. In such case, the lot shall have
two side lot lines.
E. Projections Into Required Yards. The following features may
project into required yards:
(1) Emergency fire escapes and exits added on to a building that
existed prior to the adoption of this chapter; provided, that
such does not intrude into a required front yard, intrudes a
maximum of eight feet into a required side or rear yard, and
does not project into an abutting lot.
(2) Routinely projecting architectural features such as bay
windows, cornices, eaves, fireplaces, flues, gutters, chimneys,
fire escapes or window sills which do not project more than
three feet into any required yard.
§ 27-803 FOREWORD § 27-803
FWD:829
(3) Stairs and landings that are not covered by structural roofs,
provided such stairs or landings do not exceed four feet in
height.
(4) Open balconies that project a maximum of five feet into any
required yard.
(5) Patios and decks that:
(a) Are not covered by a structural roof.
(b) Are not enclosed and do not have walls of mostly solid
material, glass or plexiglass.
(c) Are not closer than five feet to any side or rear lot line,
(except zero feet at a shared lot line of attached
dwellings).
(d) Are not raised an average of more than four feet above the
surrounding average ground level.
(6) Patios and decks that do not comply with subsection (5), above,
and that:
(a) May or may not be covered by a structural roof.
(b) Are not enclosed and do not have walls of mostly solid
material, glass or plexiglass.
(c) Are not closer than five feet to any side lot line or 15 feet to
any rear lot line, (except zero feet at a shared lot line of
attached dwellings).
(7) Wheelchair Access Ramps. See § 27-306(5), "Essential
Services."
F. Previously Approved Setbacks. Where a subdivision or land
development was granted final approval prior to the adoption of
this chapter, and the lawful setbacks in effect at such time are
shown on the approved plans, at the option of the developer, those
approved setbacks may apply in place of any revised setbacks in
this chapter.
G. Front Yard Exceptions. When an unimproved residential lot is
situated between two or more lots with principal buildings with
principal building front yard setbacks with less depth than required
in that district, the minimum front yard shall be reduced to the
depth of such abutting improved lot that has the largest depth.
H. Parking Lot Setbacks. See Part 6.
I. Depth of Irregular Lots. On irregularly-shaped lots where the rear
lot line is not parallel to the front lot line, the minimum depth may
be based upon average dimensions.
§ 27-803 EMMAUS CODE § 27-803
FWD:830
J. De Minimis. In cases where an inadvertent error has been made in
design or construction, the Zoning Officer may permit a variation of
up to 3% in one requirement of this chapter.
K. Culs-de-Sac. The minimum lot width may be reduced to 60% of
what would otherwise be required for lots abutting a cul-de-sac
street; provided, that the minimum width along the curbline is not
less than 30 feet for a dwelling unit other than a townhouse.
3. Sight Distance at Intersections.
A. Purpose. To ensure that traffic passing through an intersection or
turning onto a street can safely see oncoming traffic.
B. A clear sight triangle shall be provided and maintained at all street
and/or alley intersections. Such clear sight distance shall be
maintained between two feet and 10 feet above curb level. Such
triangle shall be 15 feet along the right-of-way lines of the streets
or alleys, measured from the intersection of such rights-of-way,
with the third longer leg of the triangle connecting the two ends,
unless a larger triangle is required under the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22]. If the intersection is
rounded, the triangle shall be measured from the extended ends of
the rights-of-way.
C. Within such clear sight triangle, no grading shall occur or
structures (such as buildings, fences or walls) be placed or
expanded or vegetation be permitted that would obstruct the vision
of motorists of pedestrians and other traffic. The only obstructions
permitted within such triangle shall be transparent fences,
vegetation regularly maintained at less than two feet height,
mailboxes, sign or utility posts less than one foot in width and the
trunks of deciduous trees.
D. This sight distance triangle shall be shown on development plans
submitted to the Borough and be shown on any plan required to be
recorded. Such triangle shall serve as a permanent setback line for
all such visual obstructions and shall be binding upon present and
future owners of the land.
E. If a driveway or accessway enters onto a street, a required sight
triangle as stated above shall be maintained, except the length of
the triangle shall be eight feet long measured at the center line of
the driveway or accessway and at the street right-of-way line.
4. Buffer Yards. Buffer yards and screening complying with the following
standards shall be required under the following situations:
A. When Required. Buffer yards of primarily evergreen screening
shall be required whenever any new or expanded uses principal
commercial use, principal industrial use, industrial outdoor storage
area or development of 10 or more apartment dwelling units has a
§ 27-803 FOREWORD § 27-803
FWD:831
side or rear yard that abuts a residential lot line as defined by Part
2.
B. Width and Plants. Any required buffer yard shall have a minimum
width of eight feet and include plant screening as stated in the
buffer yard section (§ 22-519) of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22]. Plants shall be chosen and
placed so as to reasonably be expected to form a solid year-round
visual screen with a minimum height of six feet within three years
of planting.
C. Location of Buffer Yards.
(1) The buffer yard shall be measured from the district boundary
line, future street right-of-way line or lot line, whichever is
applicable.
(2) Plants needed for the visual screen shall not be placed within a
future street right-of-way. The required buffer yard width shall
be in addition to the required future street right-of-way.
(3) The buffer yard may be within a required front, side or rear
yard, or a paved area setback area provided the larger width
requirement shall apply in case of overlap.
D. Characteristics of Buffer Yards.
(1) The buffer yard shall be a landscaped area free of structures,
dumpsters, commercial or industrial storage or display,
manufacturing or processing activity, materials, loading and
unloading areas or vehicle parking or display. No new
driveways or streets shall be permitted in the buffer yards
except at points of approved necessary perpendicular
crossings for ingress or egress.
(2) Maintenance. In buffer yards, all areas not covered by trees
and shrubs shall be well-maintained in an all-season vegetative
ground cover (such as grass) and shall be kept free of debris
and rubbish and shall not include grass areas higher than six
inches.
(3) Fence. Any fence in a buffer yard shall be placed on the inside
of any required evergreen screening.
(4) Modifications. In situations where it would be impractical to
develop a screen that would meet all Borough requirements or
where an undue hardship would be created to an applicant, the
Zoning Hearing Board may agree to modify these requirements
to allow an acceptable alternative. Such alternative may, for
example, involve the development of a solid wooden fence that
has been treated to be weather-resistant. Such modification
shall only occur after a review by the Planning Commission.
§ 27-803 EMMAUS CODE § 27-803
FWD:832
§ 27-804. Landscaping. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 804; as amended by
Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006]
E. Buffer Yard Plans.
(1) Prior to the issuance of a permit under this chapter where a
buffer yard would be required, and on any required subdivision
or land development plan, the applicant shall submit plans
showing:
(a) The location and arrangement of each buffer yard.
(b) The placement, general selection of species and initial size
of all plant materials.
(c) The placement, size, materials and type of all fences to be
placed in such buffer yard.
(2) The Zoning Officer shall review such plans to determine that
the plans are in conformance with the terms of this chapter.
F. Occupancy Permit. A zoning occupancy permit for a use on the
premises shall not be issued until such time as the buffer yards and
other landscaping requirements established by Borough
ordinances are either:
(1) Actually installed in full compliance with such ordinance; or,
(2) If such season is not appropriate for planting, a performance
guarantee of 100% of the cost of such landscaping, with such
estimate approved by the Borough Manager, has been
deposited with the Borough Secretary. Such guarantee shall be
in an acceptable form to the Borough. Such guarantee shall
provide that the depositor agrees that if performance is not
completed within six months of any permit issued on or before
August 31 of any year or within nine months of any permit
issued on or after September 1 of any year, the Borough may
complete the landscaping and buffer requirements and charge
the cost against the deposit. Otherwise, the deposit shall be
returned in full with any interest earned after the satisfactory
completion of the work.
1. Ground cover. Any part of a commercial, industrial, institutional or
garden apartment lot which is not used for structures, loading areas,
parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and designated storage areas shall
be provided with an all-season, well-maintained vegetative ground
cover, and shall be landscaped with trees and shrubs.
2. See also the following landscaping requirements:
A. Section 22-514, "Landscaping General Requirements," § 22-515,
"Detention Basin Plantings," § 22-516, "Parking Facilities,
Landscaping," § 22-517, "Multiple Family Development,
§ 27-803 FOREWORD § 27-804
FWD:833
§ 27-805. Ultimate/Future Street Right-of-Way Widths. [Ord. 776, 6/
21/1993, § 805]
See the Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance (§ 22-504 or
its successor section) [Chapter 22].
§ 27-806. Nonconformities. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 806; as
amended by Ord. 940, 1/7/2002, § 3; by Ord. 1009, 12/4/2006; and
by Ord. 1073, 10/4/2010]
Landscaping" and § 22-518, "Street Trees," or their successor
sections, of the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Chapter 22].
(1) Such provisions shall apply to any additional 4,000 or more
square feet of impervious coverage or any development of a
new principal non-residential building, regardless of whether
such use would be a "subdivision" or "land development."
B. The buffer yard requirements in § 27-803(4) of this chapter.
C. The Borough Shade Tree Ordinance [Chapter 25], which primarily
regulates the type, placement and maintenance of trees along
public streets.
1. Registration of Nonconformities. It shall be the responsibility of a party
asserting a nonconformity to provide the evidence that it is lawful. A
property owner may request a written statement of nonconformity from
the Zoning Officer after providing sufficient evidence.
2. Continuation of Nonconformity. A lawful nonconforming use, structure
or lot as defined by this chapter may be continued and may be sold and
continued by new owners. Any expansion of, construction upon or
change in use of a nonconformity shall only occur in conformance with
this section.
3. Expansion of, Construction Upon or Change in Use of Nonconformities.
A. Nonconforming Structure.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall permit a nonconforming structure to
be reconstructed or expanded as follows:
(a) When a lawful structure exists on the effective date of this
chapter, or subsequent amendments thereto, that could
not be built under the terms of this chapter by reason of
restrictions on area, lot coverage, height or yards, it may
be continued as long as it remains otherwise lawful,
subject to the following provisions:
1) In any residential district where a structure is
nonconforming because it does not fulfill the yard
requirements of the district in which it is located, it
§ 27-804 EMMAUS CODE § 27-806
FWD:834
may be enlarged, provided that the addition is
extended along the existing building line. Such
extensions shall not be permitted to encroach any
further into the yards than as currently
nonconforming, nor cause a nonconformity.
2) In no case shall any addition be larger than 25% of the
gross floor area of the existing building.
3) A nonconforming structure, which is damaged by fire,
explosion or act of God, may be rebuilt and used for
the same purposes, provided that the reconstruction
of the building is commenced within one year from the
date of the destruction of the building, and is carried
out to completion without undue delay. In no case shall
the reconstructed structure be larger than the one
existing at the time of destruction.
(2) In the case of a nonconforming structure that is occupied as a
nonconforming use, any expansion shall also meet the
requirements of this section regarding nonconforming uses.
B. Nonconforming Lot.
(1) New permitted structures for a single permitted by right
principal use and its customary accessory uses may be
constructed, reconstructed or expanded on a nonconforming
lot of record as a permitted by right use if all of the following
requirements are met:
(a) The lot area is at least 40% of the minimum lot area.
(b) The lot width is at least 40% of the minimum lot width.
(c) The lot is a lot of record that lawfully existed prior to the
adoption of this chapter or an applicable subsequent
amendment.
(d) Minimum setbacks and other requirements of this chapter
are complied with for any new construction or expanded
area.
(e) For a dwelling on a nonconforming lot, the front door shall
face a public street, and the dwelling shall have a side
facing onto a public street that has an appearance typical
of a front of a dwelling.
(2) Setbacks. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a special
exception to reduce the required setbacks for construction on
a nonconforming lot if the Board determines that such
reduction would result in a building that would be more
compatible with neighboring buildings than would be built if
the setback requirement was not reduced.
§ 27-806 FOREWORD § 27-806
FWD:835
(3) Integration/Merger. Contiguous nonconforming lots under
common ownership shall be integrated/merged to form lots
that would be conforming or less nonconforming.
(4) Variances. If a proposed development on a nonconforming lot
does not meet the requirements of the above § 27-806(3)(B),
subsections (1) and (2), then development of the lot shall not
occur unless a variance is granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board. In addition to the standards stated for a variance in the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et
seq., the Zoning Hearing Board shall also review whether any
alternative permitted uses could reasonably be made of the
property that would less significantly adverse impacts upon the
established character of an existing residential neighborhood
than the proposed use.
C. Expansion of a Nonconforming Nonresidential Use. A
nonconforming use or a building used by a nonconforming use shall
not be expanded, except in accordance with the following
provisions:
(1) An expansion of more than 5% in total building floor area shall
require special exception approval from the Zoning Hearing
Board under § 27-119.
(2) Such reconstruction or expansion shall be only upon the same
lot that the nonconforming use was located upon at the time
the use became nonconforming.
(3) The nonconforming use shall not be expanded by more than
25% beyond the total building floor area used by a
nonconforming use or the total area covered by impervious
surfaces of a nonconforming use, whichever is more
restrictive. Such measurement shall be based upon the floor
area and impervious surface area that existed at the time such
use became nonconforming.
(a) These maximum increases shall be measured in aggregate
over the entire life of the nonconformity.
(b) If the Zoning Hearing Board determines that such
measurements are not applicable to a particular use, then
the Zoning Hearing Board may establish a reasonable
measure to base the 25% expansion upon.
(4) Any expansion of a nonconforming use shall meet the required
setbacks and other requirements of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board grants a variance.
(5) The Zoning Hearing Board may require a nonconforming use
that is expanding to provide: (i) a buffer yard with a planting
screen meeting the requirements of § 27-803; and/or, (ii) an
§ 27-806 EMMAUS CODE § 27-806
FWD:836
attractive weather-resistant solid wood fence of six feet
minimum height.
D. Expansion of a Nonconforming Residential Use. An existing
nonconforming residential use may be expanded in floor area as a
permitted by right use provided that:
(1) The number of dwelling units or rental units, as applicable, is
not increased.
(2) The expansion meets all applicable setbacks.
(3) No new types of nonconformities are created.
(4) A nonconformity is not made more severe (including the
building area within the required setback area).
4. Damaged or Destroyed Nonconformities.
A. A nonconforming structure that has been destroyed or damaged
equal to 50% or more of its total value by fire, windstorm, lightning
or a similar cause deemed not to be the fault of the owner may
rebuild in a nonconforming fashion only if:
(1) The application for a building permit is submitted within 18
months after the date of damage or destruction.
(2) Work begins in earnest within 12 months afterwards.
(3) A nonconformity shall not be created or increased by any
reconstruction.
B. Rebuilding of a damaged or destroyed nonconformity shall not
begin until plans for rebuilding have been presented and approved
by the Zoning Officer. Any change of one nonconforming use to
another nonconforming use shall comply with the provisions of this
section.
C. Nonconforming Use of Open Land. All nonconforming off-premises
signs, junkyards, outside storage areas and similar nonconforming
uses of open land, when damaged to an extent of 50% or more of
replacement cost, shall not be continued, repaired or
reconstructed.
5. Abandonment of a Nonconformity.
A. If a non-conforming use of building or land is sufficiently shown to
be discontinued, razed, removed or abandoned, subsequent use of
such building or land shall conform with the regulations of the
district in which it is located, except as provided for in the
"damaged or destroyed non-conformity" provisions of this section.
§ 27-806 FOREWORD § 27-806
FWD:837
B. The party asserting abandonment of a building or land shall be
responsible to provide sufficient evidence to establish an intent to
abandon the use, and that such use was abandoned.
6. Floodplain. See the floodplain area regulations in Part 5.
7. Changes from One Nonconforming use to Another.
A. Once changed to a conforming use, a structure or land or portion
thereof shall not revert to a nonconforming use.
B. A nonconforming use may be changed to a different type of
nonconforming use only if permitted as a special exception by the
Zoning Hearing Board. The Board shall determine whether the
applicant has provided sufficient proof to show that the proposed
new use will be equally or less objectionable in external effects
compared to the preexisting nonconforming use. The Board should
review the following types of effects:
(1) Traffic generation (especially truck traffic).
(2) Noise, dust, fumes, gases, odor, glare, vibration, fire and
explosive hazards.
(3) Amount and character of outdoor storage.
(4) Hours of operation if the use would be close to dwellings.
(5) Compatibility with the character of the surrounding area.
C. District Changes. Any uses, structures or lots that become
nonconforming because of a zoning district change shall be
regulated under this section on nonconformities.
8. Subdivision of Lots with Existing Buildings. Notwithstanding limitations
imposed by other provisions of this chapter, a lot which had one or more
principal building existing prior to September 8, 1987, may be divided
into more than one nonconforming lot provided such division is for
purposes of conveyance into separate ownership and provided the
following conditions are met:
A. Each lot shall include a maximum of one principal building.
B. Each lot shall have vehicle access onto a public street.
C. Each lot shall be served by both public water and public sewage
service.
D. The boundaries of all lots shall be designed in such a manner to
maximize lot area, lot width, lot depth and yard areas and to result
in a functional configuration that minimizes nonconformities.
E. Variances of lot area, width, depth and yard areas shall require
action by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 27-806 EMMAUS CODE § 27-806
FWD:838
§ 27-807. Temporary Structure or Use. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 807;
as amended by Ord. 1080, 9/19/2011]
F. The Zoning Hearing Board shall not make a decision on a variance
under this section until a minimum of 40 days after an application
is filed, unless comments have already been received from the
Planning Commission.
1. Construction Vehicle Parking and Temporary Offices. See "essential
services," a permitted by right accessory use, in § 27-306.
2. Tents. The following are permitted by right accessory uses: tents
erected for a use during a maximum of five days in any calendar year
for: (A) routine and customary accessory noncommercial uses (such as
weddings in a rear yard) and for (B) a routine and customary accessory
use to an existing commercial use.
3. Christmas Tree Sales. A lot in a commercial or industrial district may be
used for the retail sale of Christmas Trees between November 20 and
December 30, provided such use does not create a public safety hazard.
4. Accessory Outdoor Retail Sales. Other than is permitted by the above
subsection (3), a commercial lot may be used for additional outdoor
commercial retail sales only if:
A. The operator is granted any business permits required by the
Borough;
B. No required off-street parking spaces are obstructed; and,
C. Signs visible from a public street comply with this chapter.
5. Temporary Uses by Special Exception. For temporary structures or uses
that are not specifically permitted by right by this chapter, and other
than those uses that were lawfully occurring on a periodic basis prior to
the adoption of this chapter, a temporary permit may be issued by the
Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception for structures or uses
subject to the following additional provisions:
A. Duration. The Zoning Hearing Board shall establish a limit on the
duration of the use. In the case of a special event, except under
special circumstances, this should be a maximum of six days in any
sixty-day period. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a single
approval once for numerous occurrences of an event.
B. Statement from Owner. The applicant shall present a statement
from the owner of record of the land accepting responsibility to
ensure that the use or structure is removed once the permit
expires.
C. Removal. Such structure or use shall be removed completely upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Borough. If the
structure or use is not removed in a timely fashion after proper
§ 27-806 FOREWORD § 27-807
FWD:839
notification, the Borough may remove the use or structure at the
cost of the person who owns the land upon which the structure or
use is located.
D. Conditions. The temporary use or structure shall: (1) be compatible
with adjacent uses; and, (2) clearly be of a temporary nature.
E. Fee. Either the Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council may
waive and/or return the required application fee if the applicant is a
Internal Revenue Service recognized and well-established
nonprofit organization, and the applicant clearly shows that the
proposed use is temporary and will be used to clearly primarily
serve a charitable or public service purpose.
F. Nonprofit. Only a well-established and Internal Revenue Service
recognized nonprofit organization proposing a temporary use to
clearly primarily serve a charitable or public service purpose shall
be eligible to receive approval for a temporary commercial use in a
district where that use is not permitted.
G. Special Events. For a special event that will attract significant
numbers of the public, the Zoning Hearing Board may deny the use
if it determines that the following will not be generally appropriate:
sanitary and water service, traffic control, off-street parking and
protection of the public health and safety.
H. Annual Special Events. If the Zoning Hearing Board grants a
special exception for a temporary use for an annual special event,
then the Board's grant of such temporary use upon an initial
application submitted by a non-profit organization applying to
conduct an event, shall authorize the Zoning Officer to grant a
permit for such temporary use in subsequent years, provided that
the application for a permit in subsequent years demonstrates to
the Zoning Officer's satisfaction that the event is the same, or
substantially the same, as in the year in which the Zoning Hearing
Board granted the temporary use, and that the applicant has
satisfied all of the conditions imposed by the Board for such use. If
the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed temporary use is
materially different from the event for which the Board granted
approval, or if the Zoning Officer determines that the proposed
event does not meet all of the conditions imposed by the Zoning
Hearing Board, then the Zoning Officer shall deny the application.
In the event of such denial, the applicant may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. An applicant may only
apply for a permit under this paragraph if it is conducting an
annual event. This paragraph shall not apply if the event was not
held and a permit issued by the Zoning Hearing Board or the
Zoning Officer in the immediately preceding year.
§ 27-807 EMMAUS CODE § 27-808
FWD:840
§ 27-808. Recreation Land, Open Space and Fees Requirements.
[Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 808]
See the requirements of the Borough Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Chapter 22].
§ 27-809. Airport Area Regulations. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 809]
1. All uses, structures and activities, unless otherwise indicated, shall
comply with the regulations and standards of this section.
A. Airport Approach Definitions. For the purpose of this section, the
following words, terms and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless expressly stated otherwise:
(1) Airport. The Queen City Municipal Airport, Lehigh County,
Pennsylvania.
(2) Airport Elevation. The established airport elevation for the
airport: 399 feet above mean sea level.
(3) Conical Zone. The area that commences at the periphery of the
horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
(4) Horizontal Zone. The area within lines drawn tangent to
adjacent arcs established by swinging arcs of 5,000 feet for all
runways designated by the airport as utility or visual and arcs
of 10,000 feet for all other runways from the center of each end
of the primary surface of each runway of the airport.
(5) Primary Surface. A surface centered longitudinally on a
runway. If such runway has a specially prepared hard surface,
the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of such
runway.
(6) Tree. Any object of natural growth.
B. Elevation Limitations. Regardless of any other provisions of this
chapter and except as otherwise provided in this section, no
structure shall be erected, altered or maintained, and no tree shall
be allowed to grow in any of the following zones to an elevation in
excess of the elevation limit established for each such zone as
follows:
(1) Conical Zone. One hundred feet above the airport elevation at
the periphery of the horizontal zone and increasing at a
uniform slope of one foot upward for each 20 feet outward
from the horizontal zone to a height of 350 feet above the
airport elevation.
(2) Horizontal Zone. One hundred feet above the airport elevation.
§ 27-808 FOREWORD § 27-809
FWD:841
C. Airport Approach Use Restrictions. Regardless of any other
provisions of this chapter, no use of land or water in the conical
zone or horizontal zone shall:
(1) Create electrical interference with the navigational signals or
radio communication between the airport and aircraft.
(2) Make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and other lights.
(3) Result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport.
(4) Impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport.
(5) Create bird strike hazards.
(6) In any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
D. Airport Approach Nonconformities and Natural Growth.
(1) Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by
this section shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering or other change or alteration of any use, structure or
tree not conforming to such regulations which nonconformity
existed prior to the effective date of this section.
(2) Marking and Lighting. Regardless of subsection (D)(1), above,
the owner of any such nonconforming use, structure or tree is
hereby required to install, operate and maintain (at the
owner's expense) thereon such markers or lights as shall be
necessary to indicate the presence of such nonconformity to
the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport.
(3) Enlargement or Expansion. Regardless of any other provisions
of this chapter, no such nonconforming use, structure or tree
may be enlarged or expanded in any way which increases the
nonconformity with the regulations of this section.
(4) Abandonment, Removal, Condemnation or Destruction.
Regardless of any other provisions of this chapter, no
nonconforming part of any nonconforming use, structure or
tree which is abandoned, removed, condemned or destroyed
shall be replaced unless it conforms with the requirements of
this section, except when authorized as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Part 1, and the following
conditions:
(a) That it would not be feasible to use the remainder of the
use, structure or tree without replacement of the
nonconformity;
§ 27-809 EMMAUS CODE § 27-809
FWD:842
(b) That the replacement represents the minimum
nonconformity needed to use the remainder of the use,
structure or tree; and,
(c) That adequate safeguards will be provided to ensure the
safety and welfare of all persons and property potentially
affected.
E. Airport Approach Permits.
(1) Scope. The owner of any proposed use, structure or tree which:
(a) Will be located in either the conical zone or the horizontal
zone; and,
(b) Is 75 feet or more in height or is of such character or will
be used in such a manner as to cause a reasonable
question whether such proposed use, structure or tree will
conform with the requirements of this section as
determined by the Zoning officer, shall apply for an airport
zoning permit.
(2) Application. Each application for an airport zoning permit shall
indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired with
sufficient particularity to provide for the determination
whether the proposed use, structure or tree will conform with
the regulations of this section. No application shall be
reviewed unless accompanied by the fee established by Council
by resolution.
(3) Issuance.
(a) If the Zoning Officer determines that such proposed use,
structure or tree conforms with all of the requirements of
this section, he shall issue an airport zoning permit. The
Zoning Officer may require the owner of any proposed use,
structure or tree to install, operate and maintain (at the
owner's expense) thereon such markers or lights
necessary to indicate the presence of such proposed use,
structure or tree.
(b) The Zoning Officer shall not issue an airport zoning permit
for any proposed use, structure or tree which will not
conform with all of the regulations of this section.
(c) The decision of the Zoning officer may be appealed to the
Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to Part 1.
F. Airport Approach Variances.
(1) Application. In addition to the applicable requirements of this
chapter, a copy of each application for a variance from the
regulations of this section shall be furnished to such official or
§ 27-809 FOREWORD § 27-809
FWD:843
§ 27-810. Bonuses for Resolving Existing Stormwater Problems.
[Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 810]
body authorized by the airport and proof of such shall be
furnished with the application. No decision shall be made until
15 days after the filing of the application unless such official
or body advises the Zoning Hearing Board as to the impact of
such variance on aeronautical safety and operations.
(2) Issuance. In addition to the applicable requirements of this
chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall not grant a variance
from the regulations of this section, unless the following
conditions are met:
(a) That the application for a variance shall be accompanied
by a determination from the Federal Aviation
Administration that the effect of the proposed variance
shall not diminish the safe, efficient use of navigable
airspace or the operation of air navigation facilities.
(b) That it would be infeasible to alter or make use of the use,
structure or tree without the proposed variance.
(c) That the variance represents the minimum variance
needed to make use of the use, structure or tree.
(d) That adequate safeguards will be provided to ensure the
safety and welfare of all persons and property potentially
affected.
1. Intent. To provide incentives to developers to help to resolve
preexisting stormwater problems.
2. This section shall apply to a serious stormwater problem area, as
identified in the Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended. Such list
for the purposes of this section may be amended or revised by
resolution of Borough Council.
3. If an applicant offers to put into place measures to resolve a serious
pre-existing stormwater problem area, a bonus may be granted as a
conditional use by the Borough Council under this section. It shall be
the responsibility of the applicant to prove to the satisfaction of the
Borough Council, based upon review by the Borough Engineer and
Planning Commission, that the proposed measures would resolve or
substantially reduce the stormwater problem.
4. No bonus shall be granted for any stormwater controls that would
ordinarily be required under Borough ordinances, standard
engineering practices, County Conservation District approval or state
law.
§ 27-809 EMMAUS CODE § 27-810
FWD:844
5. Bonuses. If an applicant meets the requirements of these bonus
provisions as determined by Borough Council, Borough Council shall
authorize as a conditional use the following:
A. An increase of 10% in the maximum impervious coverage above
what would otherwise be permitted.
B. A reduction of 10% of building setback requirements.
C. A decrease of 10% in the minimum lot area and/or minimum
average lot area per dwelling unit below what would otherwise be
permitted.
§ 27-810 FOREWORD § 27-810
FWD:845

Part 9
AREA, YARD AND BUILDING REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICT
§ 27-901. Area, Yard and Building Restrictions. [Ord. 776, 6/21/
1993, § 901; as amended by Ord. 937, 11/5/2001, §§ 3, 7]
The following area, yard and building requirements shall apply for the
specified zoning district, unless a more restrictive requirement for a specific
use is required by Part 4 or another section of this chapter. All
measurements shall be in linear feet unless otherwise stated.29
§ 27-902. Height. [Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 902; as amended by Ord.
937, 11/5/2001, § 7]
§ 27-903. Lots Without Public Sewage and Public Water Service.
[Ord. 776, 6/21/1993, § 903]
1. All districts shall have a maximum height for buildings of 2.5 stories
and 35 feet, whichever is more restrictive, except as follows:
A. Unless specifically stated otherwise in this chapter for a specific
use, such as permitted mid-rise apartments in Part 3.
B. Except as exempted by § 27-802, "Height Exceptions."
C. Except a maximum height of 45 feet or 3.5 stories, whichever is
more restrictive, shall apply in the R-P and R-HO districts.
D. Newly constructed buildings in the B-C District shall be a minimum
of two stories and a maximum of 50 feet high.
E. Except residential accessory structures on lots of less than one
acre, which shall have a maximum height of 1.5 stories (with the 1/
2 story limited to nonhabitable storage areas) and 25 feet.
1. Any lot that will not be served by both public water service and public
sewage service at the time of occupancy of any principal buildings shall
be required to have a minimum lot area of one acre per principal use/
dwelling unit and a minimum lot width of 150 feet, unless a more
restrictive requirement is established by another section of this
chapter.
2. See the Borough Ordinance requiring connections to the Borough
sewage system.
29.Editor's Note: The Table of Area, Yard and Building Requirements is included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 27-901 FOREWORD § 27-903
FWD:847

Part 10
AGE QUALIFIED COMMUNITIES
§ 27-1001. Definitions. [Ord. 1098, 9/3/2013, § 2]
Where used in this Part, the following words and phrases shall have the
following definitions:
AGE QUALIFIED COMMUNITY — A master planned residential
development in which residency is qualified by age and other related
characteristics as defined by the developer in accordance with this Part and
all applicable laws and regulations.
APPLICANT — An individual, person or other legal entity who submits an
application for an Age Qualified Community Overlay District pursuant to
this Part. As used herein, the term shall include the subsequent developer(s)
of the tract.
NATURE TRAIL — An unpaved pedestrian walking surface which
incorporates or provides access to one or more natural features.
PEDESTRIAN PATHWAY — A pedestrian walking surface which forms a part
of the pedestrian circulation system of the age qualified community and
which is constructed with a concrete, bituminous or modular paving unit
surface.
QUADRAPLEX — A building consisting of four dwelling units attached as a
group wherein each dwelling unit has individual outside access and extends
from ground to roof.
RECREATIONAL USE — A leisure time activity which may or may not be
of a formal, organized nature, but which entails some physical exertion and
may require a specially designed area, field, arena, structure or facility and
which is owned and maintained by the governing association of the age
qualified community. Such facilities are available for use by the residents
of the community and include, but are not limited to, parks, indoor and
outdoor swimming pools, athletic courts, athletic fields, pedestrian
pathways, nature trails, golf/putting/chipping areas, and other similar uses.
Amusement parks, arenas, motor sports parks, race tracks, stadiums, and
water parks shall not be considered a recreational use for purposes of
this Part. Adult oriented businesses and sexually oriented businesses and
services shall not be considered as a recreational use for purposes of this
Part.
SIDEWALK — A concrete pedestrian walking surface that is constructed
substantially parallel to the cartway and meets all of the requirements of
this Part and Chapter 21 of the Borough's Codified Ordinances to the extent
not inconsistent with the specific requirements of this Part.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING UNIT (TOWNHOUSE) — A
building designed for and occupied exclusively as a residence for only one
family and having (1) only one (1) dwelling unit from ground to roof; (2)
independent outside access; and (3) any portion of one or two vertical walls
§ 27-1001 FOREWORD § 27-1001
FWD:849
in common with an adjoining single-family attached dwelling. A townhouse
shall not have interior access between dwelling units.
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A building, commonly
known as a single-family house, designed for and occupied exclusively as a
residence for one family and having; (1) only one dwelling unit from ground
to roof; (2) independent outside access; and (3) open space on all sides.
Where a private garage is structurally attached to such a dwelling, it shall
be considered as a part thereof.
TRACT — The parcel of land comprising the age qualified community in
accordance with § 27-1006.11.C of this Part. For the purpose of this
definition, a tract may extend into an abutting municipality, in which case
the applicable provisions of this chapter shall set the minimum standards
for development in the abutting municipality.
TWO-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING (DUPLEX) — A building intended
and designed to be occupied as a residence by two families living
independently of each other as separate dwelling units. Each dwelling unit
within the two-family detached dwelling is separated by a horizontal floor.
TWO-FAMILY SEMI-DETACHED DWELLING (TWIN) — A building intended
and designed for residence by two families living independently of each
other as separate dwelling units. A semi-detached dwelling unit has
independent outside access and is separated by a common vertical wall
from the other semi-detached dwelling unit.
§ 27-1002. Establishment of Overlay Districts; General. [Ord. 1098,
9/3/2013, § 2]
1. Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and in accordance with the
objectives and policies of the Borough's Comprehensive Plan, and in
compliance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, all land area within the Borough has been assigned a zoning
district designation and incorporated within defined zoning districts as
the means to implement the provisions stated therein. In addition to
zoning district designations, specific land areas within the Borough may
be subject to a zoning overlay district or overlay districts.
2. A zoning overlay district is a special purpose zoning district that is
superimposed over existing zoning jurisdictions, and development in
accordance with the overlay district regulations is an option to
development in accordance with the base zoning district regulations.
An overlay district is designated to provide additional land use options,
standards and regulations for specific areas of the Borough based on
specific conditions as more particularly described with respect to each
overlay district. An overlay district may encompass more than one
zoning district or may encompass only portions of a zoning district.
Zoning overlay districts are delineated on the Zoning Map. In the
absence of a specific standard for an overlay district, the requirements
of the base zoning district shall apply.
§ 27-1001 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1003
FWD:850
§ 27-1003. Age Qualified Community Overlay District (AQCOD).
[Ord. 1098, 9/3/2013, § 2]
1. The Age Qualified Community Overlay District (hereinafter, "AQCOD")
is an overlay established to permit development of age qualified
communities within the areas designated on the Official Zoning Map.
Age qualified communities shall be permitted by right solely within the
AQCOD, in accordance with the minimum requirements set forth in this
Part. In the absence of a specific standard for age qualified communities
appearing in this Part, the provisions of the base zoning district shall
apply.
2. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to preclude the development of
age qualified communities in any other area of the Borough where
residential land uses are permitted. However, development of age
qualified communities outside of an AQCOD shall meet the
requirements of the base zoning district in which they are located.
3. Pursuant to § 27-108, "Amendments to this Chapter," of this chapter
Borough Council may consider an amendment to the Zoning Map to
include a particular parcel or parcels of land within the AQCOD, thus
enabling development of such parcel(s) in accordance with this Part.
Such a determination is legislative and discretionary in nature. In
determining the propriety of a zoning map amendment under this
section, the Borough shall comply with all requirements of the
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, relating to zoning map
amendments and in addition to the specific requirements of this Part,
shall consider the following criteria:
A. Consistency with the Borough's Comprehensive Plan and other
development objectives as embodied in Borough Ordinances,
documents and records.
B. Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan for Lehigh and
Northampton Counties and the Southwestern Lehigh County
Comprehensive Plan.
C. Conduciveness of development to, and impact of development on,
all relevant environmental factors.
D. Compatibility with the character of the neighborhood in which the
subject parcel or parcels is/are located.
E. Impact of the development on traffic and vehicular circulation both
within and outside the development.
F. Whether such amendment, if enacted, would violate established
legal principles.
G. The availability of municipal water and sewer.
H. The availability of, and access to, the development for emergency
services.
§ 27-1003 FOREWORD § 27-1003
FWD:851
§ 27-1004. Use Regulations. [Ord. 1098, 9/3/2013, § 2]
In reviewing an application for an AQCOD, Borough Council may
require as much detail of the proposed development as it deems
necessary in its sole discretion to aid in the application of the
above-stated criteria. In granting a request for an AQCOD,
Borough Council may impose reasonable conditions on the
applicant, consistent with these criteria.
4. Notwithstanding the requirements of subsection .3, above, and
regardless of the availability of municipal water and/or municipal
sewer, parcels of land located in whole or in part within the Industrial
Light (IL) and Business Highway (BH) Zoning Districts shall not be
eligible for consideration for inclusion within the AQCOD.
1. In the AQCOD a building may be erected, used, and/or renovated to
change, alter, or expand usage and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following land uses, subject to all applicable regulations and
administrative, procedural, design, engineering, and review and
approval requirements contained within this Part, this chapter, the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22], and any
other applicable Borough ordinance.
A. Age Qualified Community. An age qualified community shall consist
of any one or more of the following types of residential dwelling
units:
(1) Single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
(3) Two-family detached dwelling (duplex).
(4) Two-family semi-detached dwelling (twin).
(5) Quadraplex.
B. Accessory uses shall be limited to the following:
(1) Uses customarily incidental to the above listed dwelling types.
(2) Recreational uses, as defined in Part 10, § 27-1001, except that
such uses shall be for the exclusive use of members of the age
qualified community and their guests.
(3) Community center or clubhouse consisting of, inter alia,
activity rooms, kitchen areas, meeting rooms, craft rooms,
fitness rooms, lounges or similar facilities for the exclusive use
of members of the age qualified community and invited guests.
(4) Administrative and sales facilities exclusively for the
management of the age qualified community and located
§ 27-1003 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1004
FWD:852
§ 27-1005. Bulk and Design Requirements. [Ord. 1098, 9/3/2013,
§ 2]
§ 27-1006. General Requirements. [Ord. 1098, 9/3/2013, § 2]
within the community center, except that model units may
contain sales facilities until build-out of the development.
(5) Service facilities exclusively for the operation of the age
qualified community.
(6) Gate houses, entrance facilities and other similar structures.
1. No minimum tract size shall apply.
2. Maximum Impervious Coverage. Maximum impervious coverage for the
tract shall be 50%.
3. Maximum Gross Density. Maximum gross density shall be six dwelling
units per acre.
4. Buffer Yard. A fifteen-foot wide buffer yard shall be provided along all
front, side, and rear boundaries of the tract in accord with regulations
of this chapter.
5. Building Setbacks. Buildings shall be set back a minimum distance of
10 feet from the street right-of-way line of all interior streets, and
garage entrance facade shall be set back a minimum distance of 20 feet
from the edge of the street right-of-way line. Where no right-of-way is
provided, buildings shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from the
paved edge of the cartway of all interior streets, and garage entrance
facades shall be set back a minimum distance of 30 feet from the paved
edge of the cartway of all interior streets.
6. Building-to-Building Setbacks. Minimum building-to-building setbacks
for single-family detached dwellings shall be 15 feet; otherwise,
minimum building-to-building setbacks shall be 25 feet.
7. Individual Lot Sizes. Except as provided in this section, no individual
minimum lot sizes shall apply.
8. Open Space. A minimum of 50% of the tract area of the age qualified
community shall be set aside as open space, in accordance with
§ 27-1006.7, below. Areas designated as open space for the purpose of
this subsection shall be designated on the approved, land development
plan and guaranteed by deed restrictions, covenants or other
instruments filed of record and binding in perpetuity.
9. Tract Setback. A minimum twenty-five-foot setback shall be provided
along all tract boundaries. No structures shall be permitted in the
setback, except that the buffer yard required by subsection .4, above,
may be placed within the setback.
§ 27-1004 FOREWORD § 27-1006
FWD:853
1. Form of Ownership. Fee simple or condominium form of ownership may
be utilized, however regardless of the form of ownership, the applicant
shall establish a community organization which shall be funded in such
a manner as to be financially responsible for the operation,
maintenance and upkeep of the age qualified community and the
improvements and common amenities forming a part thereof.
2. Declaration of Age Qualification. In addition to the requirements of
subsection .1, above, prior to the recording of the land development
plan, the applicant shall record a declaration against the property being
developed, in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor, binding the
property and owners to the minimum age qualification and such other
regulations as may be established by the applicant. Such qualifications
and regulations shall be in accordance with all applicable federal and
state laws and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The recorded
declaration shall relieve the Borough from any obligation to enforce the
qualifications and regulations set forth therein, and shall place the
primary obligation of enforcement on the residents/owners and/or
governing association, if any, of the development.
3. Utilities.
A. The age qualified community shall be served by both public water
and public sewer service, and public water service shall be
sufficient to provide firefighting capabilities to the satisfaction of
the Borough. The public water and sewer service (excluding
laterals) together with all associated easements shall be
transferred and conveyed to the Borough by appropriate
instruments for the nominal consideration of $1. The above
notwithstanding, the Borough shall retain complete discretion
whether to accept dedication of any pump station and force main
facilities.
B. All fire services shall be designed and constructed to meet or
exceed ISO standards. The heads of all emergency services within
the Borough or their designees shall review and approve those
aspects of the land development plan relating to the provision of
such services, including, but not limited to, water pressure, fire
hydrant locations, turning radii, access to dwelling units and other
structures and access to the development from the public right-ofway.
C. All utilities to be constructed on the tract to serve the age qualified
community shall be installed underground. Design and installation
of utilities shall be in accord with applicable requirements of the
Borough or other provider as applicable.
4. Pedestrian Circulation System. A pedestrian circulation system shall be
provided as an integral part of the age qualified community, as follows:
A. Pedestrian sidewalks a minimum of four feet in width shall be
provided on both sides of all interior access streets, whether public
§ 27-1006 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1006
FWD:854
or private, and along any common, off-street parking areas where
pedestrian usage is anticipated. All pedestrian sidewalks shall be
concrete.
B. Pedestrian sidewalks shall be set back a minimum of five feet from
the curb line of all interior streets where street trees are placed
between the sidewalk and the curb. Where street trees are placed
between the sidewalk and building facade the distance between the
curb and sidewalk may be reduced to three feet.
C. Pedestrian sidewalks may adjoin off-street parking areas, however
such parking shall not encroach upon the pedestrian sidewalk. In
all cases, provision shall be made to prevent vehicles from
overhanging pedestrian sidewalks.
D. Pedestrian pathways a minimum of five feet in width shall be
provided throughout the age qualified community to interconnect
pedestrian sidewalks with open space, recreational space,
amenities and facilities. The pedestrian pathway system shall
meander throughout the open space.
E. Pedestrian sidewalks and pathways shall meet or exceed all
governmental, regulatory requirements relating to accessibility,
including, but not limited to, the requirements of the ADA and the
regulations promulgated there under.
F. Nature trails may be incorporated into the pedestrian circulation
system however the same shall comply with laws and governmental
regulations relating to accessibility.
G. Upon the written request of an applicant and following a review
and recommendation by the Planning Commission, Borough
Council may, in its sole discretion, modify or waive the
requirements of this Part as they relate to the pedestrian
circulation system. Borough Council may place reasonable
conditions upon the grant of any modifications or waivers
hereunder.
5. Vehicular Circulation System.
A. Interior streets within an age qualified community shall be private,
and owned and maintained by a governing association,
management corporation or other entity acceptable to the
Borough.
B. Interior streets within the age qualified community shall be
designed and constructed to Borough standards for public
residential streets, except that the cartway width may be reduced
to a minimum of 26 feet. In its discretion, Council may require that
an applicant provide street right of way, which shall be no less than
40 feet.
§ 27-1006 FOREWORD § 27-1006
FWD:855
C. The applicant shall cause to be performed at its sole cost and
expense a traffic impact study. This study shall be made in
accordance with all applicable industry and professional standards
and certified by a professional traffic engineer. The study shall, at a
minimum, detail traffic flow within the land development and/or
subdivision, identify points of ingress and egress, detail the effects
of the land development/subdivision upon local traffic movements,
identify appropriate, mitigating measures and address any other
specific or unique, traffic issues which may be created by the
proposed development/subdivision. The study shall be submitted to
the Borough for review and approval, and all recommendations
contained in the approved traffic impact study shall be
implemented by the developer in accordance with this Part and
other applicable laws, rules, regulations, ordinances and
standards. All improvements recommended by the approved traffic
impact study shall be constructed in conjunction with the land
development and/or subdivision. All on site improvements shall be
the responsibility of the developer.
D. Curbs shall be provided along all streets or cartways.
6. Off-Street Parking.
A. A minimum of three off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
each dwelling unit. Garage spaces may count toward this
requirement provided that the developer include in its declarations
and restrictions an enforceable covenant that each counted space
be used for parking and not be converted to another use; however,
at least one of the required off-street parking spaces must be an
exterior space (outside the garage). Alternatively, the developer
may construct separate, common parking facilities within 200 feet
of the dwellings to be served thereby in accordance with
regulations contained in this chapter to meet the requirements of
this section.
B. Off-street parking areas for the community center or other
community amenities shall be set back a minimum of 20 feet from
all buildings and a minimum of 30 feet from the overall
development tract boundaries. For the community center, a
minimum of 7.5 off-street parking spaces shall be provided for
every 1,000 square feet of gross floor area.
C. Except as provided herein, off-street parking facilities shall comply
with Part 6 of this chapter.
7. Open Space.
A. A minimum of 50% of the tract area of the age qualified community
shall be set aside as open space. Open space for the purpose of this
section shall be defined as land areas that are not occupied by
buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, alleys, sidewalks,
other impervious surfaces, or stormwater management facilities
§ 27-1006 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1006
FWD:856
(except as noted in paragraph .B below). Open space may be
devoted to landscaping preservation of natural features, common
recreation areas (as described in subsection .8, below), and
pedestrian trails.
B. With Borough (and, as applicable, other outside agency) approval,
land area containing stormwater management facilities designed
and constructed as wet ponds or shallow basins and which
incorporate natural features, landscaping or other, similar qualities
may be attributable to the open space requirement of this section.
C. Significant natural features such as woodland areas, large trees,
natural watercourses, bodies of water, rock outcroppings, and
scenic views shall be incorporated into open space areas.
D. Upon the written request of an applicant and following a review
and recommendation by the Planning Commission, Borough
Council may, in its sole discretion, modify or waive the
requirements of this Part as they relate to open space. Borough
Council may place reasonable conditions upon the grant of any
modifications or waivers hereunder.
8. Recreational Use Areas.
A. A minimum of 10% of the tract area of the age qualified community
shall be set aside as area for recreational use, which shall be for the
exclusive use of the residents of the age qualified community and
their guests. This requirement may be satisfied through provision
of one or more individual common recreation areas.
B. At least 50% of the total required recreational use area acreage
shall be provided in one or more areas that each have a minimum
dimension of not less than 100 feet by 100 feet, a maximum slope of
6%, and being at least 20 feet from all buildings, streets, parking
areas, alleys and stormwater management facilities.
C. Areas associated with environmentally sensitive features that
would otherwise prohibit or restrict development, such wetlands,
floodplains and steep slopes in excess of 10% shall not be utilized
as or attributable to the required recreational use areas.
D. Recreational use areas may be open space areas or recreational
buildings or facilities.
E. Recreational use areas otherwise meeting the requirements for
open space within the meaning of subsection .7 of this section may
be counted toward the developer's obligation to provide open space
pursuant to that subsection.
F. Upon the written request of an applicant and following a review
and recommendation by the Planning Commission, Borough
Council may, in its sole discretion, modify or waive the
§ 27-1006 FOREWORD § 27-1006
FWD:857
requirements of this Part as they relate to recreational use areas.
Borough Council may place reasonable conditions upon the grant
of any modifications or waivers hereunder.
9. Park and Recreation Requirements of SALDO. Nothing contained
herein shall relieve the applicant of its obligation to provide land
suitable for park or recreation purposes (or statutory alternatives
thereto) pursuant to § 503 of the Municipalities Planning Code, as
amended, and § 22-511 of the Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] as may be amended from time to
time. Such compliance shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of,
compliance with the open space and common recreation area
requirements of this Part.
10. Record Plan Requirements. The applicant shall include on the record
plan for the development and within the governing association
documents) or management corporation document(s) a depiction of all
open space and common recreation areas necessary to satisfy the
requirements of this Ordinance. In addition, the developer shall include
on the record plan and within the governing association documents) or
management corporation document(s) a statement that no buildings,
structures or other impervious surfaces (other than pedestrian
pathways and nature trails) shall be permitted to be built in the
required open space.
11. Other Requirements.
A. Unless otherwise stated in this Part, the Borough, in its sole
discretion, shall determine whether it is in the Borough's interest to
accept all or a portion of any infrastructure within the age qualified
community, including, but not limited to, streets, utilities,
recreational areas, and community facilities; and all such amenities
shall be constructed, owned, and operated by a financially
responsible governing association or management corporation.
B. Ownership, maintenance, and use provisions associated with all
infrastructure and common amenities and facilities within the age
qualified community shall be identified within a governing
association document(s) or management corporation document(s).
The document(s) shall be submitted to the municipality for review
and approval prior to final plan approval by the Borough.
C. All parcels of land intended to form a single, age qualified
community under this Part shall be consolidated into a single
parcel regardless of municipal boundaries. Following the
procedure set forth in § 27-1003, above, a parcel of land may be
added subsequently to the age qualified community, provided that
the parcel is consolidated with the original parcel and provided
that the proposed development continues to meet all of the
requirements of this Part with respect to the parcel, as
consolidated.
§ 27-1006 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1006
FWD:858
Part 11
MEDICAL MARIJUANA FACILITIES
§ 27-1101. Purpose. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
The purpose of this Part is to establish a process and standards for the
establishment, construction, and operations of medical marijuana facilities,
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Medical Marijuana Act (PA Act 16, 2016)30
to allow for the integration of an allowed industry while providing for the
protection of the public's health, safety, morals, and general welfare.
§ 27-1102. District Regulations. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
§ 27-1103. Definitions. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
See Chapter 27, Part 2, Definitions, § 27-202, Terms Defined, of this chapter
of the Emmaus Borough Code.
§ 27-1104. Use Regulations. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
1. Academic clinical research centers are permitted in the Light Industrial
(I-L) Zoning District, subject to the applicable performance standards
found in § 27-1104, Subsection 1A, of this Part.
2. Medical marijuana growers/processors permitted in the Light Industrial
(I-L) Zoning District, subject to the applicable performance standards
found in § 27-1104, Subsection 1B, of this Part.
3. Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices are permitted in the Light-
Industrial (I-L) Zoning District, subject to the applicable performance
standards found in § 27-1104, Subsection 1C, of this Part.
4. Medical marijuana dispensaries are permitted in the Limited
Commercial (B-L), Highway Commercial (B-H), (Light Industrial) I-L
and Central Commercial (B-C) Zoning Districts (the latter by special
exception), subject to the applicable performance standards found in
§ 27-1104, Subsection 1D, of this Part.
1. The following performance standards will be incorporated into Chapter
27, Zoning, of the Emmaus Borough Code.
A. Academic Clinical Research Center.
(1) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Part 6, Table 6.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of this
chapter, and/or as listed for colleges, universities, technical or
fine arts schools, as appropriate.
(2) An academic clinical research center may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
30.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 10231.101 et seq.
§ 27-1101 FOREWORD § 27-1104
FWD:859
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance,
and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor
facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile
or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other
motor vehicle.
(3) All external lighting serving an academic clinical research
center must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to
be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(4) A buffer to include a solid, nontransparent fence with a height
of six feet from ground to peak is required where a medical
marijuana academic clinical research center adjoins a
residential use or district.
(5) The clear sight triangle found in Part 8, § 27-803, Subsection 3,
of this chapter must be provided and maintained.
(6) The access drive/driveway must be designed and improved to
the standard expressly described in Part 6, § 27-603,
Subsection 4, of this chapter.
B. Medical Marijuana Grower/Processor.
(1) A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance
and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor
facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile
or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or other
motor vehicle.
(2) The floor area of a medical marijuana grower/processor shall
not exceed 20,000 square feet and shall include space for
production, secure storage of marijuana seeds, related finished
product, and marijuana-related materials and equipment used
in production and cultivation or for required laboratory testing.
(3) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or
waste into the environment from any facility where medical
marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs.
(4) Marijuana remnants and byproducts shall be secured and
properly disposed of in accordance with the DOH policy and
shall not be placed within any unsecure exterior refuse
containers.
(5) The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to
other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing
of medical marijuana and related products is prohibited at
medical marijuana grower/processor facilities.
§ 27-1104 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1104
FWD:860
(6) Growers/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a public, private, or parochial school or daycare
center.
(7) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Part 6, Table 6.1, of this chapter.
(8) A buffer to include a solid, nontransparent fence with a height
of six feet from ground to peak is required where a medical
marijuana grower/processor adjoins a residential use or
district.
(9) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/
processor must be designed to accommodate the anticipated
vehicles used to service the facility.
(a) Each point of access or driveway shall be subject to an
appropriate highway occupancy permit.
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Part 8, § 27-803,
Subsection 3, of this chapter must be provided and
maintained.
(c) The access drive/driveway must be designed and improved
to the standard expressly described in Part 6, § 27-603,
Subsection 4, of this chapter.
(10) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is
designed, it should be from within a secure environment.
C. Medical Marijuana Transport Vehicle Service.
(1) A traffic impact study is required when an office is operated.
(2) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Part 6, Table 6.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of this
chapter.
(3) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport
vehicle service must be shielded in such a manner to not allow
light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(4) A buffer to include a solid, nontransparent fence with a height
of six feet from ground to peak is required where a medical
marijuana transport vehicle service adjoins a residential use or
district.
(5) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport
vehicle service must be designed to accommodate the
anticipated vehicles used to enter and exit the premises.
(a) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway
occupancy permit.
§ 27-1104 FOREWORD § 27-1104
FWD:861
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Part 8, § 27-803,
Subsection 3, of this chapter must be considered and
maintained.
(c) The driveway must be designed and improved to the
standards expressly described in Part 6, § 27-603,
Subsection 4, of this chapter.
(6) If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be
temporarily stored at a medical transport vehicle service
facility, the facility must be secured to the same level as a
medical marijuana grower/producer and dispensary.
(7) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is
designed, it should be from within a secure environment.
D. Medical Marijuana Dispensary.
(1) A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in
the commonwealth and possess a current valid medical
marijuana permit from the DOH.
(2) A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure
building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle, or
other motor vehicle.
(3) A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same
site as a facility used for growing and processing medical
marijuana.
(4) Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure
public entrance and shall implement appropriate security
measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and
unauthorized entrance into areas containing medical
marijuana.
(5) Permitted hours of operation of a dispensary shall be no earlier
than 8:00 a.m. to no later than 8:00 p.m. (of the same calendar
day).
(6) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be no greater than 3,000
gross square feet, of which no more than 500 square feet shall
be used for secure storage of product, and shall have an
interior customer waiting area equal to a minimum of 25% of
the gross floor area.
(7) A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
(a) Have no drive-through service;
§ 27-1104 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1104
FWD:862
(b) Not have outdoor seating areas;
(c) Not have outdoor vending machines;
(d) Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of,
medical marijuana on the premises; and
(e) Not offer delivery service.
(8) A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical
marijuana to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations.
(9) A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a public, private or parochial
school or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in
a straight line from the closest exterior wall of the building or
portion thereof in which the business is conducted, or
proposed to be conducted, to the closest property line of the
protected use, regardless of the municipality in which it is
located.
(10) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a minimum of 1,000
feet from the next nearest medical marijuana facility. This does
not include complementing or supporting businesses covered
by different definitions. This distance shall be measured in a
straight line from the closest exterior walls of the buildings or
portions thereof in which the businesses are conducted or
proposed to be conducted, regardless of the municipality in
which they are located. This separation distance does not apply
to the distance between the grower/processor or academic
clinical research centers and the specific dispensary they
serve, or with which they partner.
(11) Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be
rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent
location of a public, private, or parochial school or a day-care
center.
(12) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be
emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(13) Parking requirements shall follow the parking schedule found
in Part 6, Table 6.1, Off-Street Parking Requirements, of this
chapter, as listed for medical and dental offices, including
outpatient clinics.
(14) A buffer to include a solid, nontransparent fence with a height
of six feet from ground to peak is required where a medical
marijuana dispensary adjoins a residential use or district.
§ 27-1104 FOREWORD § 27-1104
FWD:863
§ 27-1105. Administration and Enforcement. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
(15) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary
must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles
used to service the facility.
(a) All accesses must secure the appropriate highway
occupancy permit.
(b) The clear sight triangle found in Part 8, § 27-803,
Subsection 3, of this chapter must be considered and
maintained.
(c) The driveway must be designed and improved to the
standards expressly described in Part 6, § 27-603,
Subsection 4, of this chapter.
(16) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is
designed, it should be from within a secure environment.
1. Building and Zoning Permits/Approvals.
A. A zoning permit shall be required prior to obtaining a building
permit: for the construction or erection of a building; the alteration
of a building or portion thereof; the use or change in use of a
building or land; or any adjustments to a nonconforming use.
B. The (municipal) zoning permit application must be completed.
C. Permit fees shall be as stipulated in the fee schedule adopted by
resolution of the municipal governing body in effect at the time of
application.
D. Permits may be denied if the applicant, in the reasonable opinion of
the municipal governing body or its appointed designee, is failing
to comply with any state or local law or regulation.
E. In the case of new construction meeting the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code definition of "land development," a
plan application is required to be submitted and an approval
secured, prior to establishment of use.
F. If the application is to change the use of the building, or needs to
demonstrate allocation of space within a structure, the applicant
shall provide architectural drawings prepared by an architect
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
G. A medical marijuana grower/processor must be legally registered
in the commonwealth and possess a current valid medical
marijuana permit from the DOH.
§ 27-1104 EMMAUS CODE § 27-1106
FWD:864
§ 27-1106. Penalties. [Ord. 1153, 2/6/2017]
Any owner, operator, or other person who violates or permits a violation of
this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding before a Magisterial District Judge, pay the Borough of Emmaus
a fine of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including but not limited to
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough of Emmaus on account
of such violation. No penalty or cost shall be imposed until the date the
determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge becomes
final. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough of Emmaus may enforce the judgment as provided by the law. Each
fine imposed shall be multiplied by the number of such days and may be
charged and collected by the Borough of Emmaus without further judicial
proceedings. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Borough of
Emmaus are hereby authorized to issue a cease-and-desist notice and/or to
seek equitable relief, including injunctions, to enforce compliance herewith.
No bond will be required if injunctive relief is sought by the Borough of
Emmaus. A person who violates this Part shall also be responsible for the
Borough of Emmaus attorney's fees, engineering fees, expert fees, and
court costs reasonably incurred by the Borough of Emmaus on account of
such violation.
§ 27-1106 FOREWORD § 27-1106
FWD:865
APPENDIX
Appendix A
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
§ A-101. Annexation of Territory
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Territory Annexed
49 9/14/1903 Portion of Township of Upper Milford and
Salisbury
158 11/6/1922 Portion of Upper Milford and Salisbury
167 9/21/1925 Portion of Upper Milford Township
168 10/19/1925 Portion of Upper Milford and Salisbury
Townships
173 12/6/1926 Portion of Upper Milford Township
212 1/5/1931 Portions of Upper Milford Township
255 9/16/1940 Portion of Salisbury Township
285 11/3/1947 Portion of Salisbury Township
299 10/3/1949 Portion of Upper Milford Township
304 8/20/1951 Portion of Salisbury Township
326 3/5/1956 Portion of Lower Macungie Township
330 9/4/1956 Portion of Lower Macungie Township
373 7/5/1960 Portion of Upper Milford Township
448 12/30/1968 Portion of Upper Milford Township
450 2/3/1969 Portions of Upper Milford and Lower
Macungie Townships
453 2/3/1969 Portion of Upper Milford Township
484 8/21/1972 Portions of Upper Milford and Lower
Macungie Townships
Appendix B
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
§ B-101. Bond Issues and Loans
Ord./Res. Adoption
Date
Type of Action Amount Purpose
37 5/5/1890 Increasing
Indebtedness
$2,000 Electric Plant
82 11/5/1906 Bond Issue $17,500 Water Works
§ 27-1106 EMMAUS CODE § B-101
FWD:866
Ord./Res. Adoption
Date
Type of Action Amount Purpose
101 11/2/1908 Temporary Loan $3,000 Property
Purchase
124 11/14/1910 Coupon Bonds $14,000 Real Estate
135 10/6/1913 Coupon Bonds $9,000 Sinking Fund
141 12/21/1914 Coupon Bonds $4,000 Water Works
144 1/17/1916 Loan $5,000 Unspecified
150 3/4/1918 Loan $10,000 Unspecified
163 4/20/1925 Coupon Bonds $60,000 Debt
179 — Coupon Bonds $30,000 Debt
180 12/15/1927 Bond Issue $100,000 Water Works
225 6/18/1934 Coupon Bonds $20,000 Street
Improvement
227 8/20/1934 Desire to Increase
Debt
$265,000 Power Plant
228 10/1/1934 Election for Ord.
227
244 9/19/1938 Bond Issue $62,000 Debt/Building
245 11/21/1938 Coupon Bonds $75,000 Debt/Building
246 12/5/1938 Amendment to
Ord. 245
283 4/21/1947 Coupon Bonds $55,000 Fire Equipment
312 — Bond Issue $50,000 Fire Equipment
324 2/6/1956 Desire to Increase
Debt
$250,000 Recreation
Places
339 4/8/1957 Election for Ord.
324
341 8/5/1957 General
Obligation Bonds
$250,000 Recreation
Places
388 9/17/1962 Desire to Increase
Debt
$400,000 Water Supply
395 7/15/1963 General
Obligation Bonds
$400,000 Water Supply
429 5/1/1967 General
Obligation Bonds
$300,000 Sundry
Purposes
482 2/28/1972 General
Obligation Bonds
$495,000 Sundry
Purposes
561 — General
Obligation Bonds
$237,500 Unspecified
§ B-101 FOREWORD § B-101
FWD:867
Ord./Res. Adoption
Date
Type of Action Amount Purpose
569 — Election to Quest.
Debt
$485,000 Fire Station
581 — Bond Issue $1,250,000Unspecified
641 — General
Obligation Bonds
$1,250,000Unspecified
654 — General
Obligation Bonds
$1,345,000Unspecified/Not
Refinanced
665 — General
Obligation Bonds
$1,250,000Unspecified
724 1/2/1990 General
Obligation Bonds
$334,450 Water Works
725 1/2/1990 General
Obligation Bonds
$248,000 Water Works
729 3/19/1990 Guaranteed
Revenue Note
$334,450 Sundry
Purposes
730 3/19/1990 General
Obligation Note
$248,000 Water System
739 11/5/1990 General
Obligation Note
$500,000 Sundry
Purposes
777 6/26/1993 General
Obligation Bonds
$1,900,000Refund Bonds
792 6/6/1994 General
Obligation Note
$400,000 Sundry
Purposes
869 5/18/1998 General
Obligation Notes
$650,000 Sundry
Purposes
878 2/16/1999 General
Obligation Notes
$200,000 Purchase of Two
Fire Trucks
883 10/4/1999 General
Obligation Notes
$200,000 Amending Ord.
878
928 6/21/2001 General
Obligation Notes
$2,570,000Various Capital
Improvement
Project
Purposes
946 2/19/2002 General
Obligation Notes
$150,000 A Sinking Fund
983 9/7/2004 General
Obligation Note
$5,032,000Furnishing and
equipping a new
police station
and refunding
the 2001 note
§ B-101 EMMAUS CODE § B-101
FWD:868
Ord./Res. Adoption
Date
Type of Action Amount Purpose
995 5/16/2005 General
Obligation Note
$50,000 Sundry
Purposes
1069 4/5/2010 General
Obligation Note
$5,125,000Fund various
capital projects
and refunding
the 2004 note
1078 6/20/2011 General
Obligation Note
$150,000 Covenanting to
pay, and
pledging
unlimited taxing
power for the
payment of the
note
1129 7/27/2015 General
Obligation Note
$5,796,000Various capital
projects
Appendix C
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
§ C-101. Franchises and Services.
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Franchise/Service Offered
41 2/16/1898 Allentown and Emmaus Street Railway
Co./railroad
45 7/18/1901 Lehigh Telephone Co./telephone service
98 10/6/1908 Inter-County Electric Co./electric railway
102 12/11/1908 W.R. Chapin & Harvey Yeager/electricity
105 7/5/1909 Emmaus Gas & Fuel Co./gas production
108 10/4/1909 Amendment to Ord. 105
110 10/4/1909 Horace West Shantz/electricity
177 11/7/1927 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./boulevard
lighting
178 10/17/1927 Unnamed/boulevard lighting
188 8/20/1928 Unnamed/electric street lighting
239 12/6/1937 Unnamed/electric street lighting
242 6/6/1938 Unnamed/electric street lighting
250 2/19/1940 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
256 -/-/- Unnamed/electric service
§ B-101 FOREWORD § C-101
FWD:869
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Franchise/Service Offered
257 12/1/1941 Emmaus Telephone Co./telephone service
287 12/22/1947 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
street lighting
297 6/20/1949 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
298 7/5/1949 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
301 7/3/1950 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
307 6/16/1952 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
316 5/17/1954 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
347 3/17/1958 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
street lighting
357 7/6/1959 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
361 11/16/1959 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
375 11/21/1960 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
394 6/17/1963 Greater Television, Inc./cable television
397 8/19/1963 Pennsylvania Power & Light Co./electric
service
Res. 77-6 4/4/1977 Sammons Communications/cable television
1012 10/16/2006 RCN Telecom Services, Inc./cable
television
1082 10/17/2011 Service Electric Cable T.V., Inc./cable
television
Appendix D
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§ D-101. Governmental And Intergovernmental Affairs
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
6 11/16/1875 Constructing new reservoir
428 3/6/1967 Cooperative purchasing agreement
between Borough and other Lehigh Valley
municipal bodies
§ C-101 EMMAUS CODE § D-101
FWD:870
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
Res. 73-26 12/17/1973 Adopting comprehensive plan for Borough
625 2/16/1981 Becoming settlor of Pennsylvania Local
Government Investment Trust
653 4/18/1983 Implementation of Lehigh County Solid
Waste Management Plan
673 6/30/1986 Approving Bond Pool Program for use by
Authority to finance projects
702 11/21/1988 Authorizing the Borough of Emmaus to join
with other governmental units as a settlor
of PLGIT Investment Trust A, PLGIT
Investment Trust B and PLGIT Investment
Trust C; Authorizing the Borough of
Emmaus to purchase and redeem shares in
such trusts; designating the trusts as
official custodians; and making certain
determinations
848 9/8/1997 Authorizing the lease of the property at
First and Main Streets to the Emmaus
Historical Society pursuant to a lease
entered into August, 1997, for a period of
99 years
882 9/7/1999 Authorizing the Borough to join with other
political subdivisions as a member of the
Lehigh Valley Insurance Cooperative
893 10/18/1999 Adopting the provisions of the standard
operating procedures of the Emmaus Police
Department regarding bicycle patrols
913 11/20/2000 Establishing a "watch children" sign at the
intersection of Cherokee Street and Liberty
Street
930 6/18/2001 Establishing a "watch children" sign
located on Alpine Circle
934 8/6/2001 Establishing a "Watch Children" sign
located in the 700 block of Furnace Street
941 12/17/2001 Establishing a "Watch Children" sign
located in the 500 block of North Third
Street
957 8/19/2002 Establishing "school zone" signs located at
intersections of Second and Third Streets
at Harrison Street
966 6/1/2005 Ratifying the addendum to the May 6, 2002
cooperative planning project to create a
multi-municipal comprehensive plan
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:871
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
967 6/2/2003 Repealing Ord. 924 and abolishing the
Emmaus Utility Authority
984 10/19/2004 Authorizing the Borough of Emmaus to join
with other political subdivisions as a
member of the Pennsylvania Municipal
Health Insurance Cooperative (PMHIC)
and to enter into an intergovernmental
agreement for the purpose of joining and to
participate as a member of the PMHIC
1110 7/21/2014 Entering into an intergovernmental
agreement to join as a member of the
Susquehanna Municipal Trust
1181 11/5/2018 Authorizing the Borough to enter into an
intergovernmental cooperation agreement
with the Boroughs of Alburtis and
Macungie and the Townships of Lower
Macungie, Lower Milford and Upper
Milford to implement the Southwestern
Lehigh County Comprehensive Plan,
provided that the governing bodies of the
other participating municipalities shall also
approve the execution of the agreement
and adopt the multi-municipal
comprehensive plan in the form approved
by the Borough of Emmaus
Appendix E
PLAN APPROVAL
§ E-101. Plan Approval
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Plan Approved
292 3/15/1948 Changing Mountain View Plan of Lots
Appendix F
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ D-101 EMMAUS CODE § F-101
FWD:872
§ F-101. Public Property
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
363 12/21/1959 Acquiring land by eminent domain, a part
of which lies in Salisbury Township
404 11/2/1964 Acquiring water line easement by eminent
domain
433 10/30/1967 Acquiring sewer line easement by eminent
domain
486 10/16/1972 Acquiring land by eminent domain
487 10/16/1972 Acquiring land by eminent domain
498 9/17/1973 Acquiring land by eminent domain
514 6/3/1974 Acquiring land by eminent domain
522 12/16/1974 Acquiring land by eminent domain
530 7/7/1975 Acquiring land by eminent domain
532 8/4/1975 Acquiring land by eminent domain
1022 1/15/2007 Authorizing the condemnation of land at 48
South Keystone Avenue owned by Connie
Yarema for the purpose of providing
sufficient water drainage from Second
Street and Adrain Street
1044 7/6/2009 Approving the agreement for the exchange
and trade of certain real estate between
Raven R. Mill and Mary A. Mill and the
Borough of Emmaus
Appendix G
SEWERS
§ G-101. Sewers
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
355 3/16/1959 Sewage disposal agreement with City of
Allentown
362 11/16/1959 Approving sewer system plans
365 1/4/1960 Granting certain rights to Emmaus
Municipal Authority
366 1/4/1960 Agreement of lease of sewer system with
Authority
396 6/27/1963 Constructing certain sewer facilities
399 9/16/1963 Constructing certain sewer facilities
432 10/16/1967 Assessing costs of sewer construction
§ F-101 FOREWORD § G-101
FWD:873
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
459 8/18/1969 Assessing costs of sewer construction
Agrmt. 5/11/1982 Transfer of sewer system from Municipal
Authority to Borough of Emmaus
796 8/6/1994 Providing for acceptance of deed of
dedication for the sanitary sewer extension
as part of the East Penn Place Project
831 5/20/1996 Approving assessment cost of construction
of certain sewer facilities in and for
Furnace Street between Sixth and Seventh
Streets
858 10/13/1997 Approving assessment cost of construction
of certain sanitary sewer facilities in and
for Pennsylvania Avenue as part of the
sanitary sewer line extension
Appendix H
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ H-101. Streets and Sidewalks
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Adams Street Adoption Entire length 198 7/15/1929
Allen Street Sewers Portion 5 11/16/1875
Allen Street Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Apple Alley Vacating Keystone Avenue to Kline's
Lane
321 9/6/1955
Apple Street Vacating Entire length 517 7/1/1974
Apple Street Williams Street to Hillegass
property
609 3/17/1980
Apple Street Lehigh Street to Warren
Street
1014 10/16/2006
Arch Street Vacating Twelfth Street to Delong
Avenue
488 10/16/1972
Arch Street Opening Tenth Street to Twelfth
Street
577 12/29/1977
Arch Street Delong Avenue & Tilghman
Street
686 10/5/1987
Arch Street Adopting Arch-Way Townhouses Sub. 772 4/5/1993
Asher Street Opening Entire length 492 2/5/1973
Bank Street Opening Fourth Street to Sixth Street 109 10/4/1909
§ G-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:874
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Bank Street Vacating Tenth Street to Twelfth
Street
582 4/17/1978
Bank Street Portion 619 11/17/1950
Bank Street Vacating/
relocating
Portion at South Seventh
Street and Chestnut Street
1036 1/7/2008
Beechwood Street Opening Portion 591 11/20/1978
Berger Street Opening Portion 608 2/4/1980
Biery Street Vacating Entire length 501 10/15/1973
Broad Street Grade Entire length 39 4/13/1896
Broad Street Extending Perkiomen Alley to Seventh
Street
72 8/6/1906
Broad Street Paving Fourth Street to Fifth Street 133 1/20/1913
Broad Street Perkiomen Street to
Borough line
161 -/-/-
Broad Street Name changed From New Street 194 5/6/1929
Broad Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Broad Street Grading Third Street to Fourth Street 206 4/21/1930
Broad Street Sidewalks Third Street to Tenth Street 208 5/5/1930
Broad Street Improvements Portion 415 4/19/1965
Broom Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Broom Alley Extending Borough line to Borough line 72 8/6/1906
Broom Alley Relocating Portion 166 -/-/-
Broom Street Vacating Main Street to Green Street 500 10/15/1973
Broom Street 511 4/15/1974
Cedar Street Vacating Harrison Street for
1986.86'N.
470 12/21/1970
Cherry Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Cherry Alley Vacated Entire length 21 -/-/-
Cherry Alley Extending Borough line to Borough line 72 8/6/1906
Cherry Alley Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Cherry Street Grade Harrison Street to Greenleaf
Street
271 1/15/1945
Cherry Street Berger Street to Pine Street 271 1/15/1945
Chestnut Street Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Chestnut Street Grade Fifth Street to Borough line 20 -/-/-
Chestnut Street Paving Entire length 29 -/-/-
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:875
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Chestnut Street Main Street to Seventh
Street
133 1/20/1913
Chestnut Street Improvements Macungie Avenue to 9th/
10th Street bridge
174 1/3/1927
Chestnut Street Ink Houser property 175 -/-/1927
Chestnut Street Excavation Portion 176 -/-/1927
Chestnut Street Relocating Ninth Street to Tenth Street 208 5/5/1930
Chestnut Street Sidewalks Sta. 279+81 to Sta. 334+77 346 1/20/1958
Chestnut Street Improvements Portion 411 3/8/1965
Chestnut Street Adopting Owned by Estate of Alma M.
Kratzer
801 9/19/1994
Chestnut Street Adopting Bollinger Subdivision 820 11/20/1995
Chris Drive Opening Entire length 509 2/18/1974
Coal Street Name changed To Palencar Street 516 6/3/1974
Dalton Street Improvements Portion 383 2/19/1962
Delong Avenue Adoption Entire length 275 9/17/1945
Delong Avenue Opening Portion 440 6/17/1968
Donald Avenue Name changed To Donald Drive 457 8/4/1969
Donald Drive Name changed From Donald Avenue 457 8/4/1969
Eagle Street Grade Evergreen Street to Dalton
Street
272 2/19/1945
Eighth Street Locating Entire length 126 5/22/1911
Eighth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Eighth Street Sidewalks Chestnut Street to Walnut
Street
208 5/5/1930
Eleventh Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Eleventh Street Opening Chestnut Street to Green
Street
576 12/29/1977
Elm Street Name changed To Sixth Street 9 5/4/1871
Elm Street Opening Third Street to Borough line 109 10/4/1909
Elm Street Second Street to Third
Street
185 5/21/1928
Elm Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Elm Street Sidewalks Third Street to state
highway
208 5/5/1930
Elm Street Grading Fifth Street to Pike Street 209 6/2/1930
Elm Street Vacating Franklin Street to Seventh
Street
343 9/16/1957
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:876
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Elm Street Portion 374 8/15/1960
Elwood Street Grade Cherry Street to Keystone
Avenue
271 1/15/1945
Evergreen Street Grade Dell Street to Eagle Street 272 2/19/1945
Fairview Street Opening Mountain Street to Seventh
Street
360 11/16/1959
Fairview Street Fourth Street to Fifth Street 442 8/5/1968
Fairview Street Fifth Street to Sixth Street 496 8/20/1973
Fifteenth Street Relocating
opening
Portion 200 11/4/1929
Fifteenth Street Shimerville Road to
Miklencic property
393 6/3/1963
Fifteenth Street Portion 485 9/6/1972
Fifteenth Street
(S.)
Opening Community Park to PA
Turnpike
691 1/18/1988
Fifth Street Name changed From Oak Street 9 5/4/1871
Fifth Street Opening Portion 13 12/1873
Fifth Street Curbing Portion 40 8/28/1896
Fifth Street Extending Broad Street to Borough line 72 8/6/1906
Fifth Street Opening Ridge Street to Borough line 125 5/25/1911
Fifth Street Paving Chestnut Street to Railroad
Street
165 6/15/1925
Fifth Street Jubilee Street to Furnace
Street
169 6/17/1926
Fifth Street Furnace Street to Perkiomen
RR
187 8/6/1928
Fifth Street Unpaved portion 197 7/15/1929
Fifth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Fifth Street Improvements Portion 238 4/19/1937
Fifth Street 415 4/19/1965
Fifth Street Sewers 310 South Fifth Street R. 74-6 5/20/1974
Fink's Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Fink's Alley Vacating Green Alley to Ridge Street 43 2/27/1901
Fink's Alley Relocating Portion 176 1927
Fink's Alley Vacating North Street to Green Street 321 9/6/1955
Firm Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
First Street Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
First Street Name changed To Keystone Avenue 42 11/1/1898
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:877
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
First Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
First Street Vacating Union Street to Reading Co. 201 12/2/1929
First Street North Street to Green Street 321 9/6/1955
First Street Opening Portion 479 12/30/1971
First Street 495 6/18/1973
First Street Vacating Main Street to Green Street 541 3/1/1976
Foundry Street Vacating Portion 391 3/18/1963
Foundry Street Mountain Street west 398 9/3/1963
Foundry Street Opening 650-658 Furnace Street 875 12/7/1998
Fourteenth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Fourth Street Name changed From Washington Street 9 5/4/1871
Fourth Street Opening New Street to Borough line 13 12/1873
Fourth Street Broad Street to Borough
line[??]
16 6/22/1875
Fourth Street Paving Main Street to Chestnut
Street
19 —
Fourth Street Opening Chestnut Street to Green
Alley
25 4/18/1876
Fourth Street Extending Portions 72 8/6/1906
Fourth Street Paving Jubilee Street to Broad
Street/Main Street to Ridge
Street
133 1/20/1913
Fourth Street Broad Street to Furnace
Street
169 6/17/1926
Fourth Street Vacating Wood Street to Borough line 181, 12/19/1927
Fourth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Fourth Street Sidewalks Furnace Street to Fairview
Street
208 5/5/1930
Fourth Street Vacating Unnamed alley to Borough
line
213 1/5/1931
Fourth Street Improvements Portion 415 4/19/1965
Fourth Street Vacating Portion south of Fairview 674 9/2/1986
Fourth Street Relocating Portion south of Fairview 684 9/21/1987
Frank Avenue Name changed to
Frank Drive
457 8/4/1969
Frank Drive Name changed From Frank Avenue 457 8/4/1969
Frank Drive Opening Portion 468 10/19/1970
Frank Drive 494 6/4/1973
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:878
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Franklin Street Opening North Street to Berger
Street
636 6/7/1982
Front Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Fulton Street Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Furnace Street Opening Fourth Street to Borough
line
16 6/22/1875
Furnace Street Extending Portions 72 8/6/1906
Furnace Street Opening Fourth Street to Keystone
Avenue
109 10/4/1909
Furnace Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Furnace Street Opening Seventh Street to Tenth
Street
315 5/3/1954
Furnace Street Vacating Fourteenth Street to Yew
Street
535 10/6/1975
Furnace Street Thirteenth Street to Yew
Street
570 9/12/1977
"G" Street Vacating Entire length 590 10/9/1978
George Street Grade Williams Street for 338.49'
N.
265 11/20/1944
George Street Adoption Kline Terr. line to State
Avenue
276 9/17/1945
Grave Yard Alley Name changed to Grave
Yard Street[??]
9 5/4/1871
Grave Yard Alley Opening Third Street to Fourth Street 24 7/7/1876
Grave Yard Street Name changed From Grave Yard Alley 9 5/4/1871
Grave Yard Street Curbing Entire length 40 8/28/1896
Green Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Green Alley Opening Fourth Street to Fifth Street 25 4/18/1876
Green Alley Extending Second Street to Borough
line/Fourth Street to Sixth
Street
72 8/6/1906
Green Alley Relocating Portion 166 —
Green Drive Adopting Owned by Author and Victor
Schmidt
771 4/5/1993
Green Street Vacating First Street to Kline Alley 266 1/15/1945
Green Street Alignment First Street to Kline Alley 267 1/15/1945
Green Street Vacating Portions 534 9/22/1975
Green Street Eleventh Street to Cedar
Crest Boulevard
575 12/29/1977
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:879
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Green Street Tenth Street for 125' E. 658 12/19/1983
Greenleaf Street Opening Portion 597 1/8/1979
Greenleaf Street Vacating Williams Street to
Beechwood Street/Berger
Street to Harrison Street
618 9/22/1980
Harrison Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Harrison Street Sidewalks Keystone Avenue to Liberty
Street
208 5/5/1930
Harrison Street Opening Franklin Street to Seventh
Street
342 9/16/1957
Henry Avenue Name changed To Henry Drive 457 8/4/1969
Henry Drive Name changed From Henry Avenue 457 8/4/1969
Houser Street Adoption Cherry Street to Keystone
Avenue
270 1/15/1945
Howard Alley Named Long Street to North Street 131 10/21/1912
Howard Street Named Between Long Street &
North Street
945 1/7/2002
Iobst Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
John Street Vacating Ridge Street to North Street 414 4/19/1965
Jubilee Street Name changed From Railroad Street 109 10/4/1909
Jubilee Street Opening Fourth Street to Fifth Street 109 10/4/1909
Jubilee Street Sink construction Emmaus Hotel footwalk 118 6/28/1910
Jubilee Street Paving Fourth Street to Sixth Street 169 6/17/1926
Jubilee Street Grading Fourth Street to Sixth Street 207 4/21/1930
Jubilee Street Boundaries Fifth Street to Sixth Street 549 5/17/1976
Keystone Avenue Name changed From First Street 42 11/1/1898
Keystone Avenue Opening Main Street to Minor Street 61 7/10/1905
Keystone Avenue Extending Furnace Street to Borough
line
72 8/6/1906
Keystone Avenue Opening Ridge Street to North Street 84 12/10/1906
Keystone Avenue 123 11/8/1910
Keystone Avenue Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Keystone Avenue Sidewalks Ridge Street to Harrison
Street
208 5/5/1930
Kline's Alley Extending Borough line to Borough line 72 8/6/1906
Kline's Lane Width Main Street to Perkiomen
RR
274 8/20/1945
Landis Circle Opening Entire length 718 9/5/1989
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:880
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Lawrence Avenue Name changed to
Lawrence Drive
457 8/4/1969
Lawrence Drive Named changed From Lawrence Avenue 457 8/4/1969
Lehigh Street Vacating Berger Street to Barrett
Road
329 8/6/1956
Lehigh Street Barrett Road to Liberty
Street
385 8/6/1967
Liberty Street Sidewalks Harrison Street to Berger
Street
208 5/5/1930
Linden Court Opening Entire length 636 6/7/1982
Line Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Long Alley Grade Second Street to Fourth
Street
39 4/13/1896
Long Alley Opening Reinhard Alley to Seventh
Street
93 2/17/1908
Long Alley Relocating 166 -/-/-
Long Alley Portion
Macungie Avenue Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Macungie Avenue Grading Chestnut Street to Ridge
Street
206 4/21/1930
Macungie Avenue Sidewalks Chestnut Street to North
Street
208 5/5/1930
Macungie Avenue Sewers Manhole C-306 to C-306A Res. 75-14 11/17/1975
Main Street Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Main Street Paving Chestnut Street to Fourth
Street
15 -/-/-
Main Street Portion 28 8/14/1889
Main Street Extending Borough line to Borough line 72 8/6/1906
Main Street Paving Kline's Alley to Keystone
Avenue/Keystone Avenue to
Second Street/Second Street
to Third Street/Third Street
to Short Alley/Short Alley to
133 1/20/1913
Main Street Relocating Fourth Street 176 -/-/1927
Main Street Sidewalks Portion 208 5/5/1930
Main Street Improvements East of Fourth Street Sta.
388+82.5 to Sta.
260 5/18/1942
Main Street 425+06.34 261 12/7/1942
Main Street 383 2/19/1962
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:881
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Main Street Portion 411 3/8/1965
Main Street Vacating 531 8/4/1975
Main Street Setbacks Portions 580 12/29/1977
Main Street Keystone Avenue to Fourth
Street
Middle Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Mine Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Minor Street Sewers Portion 5 11/16/1875
Minor Street Grade Fourth Street to Borough
line
39 4/22/1896
Minor Street Opening Fifth Street to Sixth Street 69 7/2/1906
Minor Street Extending Keystone Avenue to Borough
line/Fourth Street to
Seventh
72 8/6/1906
Minor Street Relocating Street 200 11/4/1929
Minor Street Sidewalks Portion 208 5/5/1930
Minor Street Opening Fifth Street to Seventh
Street
469 11/30/1970
Minor Street Sewers Short Street to Broom Street
Extension
Res. 73-4 2/26/1973
Minor-Furnace
Street
Opening Fifth Street to Fourth Street 13 12/1873
Miriam Drive Opening Entire length 510 2/18/1974
Mountain Building Vacating Portions 552 7/12/1976
Mountain Building 555 11/1/1976
Mountain Building Relocating Portions 594 2/5/1979
Mountain Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Mountain Street Vacating Portion 1007 4/17/2006
Moyer's Alley Extending Borough line to Borough 72 8/6/1906
Moyer's Alley Relocating Line 166 -/-/-
Moyer's Alley Portion
Moyer Street Vacating Minor Street to Perkiomen
RR
268 1/15/1945
Moyer Street Alignment Minor Street to Perkiomen
RR
269 1/15/1945
Moyer Street Vacating Portion 284 9/2/1947
Moyer Street Seem Street to Harrison
Street
317 11/15/1954
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:882
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
New Alley Opening New Street to Broom Alley 27 -/-/-
New Street Sewers Portion 5 11/16/1875
New Street Vacating Second Street to Third
Street
9 5/4/1871
New Street Opening Fifth Street to Borough line 12 10/3/1874
New Street Grading Entire length 22 -/-/-
New Street Relocating Portion 176 -/-/1927
New Street Name changed To[??] Broad Street 194 5/6/1929
Ninth Street Locating Entire length 126 5/22/1911
Ninth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Ninth Street Opening Walnut Street to Long Street 636 6/7/1982
Ninth Street Vacating Portion 737 8/9/1990
North Street Sidewalk Along Lutheran and
Reformed Cemetery
44 —
North Street Extending Keystone Avenue to Borough
line/Fourth Street to Sixth
Street
72 8/6/1906
North Street Opening Second Street to Keystone
Avenue
84 12/10/1906
North Street 122 11/8/1910
North Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
North Street Extending Keystone Avenue to Kline's
Lane
322 9/6/1955
Oak Street Name changed to Fifth Street 9 5/4/1871
Oak Street Vacating Harrison to George Street 767 12/7/1992
Old Second Street Vacating Harrison Street to Berger
Street
213 1/5/1931
Olney Street Vacating Portion 391 3/18/1963
Palencar Street Name changed
from Coal Street
516 6/3/1974
Peach Alley Named Entire length 21 —
Penn Street Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Penn Street Vacating Seem Street to Harrison
Street
184 5/21/1928
Penn Street Opening North Street to Seem Street 186 6/18/1928
Penn Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Penn Street Sidewalks North Street to Seem Street 208 5/5/1930
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:883
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Penn Street Vacating Harrison Street to Stephen
Street
601 7/2/1979
Penn Street Reconstruction Seem Street for 132' S. Res. 79-12 7/16/1979
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Improvements Portion 401 4/20/1964
Pennsylvania
Avenue
Adopting Portion 797 9/6/1994
Perkiomen Alley Naming Entire length 53 5/28/1904
Perkiomen Alley Width Entire length 54 6/4/1904
Perkiomen Alley Relocating Portion 166 —
Perkiomen Street Vacating Wood Street to Borough line 181 12/19/1927
Perkiomen Street Chestnut Street to E. Pa. RR 182 12/19/1927
Perkiomen Street Opening Foundry Street to Wood
Street
350 8/18/1958
Pine Alley Relocating Portion 166 —
Pine Street Opening Franklin Street for 608.77'
NE
636 6/7/1982
Pine Top Circle Opening South Fifteen Street for 255'
SW
711 4/17/1989
Poplar Street Opening Green Alley to Borough line 109 10/4/1909
Quarry Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Race Street Vacating Portion 340 5/6/1957
Railroad Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Railroad Street Paving Fourth Street to Fifth Street 18 11/4/1884
Railroad Street Extending Fifth Street to Sixth Street 72 8/6/1906
Railroad Street Name changed To[??] Jubilee Street 109 10/4/1909
Railroad Street Paving Fourth Street to Fifth Street 169 6/17/1926
Railroad Street Opening 622 Chestnut Street to Park
Row
311 8/17/1953
Railroad Street Opening West from Sixth Street 704 12/5/1988
Reinhard Alley Opening Green Alley to Ridge Street 93 2/17/1908
Reinhard Alley Relocating Portion 166 —
Ridge Street Grade Second Street to Fourth
Street
39 4/22/1896
Ridge Street Opening Fourth Street to Sixth Street 69 7/2/1906
Ridge Street Extending Keystone Avenue to Borough
line/Fifth Street to Sixth
Street
72 8/6/1906
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:884
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Ridge Street Opening Keystone Avenue to Borough
line
121 11/8/1910
Ridge Street Extending Sixth Street to Borough line 126 5/22/1911
Ridge Street Opening Keystone Avenue to Borough
line
130 5/6/1912
Ridge Street Sixth Street to Seventh
Street
132 1/6/1913
Ridge Street Paving Second Street to Fourth
Street
169 6/17/1926
Ridge Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Ridge Street Sidewalks Keystone Avenue to Third
Street
208 5/5/1930
Ridge Street Sewers Portion Res. 72-6 3/6/1972
Ridge Street Opening Eighth Street to Crest Way 571 8/29/1977
Ridge Street Sewers Manhole C-200 to C-200A Res. 77-22 11/21/1977
Ridge Street Vacating Eighth Street to Macungie
Avenue
616 6/16/1980
Second Avenue Vacating Buttonwood Street to
Evergreen Street
377 12/5/1960
Second Street Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Second Street Curbing Main Street to Borough line 40 8/28/1896
Second Street E. Pa. RR to Perkiomen RR 48 7/6/1903
Second Street Extending Furnace Street and North
Street to Borough lines
72 8/6/1906
Second Street Opening Ridge Street to North Street 120 10/17/1910
Second Street North Street to Harrison
Street
160 11/8/1923
Second Street Vacating North Street to Harrison
Street
170 6/7/1926
Second Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Second Street Sidewalks Ridge Street to Harrison
Street
208 5/5/1930
Second Street Vacating Spruce Street to Houser
Street
270 1/15/1945
Second Street,
South
Accepted The Major Subdivision of the
Woods of Emmaus
817 8/7/1995
Seem Street Opening Second Street to Third
Street
185 5/21/1928
Seem Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:885
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Seem Street Sidewalks Second Street to Keystone
Avenue
208 5/5/1930
Seem Street Reconstruction Second Street to Third
Street
Res. 79-12 7/16/1979
Seventh Street Abandonment Chestnut Street to Walnut
Street
58 3/13/1905
Seventh Street Extending Chestnut Street and Walnut
Street to Borough lines
72 8/6/1906
Seventh Street Opening Chestnut Street to Broad
Street
83 11/5/1906
Seventh Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Seventh Street Sidewalks Chestnut Street to Broad
Street
208 5/5/1930
Seventh Street Opening Broad Street to Minor Street 359 11/16/1959
Shimerville Road Vacating Reading Co. for 700' W. 193 3/18/1929
Shimerville Road Sidewalks Tenth Street to Thirteenth
Street
208 5/5/1930
Shimerville Road Vacating Portion 331 9/17/1956
Shimerville Road Opening Portion 332 9/17/1956
Shimerville Road Vacating Pennsylvania Avenue to
Leiberts Creek
626 3/2/1981
Shimerville Road Sewers Entire length 664 4/1/1985
Short Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Short Alley Extending Furnace Street to Borough
line
72 8/6/1906
Short Alley Relocating Portion 166 —
Sixteenth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Sixteenth Street Vacating Portion 333 9/17/1956
Sixteenth Street Opening Portion 334 9/17/1956
Sixteenth Street Sewers Extension R73-13 4/16/1973
Sixteenth Street Sewers Manhole 322A to 322B R83-4 2/22/1983
Sixth Street Name changed From Elm Street 9 5/4/1871
Sixth Street Extending Furnace Street to Borough
line
72 8/6/1906
Sixth Street Paving Chestnut Street to North
Street
169 6/17/1926
Sixth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Sixth Street Sidewalks Minor Street to Perkiomen
RR
208 5/5/1930
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:886
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Sixth Street Sewers Portion R72-6 3/6/1972
S. Sixteenth Street Adopting Portion 808 12/5/1994
South Alley Naming Broad Street to Borough line 38 9/14/1895
Spruce Street Opening Barrett Road to Seventh
Street
336 11/19/1956
Spruce Street Macungie Avenue to
Seventh Street
636 6/7/1982
State Avenue Sewers Manhole B-215 to B-215A R77-14 8/29/1977
Stoklea Drive Opening Entire length 636 6/7/1982
Stream Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Tenth Street Locating Entire length 126 5/22/1911
Tenth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Tenth Street Grading Chestnut Street to subway 206 4/21/1930
Tenth Street Sidewalks Chestnut Street to
Shimerville Road
208 5/5/1930
Tenth Street Improvements Portion 401 4/20/1964
Tenth Street Sewers Manhole C118D to Borough
line
R.74-8 6/3/1974
Tenth Street Opening Entire length 536 12/1/1975
Tenth Street Portion 603 9/24/1979
Tenth Street (S.) Additions Portion 800 9/19/1994
Tenth Street (S.) Adopting Portion 811 2/21/1995
Third Street Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Third Street Sewers Portion 5 11/16/1875
Third Street Curbing Grave Yard Street to Green
Alley
40 8/28/1896
Third Street Extending Furnace Street and North
Street to Borough lines
72 8/6/1906
Third Street Opening Main Street to North Street 109 10/4/1909
Third Street Paving Main Street to Ridge Street 165 6/15/1925
Third Street Adrain Street to Reading Co. 196 6/17/1929
Third Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Third Street Vacating Portion 391 3/18/1963
Thirteenth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Thomas Miklencic
Drive
Opening Entire length 574 12/5/1977
Tilghman Street Opening Entire length 441 7/15/1968
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:887
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Tilghman Street DeLong Avenue to Twelfth
Street
521 12/16/1974
Tool's Alley Named Entire length 11 1/9/1872
Twelfth Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Twelfth Street Opening Portion 617 9/8/1980
Union Street Relocating Portion 166 —
Union Street Vacating First Street to Reading Co. 201 12/2/1929
Unnamed alley Opening Second Street to Third
Street
26 1/17/1887
Unnamed alley Walnut Street to Green Alley 58 3/13/1905
Unnamed alley Vacating Portion 147 8/6/1917
Unnamed alley Fifth Street to Sixth Street 164 —
Unnamed alley Portion 253 9/16/1940
Unnamed alley 254 9/16/1940
Unnamed alley 302 10/16/1950
Unnamed alley Long Street to Ridge Street 310 7/20/1953
Unnamed alley Walnut Street to Green
Street
320 7/5/1955
Unnamed alley Portions 323 10/3/1955
Unnamed alley 372 6/20/1960
Unnamed alley 377 12/5/1960
Unnamed alley 406 12/7/1964
Unnamed street Vacating Keystone Avenue to
Keystone Avenue
60 7/10/1905
Unnamed street
(Emmaus High
School)
Accepted Phase I, Stadium
Renovations to the Emmaus
High School
818 8/17/1995
Walnut Street Opening Sixth Street to Macungie
Road
71 8/13/1906
Walnut Street Seventh Street to Macungie
Road
89 9/2/1907
Walnut Street Extending Macungie Road to Borough
line
126 5/22/1911
Walnut Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Walnut Street Grading Seventh Street to unnamed
alley
206 4/21/1930
Walnut Street Opening Portion 603 9/24/1979
Washington Street Name changed to Fourth Street 9 5/4/1871
§ H-101 EMMAUS CODE § H-101
FWD:888
Street Activity Location Ord./Res. Adoption Date
Water Alley Named Entire length 1 4/14/1860
Wayne Street Grade Cherry Street to Keystone
Avenue
271 1/15/1945
Wenner Street Laying out Jefferson Street to George
Street
568 8/8/1977
Williams Street Vacating Harrison Street to Elwood
Street
472 2/15/1971
Wood Street Vacating New Street to Line Street 9 5/4/1871
Wood Street Fifth Street to unnamed
alley
183 3/19/1928
Wood Street Relocating Portion 200 11/4/1929
Wood Street Vacating Portion 337 4/1/1957
Wood Street Opening Fifth Street to Sixth Street 349 8/18/1958
Appendix I
WATER
§ I-101. Water
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
94 6/1/1908 Extension of works of Mountain Water
Company
192 1/21/1929 Purchasing of Mountain Water Company
736 7/16/1990 Establishing uniform water rental or
charges for use of the Borough of Emmaus
Water System by customers both inside and
outside of the corporate boundary limits of
the Borough
Appendix J
ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
§ J-101. Zoning; Prior Ordinances
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
539 12/29/1975 Zoning
554 11/1/1976 Zoning
558 2/7/1977 Zoning
562 5/2/1977 Zoning
566 6/6/1977 Zoning
§ H-101 FOREWORD § J-101
FWD:889
Ord./Res. Adoption Date Subject
567 7/11/1977 Zoning
573 10/3/1977 Zoning
583 4/17/1978 Zoning
612 3/17/1980 Zoning
620 12/15/1980 Zoning
624 2/16/1981 Zoning
637 7/6/1982 Zoning
638 7/6/1982 Zoning
649 3/7/1983 Zoning
651 3/21/1983 Zoning
682 9/8/1987 Zoning
755 9/3/1991 Zoning
762 2/3/1992 Zoning
766 6/1/1992 Zoning
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES
Chapter KO
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES
§ KO-101. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances.
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1 Appendix H
2 Repealed by 675
3 Repealed by 230
4 Repealed by 235
5 Appendix H
6 Appendix D
7 Repealed by 675
8 Repealed by 235
9 Appendix H
10 Repealed by 675
11 Appendix H
12 Appendix H
13 Appendix H
14 Repealed by 675
§ J-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:890
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
15 Appendix H
16 Appendix H
17 Appendix H
18 Appendix H
19 Appendix H
20 Appendix H
21 Appendix H
22 Appendix H
23 Repealed by 195
24 Appendix H
25 Appendix H
26 Appendix H
27 Appendix H
28 Appendix H
29 Appendix H
30 Repealed by 463
31 Repealed by 675
32 Repealed by 588
33 Repealed by 231
34 Repealed by 675
35 Repealed by 235
36 Repealed by 235
37 Appendix B
38 Appendix H
39 Appendix H
40 Appendix H
41 Appendix C
42 Appendix H
43 Appendix H
44 Appendix H
45 Appendix C
46 Repealed by 235
47 Repealed by 474
48 Appendix H
49 Appendix A
50 Repealed by 675
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:891
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
51 Repealed by 675
52 Repealed by 675
53 Appendix H
54 Appendix H
55 Repealed by 675
56 Repealed by 675
57 Repealed by 675
58 Appendix H
59 Repealed by 233
60 Appendix H
61 Appendix H
62 Repealed by 235
63 Repealed by 235
64 Repealed by 235
65 Repealed by 675
66 Repealed by 235
67 Repealed by 235
68 Repealed by 596
69 Appendix H
70 Repealed by 235
71 Appendix H
72 Appendix H
73 Repealed by 190
74 Repealed by 230
75 Repealed by 232
76 Repealed by 675
77 Repealed by 589
78 Repealed by 235
79 Repealed by 586
80 Repealed by 675
81 Repealed by 533
82 Appendix B
83 Appendix H
84 Appendix H
85 Repealed by 232
86 Salaries 1907
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:892
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
87 Did Not Pass
88 Repealed by 675
89 Appendix H
90 Tax Rate 1908
91 Repealed by 675
92 Repealed by 675
93 Appendix H
94 Appendix I
95 Repealed by 235
96 Repealed by 675
97 Repealed by 231
98 Appendix C
99 Repealed by 456
100 Repealed by 675
101 Appendix B
102 Appendix C
103 Repealed by 111
104 Did Not Pass
105 Appendix C
106 Repealed by 235
107 Repealed by 257
108 Appendix C
109 Appendix H
110 Appendix C
111 Repealed by 675
112 Tax Rate Procedure
113 Repealed by 675
114 Repealed by 235
115 Repealed by 595
116 Repealed by 126
117 Repealed by 675
118 Appendix H
119 Repealed by 230
120 Appendix H
121 Appendix H
122 Appendix H
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:893
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
123 Appendix H
124 Appendix B
125 Appendix H
126 Appendix H
127 Repealed by 235
128 Repealed by 584
129 Repealed by 675
130 Appendix H
131 Appendix H
132 Appendix H
133 Appendix H
134 Superseded by 143
135 Appendix B
136 Repealed by 236
137 Repealed by 305
138 Repealed by 420
139 Repealed by 232
140 Repealed by 231
141 Appendix B
142 Repealed by 586
143 Superseded by 146
144 Appendix B
145 Tax Rate 1917
146 Superseded by 153
147 Appendix H
148 Repealed by 231
149 Repealed by 257
150 Appendix B
151 Tax Rate 1918
152 Repealed by 513
153 Superseded by 157
154 Repealed by 640
155 Repealed by 235
156 Repealed by 497
157 Superseded by 159
158 Appendix A
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:894
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
159 Superseded by 166
160 Appendix H
161 Appendix H
162 Repealed by 580
163 Appendix B
164 Appendix H
165 Appendix H
166 Appendix H
167 Appendix A
168 Appendix A
169 Appendix H
170 Appendix H
171 Repealed by 675
172 Repealed by 586
173 Appendix A
174 Appendix H
175 Appendix H
176 Appendix H
177 Appendix C
178 Appendix C
179 Appendix B
180 Appendix B
181 Appendix H
182 Appendix H
183 Appendix H
184 Appendix H
185 Appendix H
186 Appendix H
187 Appendix H
188 Appendix C
189 Repealed by 235
190 Repealed by 513
191 Salaries 1928
192 Appendix I
193 Appendix H
194 Appendix H
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:895
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
195 Repealed by 303
196 Appendix H
197 Appendix H
198 Appendix H
199 Repealed by 513
200 Appendix H
201 Appendix H
202 Tax Rate 1930
203 Repealed by 217
204 Repealed by 462
205 Repealed by 474
206 Appendix H
207 Appendix H
208 Appendix H
209 Appendix H
210 Superseded by 675
211 Repealed by 539
212 Appendix A
213 Appendix H
214 Tax Rate 1931
215 Appendix H
216 Repealed by 493
217 Salaries 1933
218 Tax Rate 1933
219 Repealed by 235
220 Repealed by 675
221 Salaries 1934
222 Tax Rate 1934
223 Repealed by 463
224 Repealed by 234
225 Appendix B
226 Repealed by 237
227 Appendix B
228 Appendix B
229 Tax Rate 1935
229 1/2 Tax Rate 1936
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:896
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
230 Repealed by 474
231 Repealed by 560
232 Superseded by 854
233 Repealed by 497
234 Chapter 6 §§ 6-101, 6-102
235 Repealer
236 Repealed by 467
237 Repealed by 539
238 Appendix H
239 Appendix C
240 Repealed by 278
241 Tax Rate 1938
242 Appendix C
243 Chapter 1 § 1-301
244 Appendix B
245 Appendix B
246 Appendix B
247 Tax Rate 1939
248 Repealed by 660
249 Repealed by 675
250 Appendix C
251 Tax Rate 1940
252 Repealed by 314
253 Appendix H
254 Appendix H
255 Appendix A
256 Appendix C
256A Tax Rate 1941
256B Repealed by 560
257 Appendix C
258 Salaries 1942
259 Tax Rate 1942
260 Appendix H
261 Appendix H
262 Tax Rate 1943
263 Salary 1944
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:897
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
264 Tax Rate 1944
265 Appendix H
266 Appendix H
267 Appendix H
268 Appendix H
269 Appendix H
270 Appendix H
271 Appendix H
272 Appendix H
273 Tax Rate 1945
274 Appendix H
275 Appendix H
276 Appendix H
277 Repealed by 478
278 Salary 1945
279 Tax Rate 1946
280 Repealed by 559
281 Repealed by 328
282 Tax Rate 1947
283 Appendix B
284 Appendix H
285 Appendix A
286 Superseded by 296
287 Appendix C
288 Repealed by 675
289 Repealed by 648
290 Repealed by 1066
291 Tax Rate 1948
292 Appendix E
293 Repealed by 675
294 Tax Rate 1949
295 Repealed by 513
296 Repealed by 369
297 Appendix C
298 Appendix C
299 Appendix A
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:898
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
300 Tax Rate 1950
301 Appendix C
302 Appendix H
303 Repealed by 439
303A Tax Rate 1951
304 Appendix A
305 Repealed by 419
306 Tax Rate 1952
307 Appendix C
308 Chapter 1 § 1-701
309 Tax Rate 1953
310 Appendix H
311 Appendix H
312 Appendix B
313 Tax Rate 1954
314 Repealed by 437
315 Appendix H
316 Appendix C
317 Appendix H
318 Superseded by 539
319 Tax Rate 1955
320 Appendix H
321 Appendix H
322 Appendix H
323 Appendix H
324 Appendix B
325 Chapter 24 §§ 24-501 – 24-504
326 Appendix A
327 Tax Rate 1956
328 Repealed by 364
329 Appendix H
330 Appendix A
331 Appendix H
332 Appendix H
333 Appendix H
334 Appendix H
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:899
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
335 Chapter 1 § 1-321
336 Appendix H
337 Appendix H
338 Tax Rate 1957
339 Appendix B
340 Appendix H
341 Appendix B
342 Appendix H
343 Appendix H
344 Repealed by 539
345 Repealed by 630
346 Appendix H
347 Appendix C
348 Tax Rate 1958
349 Appendix H
350 Appendix H
351 Repealed by 513
352 Chapter 1 §§ 1-201 – 1-203
353 Repealed by 560
354 Repealed by 439
355 Appendix G
355A Tax Rate 1959
356 Chapter 1 § 1-204
357 Appendix C
358 Repealed by 539
359 Appendix H
360 Appendix H
361 Appendix C
362 Appendix G
363 Appendix F
364 Repealed by 478
365 Appendix G
366 Appendix G
367 Chapter 18 §§ 18-101 – 18-107
368 Chapter 18 §§ 18-201 – 18-209
369 Repealed by 436
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:900
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
370 Tax Rate 1960
371 Chapter 18 §§ 18-102, 18-104
372 Appendix H
373 Appendix A
374 Appendix H
375 Appendix C
376 Repealed by 527
377 Appendix H
378 Repealed by 381
379 Tax Rate 1961
380 Repealed by 477
381 Repealed by 1066
382 Repealed by 477
383 Appendix H
384 Tax Rate 1962
385 Appendix H
386 Repealed by 587
387 Repealed by 539
388 Appendix B
389 Repealed by 587
390 Tax Rate 1963
391 Appendix H
392 Repealed by 560
393 Appendix H
394 Appendix C
395 Appendix B
396 Appendix G
397 Appendix C
398 Appendix H
399 Appendix G
400 Tax Rate 1964
401 Appendix H
402 Repealed by 513
403 Repealed by 437
404 Appendix F
405 Repealed by 539
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:901
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
406 Appendix H
407 Superseded by 988
408 Superseded by 964
409 Repealed by 423
410 Tax Rate 1965
411 Appendix H
412 Chapter 12 § 12-101
413 Superseded by 964
414 Appendix H
415 Appendix H
416 Repealed by 539
417 Appendix H
418 Repealed by 477
419 Repealed by 508
420 Repealed by 525
421 Tax Rate 1966
422 Repealed by 587
423 Superseded by 1141
424 Repealed by 477
425 Chapter 11 §§ 11-301 – 11-305
426 Superseded by 988
427 Tax Rate 1967
428 Appendix D
429 Appendix B
430 Did Not Pass
431 Repealed by 439
432 Appendix G
433 Appendix F
434 Repealed by 439
435 Repealed by 539
436 Repealed by 505
437 Repealer
438 Tax Rate 1968
439 Repealed by 595
440 Appendix H
441 Appendix H
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:902
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
442 Appendix H
443 Superseded by 964
444 Superseded by 778
445 Repealed by 675
446 Repealed by 587
447 Repealed by 539
448 Appendix A
449 Tax Rate 1969
450 Appendix A
451 Chapter 21 §§ 21-201 – 21-208
452 Chapter 1 § 1-301
453 Appendix A
454 Repealed by 551
455 Repealed by 527
456 Superseded by 635
457 Appendix H
458 Repealed by 675
459 Appendix G
460 Repealed by 587
461 Repealed by 595
462 Repealed by 480
463 Repealer
464 Tax Rate 1970
465 Repealed by 659
466 Repealed by 539
467 Chapter 21 §§ 21-101 – 21-120
468 Appendix H
469 Appendix H
470 Appendix H
471 Tax Rate 1971
472 Appendix H
473 Superseded by 675
474 Chapter 26 §§ 26-101 – 26-122
475 Repealed by 525
476 Repealed by 539
477 Repealed by 652
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:903
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
478 Repealed by 656
479 Appendix H
480 Chapter 2 §§ 2-101 – 2-107
481 Tax Rate 1972
482 Appendix B
Res. 72-6 Appendix H
483 Appendix H
484 Appendix A
485 Appendix H
486 Appendix F
487 Appendix F
488 Appendix H
489 Chapter 10 §§ 10-201 – 10-208
490 Budget 1973
491 Tax Rate 1973
492 Appendix H
Res. 73-4 Appendix H
Res. 73-13 Appendix H
493 Chapter 13 §§ 13-201 – 13-212
494 Appendix H
495 Appendix H
496 Appendix H
497 Superseded by 1123
498 Appendix F
499 Superseded by 675
500 Appendix H
501 Appendix H
502 Chapter 11 §§ 11-201 – 11-204
Res. 73-26 Appendix D
503 Chapter 6 §§ 6-201 – 6-203
504 Chapter 24 § 24-501
505 Chapter 1 § 1-102
506 Budget 1974
507 Tax Rate 1974
508 Superseded by 842
509 Appendix H
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:904
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
510 Appendix H
511 Appendix H
512 Chapter 1 § 1-301
513 Superseded by 675
Res. 74-6 Appendix H
Res. 74-8 Appendix H
514 Appendix F
515 Chapter 18 § 18-209
516 Appendix H
517 Appendix H
518 Superseded by 964
519 Superseded by 675
520 Repealed by 656
521 Appendix H
522 Appendix F
523 Budget 1975
524 Tax Rate 1975
525 Repealed by 646
526 Repealed by 659
527 Repealed by 547
528 Repealed by 595
529 Appendix H
530 Appendix F
531 Appendix H
532 Appendix F
533 Superseded by 635
534 Appendix H
535 Appendix H
Res. 75-14 Appendix H
536 Appendix H
537 Budget 1976
538 Tax Rate 1976
539 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
540 Chapter 18 § 18-203
541 Appendix H
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:905
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
542 Chapter 10 §§ 10-101 – 10-105
543 Repealed by 562
544 Chapter 11 §§ 11-202, 11-203
545 Repealed by 595
546 Superseded by 675
547 Superseded by 852
548 Chapter 24 §§ 24-101 – 24-108
549 Appendix H
550 Repealed by 663
551 Chapter 22 §§ 22-101 – 22-1103
552 Appendix H
553 Chapter 13 §§ 13-301 – 13-322
554 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
555 Appendix H
556 Budget 1977
557 Tax Rate 1977
558 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
Res. 77-6 Appendix C
559 Superseded by 675
560 Superseded by 919
561 Appendix B
562 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
563 Superseded by 651
564 Chapter 22 § 22-513
565 Chapter 1 §§ 1-621 – 1-630
566 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
567 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
568 Appendix H
569 Appendix B
Res. 77-14 Appendix H
570 Appendix H
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:906
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
571 Appendix H
572 Superseded by 981
573 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
Res. 77-22 Appendix H
574 Appendix H
575 Appendix H
576 Appendix H
577 Appendix H
578 Budget 1978
579 Tax Rate 1978
580 Appendix H
581 Appendix B
582 Appendix H
583 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
584 Chapter 11 §§ 11-101, 11-102
585 Superseded by 662
586 Chapter 13 §§ 13-101 – 13-110
587 Superseded by 981
588 Repealed by 640
589 Chapter 7 §§ 7-201 – 7-220
590 Appendix H
591 Appendix H
592 Budget 1979
593 Tax Rate 1979
Res. 79-2 Chapter 5 § 5-501
594 Appendix H
595 Repealed by 650
596 Superseded by 855
597 Appendix H
598 Chapter 21 § 21-203
599 Repealed by 652
600 Repealed by 656
601 Appendix H
602 Appendix H
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:907
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
Res. 79-12 Appendix H
603 Appendix H
604 Chapter 21 §§ 21-114, 21-119
605 Superseded by 675
606 Budget 1980
607 Tax Rate 1980
608 Appendix H
609 Appendix H
610 Repealed by 650
611 Repealed by 652
612 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
613 Repealed by 663
614 Chapter 2 §§ 2-201, 2-202
615 Chapter 13 § 13-307
616 Appendix H
617 Appendix H
618 Appendix H
619 Appendix H
620 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
621 Repealed by 656
622 Budget 1981
623 Tax Rate 1981
624 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
625 Appendix D
626 Appendix H
627 Superseded by 919
628 Repealed by 652
629 Chapter 1 § 1-101
630 Superseded by 1079
631 Repealed by 675
632 Budget 1982
633 Tax Rate 1982
634 Superseded by 675
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:908
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
635 Chapter 10 §§ 10-301 – 10-304
636 Appendix H
637 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
638 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
639 Repealed by 656
640 Superseded by 925
641 Appendix B
642 Superseded by 964
643 Repealed by 656
644 Budget 1983
645 Tax Rate 1983
646 Superseded by 887
647 Chapter 1 §§ 1-561 – 1-569
648 Chapter 24 §§ 24-301 – 24-307
Res. 83-4 Appendix H
649 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
650 Superseded by 989
651 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
652 Superseded by 975
653 Appendix D
Res. 83-6 Repealed by 656
654 Appendix B
655 Repealed by 656
656 Superseded by 977
657 Tax Rate 1984
658 Appendix H
659 Chapter 1 § 1-103
660 Repealer
Res. 84-25 Beginning Pages
661 Tax Rate 1985
662 Superseded by 887
663 Chapter 18 §§ 18-301 – 18-303
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:909
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
664 Appendix H
665 Appendix B
666 Superseded by 981
667 Chapter 18 § 18-401
668 Superseded by 738
669 Chapter 1 §§ 1-341 – 1-347
669A Tax Rate 1986
670 Superseded by 964
671 Superseded by 975
672 Superseded by 832
673 Chapter 1 § 1-202
Appendix D
674 Appendix H
675 Adopting Ord. Intro. Pg. ix
R-86-12 Chapter 1 § 1-103
676 Amended by 1019
677 Chapter 15 § 15-409
678 Repealed by 1058
679 Superseded by 854
680 Chapter 13 § 13-208
681 Chapter 1 § 1-607
682 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
683 Chapter 12 § 12-101
684 Appendix H
685 Chapter 10 § 10-401 – 10-410
686 Appendix H
687 Chapter 24 § 24-503
688 Superseded by 964
689 Superseded by 977
690 Tax Rate 1988
691 Appendix H
692 Chapter 10 §§ 10-501, 10-502
693 Chapter 1 § 1-301
694 Superseded by 977
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:910
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
695 Chapter 15 §§ 15-404.1, 15-404.2,
15-404.3
696 Superseded by 975
697 Chapter 15 § 15-207, 15-403, 15-404,
15-406, 15-407, 15-803
698 Chapter 6 § 6-301 – 6-307
R-88-11 Superseded by 699
699 Chapter 15 § 15-403
700 Superseded by 918
701 Chapter 15 § 15-214
702 Appendix D
703 Chapter 13 § 13-305
704 Appendix H
705 Tax Rate 1989
706 Superseded by 887
707 Chapter 15 § 15-403
708 Chapter 15 § 15-214
709 Superseded by 854
710 Superseded by 975
711 Appendix H
712 Chapter 15 § 15-214
713 Chapter 15 § 15-207
714 Superseded by 919
715 Chapter 26 § 26-114
716 Superseded by 964
717 Chapter 22 § 22-514 – 22-519
718 Appendix H
719 Chapter 15 § 15-207
720 Chapter 20 §§ 20-301 – 20-307, 20-310,
20-311
721 Chapter 15 § 15-403
722 Chapter 15 § 15-214
723 Tax Rate 1990
724 Appendix B
725 Appendix B
726 Superseded by 778
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:911
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
727 Superseded by 925
728 Superseded by 981
729 Appendix B
730 Appendix B
731 Chapter 15 § 15-403
732 Chapter 15 § 15-207
733 Chapter 6 §§ 6-401 – 6-404
734 Superseded by 977
735 Chapter 1 § 1-426
736 Appendix I
737 Appendix H
738 Superseded by 880
739 Appendix B
740 Chapter 18 § 18-203
741 Tax Rate 1990
742 Chapter 24 § 24-701
743 Chapter 15 § 15-214
744 Chapter 2 §§ 2-401 – 2-406
745 Chapter 15 § 15-403
746 Superseded by 964
747 Chapter 15 § 15-403
748 Chapter 15 § 15-207
749 Chapter 15 § 15-406
750 Superseded by 981
751 Superseded by 887
752 Chapter 1 § 1-301
753 Chapter 15 § 15-403
754 Chapter 15 § 15-403
755 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
756 Chapter 15 § 15-403
757 Chapter 15 § 15-406
758 Chapter 15 § 15-403
759 Chapter 15 § 15-403
760 Tax Rate 1992
761 Chapter 22 §§ 22-202, 22-511
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:912
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
762 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
763 Superseded by 778
764 Chapter 15 §§ 15-403, 15-407
765 Chapter 15 § 15-603
766 Repealed by 776
Appendix J
767 Appendix H
768 Chapter 15 § 15-403
769 Superseded by 887
770 Tax Rate 1993
771 Appendix H
772 Appendix H
773 Chapter 15 §§ 15-214, 15-403, 15-406
774 Chapter 15 § 15-404
775 Chapter 15 § 15-403
776 Chapter 27 §§ 27-101 – 27-903
777 Appendix B
778 Superseded by 981
779 Superseded by 925
780 Chapter 5 § 5-461
781 Superseded by 989
782 Chapter 15 § 15-214
783 Chapter 22 § 22-511
784 Chapter 22 § 22-304
785 Tax Rate 1994
786 Chapter 15 § 15-403
787 Chapter 15 § 15-206
788 Chapter 15 § 15-214
789 Chapter 15 § 15-406
790 Chapter 12 § 12-101
791 Chapter 15 § 15-214
792 Appendix B
793 Chapter 27 § 27-603
794 Chapter 15 § 15-406
795 Chapter 15 § 15-301
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:913
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
796 Appendix G
797 Appendix H
798 Chapter 15 § 15-601
799 Superseded by 1137
800 Appendix H
801 Appendix H
802 Chapter 27 §§ 27-202, 27-503, 27-517,
27-518
803 Chapter 22 § 22-502
804 Repealed by 1067
805 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
806 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
807 Repealed by 906
808 Appendix H
809 Tax Rate 1995
810 Chapter 18 § 18-203
811 Appendix H
812 Chapter 15 § 15-403
813 Chapter 15 § 15-403
814 Chapter 15 § 15-406
815 Chapter 15 §§ 15-207, 15-214, 15-403,
15-404.1, 15-406, 15-408
816 Chapter 27 §§ 27-701, 27-707
817 Appendix H
818 Appendix H
819 Tax Rate 1996
820 Appendix H
821 Chapter 1 §§ 1-901 – 1-909
822 Chapter 1 §§ 1-921 – 1-930
823 Chapter 15 § 15-406
824 Chapter 16 § 16-201
825 Tax Rate 1996
826 Chapter 15 § 15-403
827 Chapter 15 §§ 15-207, 15-210
828 Chapter 15 § 15-207
829 Chapter 15 § 15-404
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:914
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
830 Chapter 27 §§ 27-202, 27-306, 27-402
831 Appendix G
832 Superseded by 1097
833 Chapter 10 §§ 10-601 – 10-604
834 Chapter 15 § 15-407
835 Chapter 15 § 15-403
836 Superseded by 989
837 Chapter 15 § 15-214
838 Superseded by 975
839 Tax Rate 1997
840 Chapter 1 § 1-105
841 Chapter 1 § 1-106
842 Chapter 1 § 1-104
843 Superseded by 904
844 Chapter 15 § 15-214
845 Chapter 15 § 15-404
846 Chapter 15 § 15-407
847 Chapter 15 § 15-404
848 Repealed by 908
849 Superseded by 975
850 Superseded by 977
851 Repealed by 951
852 Superseded by 856
853 Chapter 1 § 1-107
854 Superseded by 992
855 Superseded by 1006
856 Chapter 1 §§ 1-501 – 1-522
857 Chapter 15 § 15-403
858 Appendix G
859 Tax Rate 1998
860 Repealed by 951
861 Chapter 1 § 1-105
862 Chapter 1 § 1-103
863 Chapter 15 §§ 15-214, 15-403
864 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
865 Chapter 1 §§ 1-354, 1-355
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:915
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
866 Budget 1998
867 Repealed by 951
868 Repealed by 951
869 Appendix B
870 Chapter 15 § 15-406
871 Not Adopted
872 Chapter 15 § 15-403
873 Chapter 15 § 15-405
874 Chapter 15 § 15-403
875 Appendix H
876 Chapter 22 § 22-511
877 Tax Rate 1999
878 Appendix B
879 Chapter 24 §§ 24-801 – 24-805
880 Chapter 26 §§ 26-201 – 26-205
881 Chapter 1 § 1-106
882 Appendix D
883 Appendix B
884 Chapter 15 § 15-214
885 Chapter 15 § 15-406
886 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
887 Chapter 1 §§ 1-541 – 1-552, 1-601 –
1-612
888 Chapter 15 § 15-406
889 Chapter 26 § 26-123
890 Chapter 15 § 15-407
891 Chapter 15 § 15-407
892 Voided
893 Appendix D
894 Chapter 15 § 15-403
895 Chapter 15 § 15-403
896 Chapter 15 § 15-403
897 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
898 Chapter 15 § 15-403
899 Chapter 15 § 15-403
900 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:916
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
901 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
902 Tax Rate 2000
903
904 Repealed by 1125
905 Chapter 22 § 22-302
906 Repealed by 1016
907 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
908 Repealed 848
909 Chapter 15 § 15-209
910 Chapter 15 § 15-406
911 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
912 Chapter 15 § 15-403
913 Appendix D
914 Chapter 15 § 15-201
915 Chapter 15 § 15-214
916 Chapter 15 § 15-403
917 Tax Rate 2001
918 Repealed by 1011
919 Superseded by 981
920 Chapter 15 § 15-403
921 Chapter 15 § 15-403
922 Chapter 15 § 15-214
923 Superseded by 975
924 Repealed by 967
925 Superseded by 981
926 Chapter 15 § 15-409
927 Chapter 5 § 5-461
928 Appendix B
929 Chapter 14 § 14-403
930 Appendix D
931 Chapter 15 § 15-602
932 Chapter 15 § 15-406
933 Repealed by 1016
934 Appendix D
935 Chapter 15 § 15-214
936 Chapter 1 § 1-604
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:917
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
937 Chapter 27 §§ 27-107, 27-202, 27-306,
27-309, 27-606, 27-707,
27-901, 27-902
938 Chapter 1 § 1-301
939 Chapter 12 § 12-101
940 Chapter 22 §§ 22-202, 22-304, 22-402,
22-403, 22-502, 22-506,
22-512, 22-513, 22-604,
22-605, 22-701 – 22-703,
22-705, 22-706
Chapter 26 §§ 26-204, 26-311, 26-334
Chapter 27 §§ 27-102, 27-105, 27-202,
27-301, 27-306, 27-402,
27-504, 27-505, 27-507,
27-514, 27-516, 27-518,
27-806
941 Appendix D
942 Chapter 15 § 15-406
943 Tax Rate 2002
944 Chapter 24 § 24-503
945 Appendix H
946 Appendix B
947 Chapter 6 §§ 6-301, 6-302, 6-304,
6-306, 6-308
948 Chapter 5 §§ 5-601, 5-602
949 Chapter 13 §§ 13-501, 13-502
950 Chapter 15 § 15-403
951 Repealed 851, 860, 867, and 868
952 Chapter 18 § 18-203
953 Not adopted
954 Not adopted
955 Chapter 15 § 15-214
956 Chapter 15 § 15-215
957 Appendix D
958 Not adopted
959 Chapter 15 § 15-214
960 Chapter 15 § 15-403
961 Chapter 15 § 15-214
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:918
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
962 Chapter 1 § 1-105
963 Chapter 15 § 15-403
964 Chapter 20 §§ 20-101 – 20-105, 20-201 –
20-203, 20-205 – 20-208
965 Superseded by 981
966 Appendix D
967 Appendix D
968 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
970 Repealed by 1016
971 Chapter 15 § 15-403
972 Chapter 15 § 15-403
973 Chapter 15 § 15-602
974 Tax Levy 2004
975 Superseded by 1050
976 Superseded by 1050
977 Superseded by 1051
978 Superseded by 1051
979 Superseded by 1051
980 Chapter 5 § 5-701
981 Chapter 5 §§ 5-101 – 5-106
982 Chapter 26 §§ 26-325 – 26-326
983 Appendix B
984 Appendix D
985 Tax Levy 2005
986 Chapter 1 §§ 1-341, 1-345, 1-346
987 Chapter 15 § 15-214
988 Superseded by 1031
989 Chapter 21 §§ 21-401 – 21-411
990 Chapter 1 § 1-341
991 Chapter 1 §§ 1-361 – 1-368
992 Chapter 21 §§ 21-301 – 21-303
993 Chapter 15 § 15-803
994 Chapter 27 § 27-202, 27-306, 27-402
995 Appendix B
996 Chapter 15 § 15-403
997 Chapter 15 §§ 15-405.1, 15-405.2
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:919
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
998 Pending
999 Chapter 15 § 15-207
1000 Tax Levy 2006
1001 Superseded by 1031
1002 Chapter 1 § 1-427
1003 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1004 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1005 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
1006 Chapter 1 § 1-321
Chapter 25 §§ 101-108
1007 Appendix H
1008 Void
1009 Chapter 27 §§ 27-111, 27-116, 27-202,
27-303, 27-306, 27-402,
27-403, 27-601, 27-704,
27-705, 27-803, 27-804,
27-806
1010 Chapter 15 § 15-407
1011 Chapter 26 §§ 26-301 – 26-386
1008 Missing
1012 Appendix C
1014 Appendix H
1015 Void
1016 Repealed by 1095
1017 Chapter 15 § 15-407
1018 Chapter 1 § 1-341
1019 Chapter 24 § 24-104
1020 Chapter 18 § 18-203
1021 Tax Levy 2007
1022 Appendix F
1023 Superseded by 1051
1024 Superseded by 1050
1025 Chapter 5 § 5-602
1026 Chapter 15 § 15-214
1027 Chapter 18 § 18-103
1028 Not Adopted
1029 Superseded by 1050
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:920
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1030 Chapter 15 § 15-405.1
1031 Chapter 24 §§ 24-401 – 24-409
1032 Chapter 1 § 1-343
1033 Superseded by 1141
1034 Tax Levy 2008
1035 Superseded by 1050
1036 Appendix H
1037 Chapter 2 §§ 2-501, 2-502
1038 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1039 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1040 Chapter 15 § 15-214
1041 Chapter 26 §§ 26-105, 26-106
1042 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1043 Chapter 24 § 24-901
1044 Appendix F
1045 Chapter 16 § 16-103
1046 Chapter 21 §§ 21-401 – 21-410
1047 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
1048 Tax Levy 2009
1049 Chapter 18 § 18-203
1050 Chapter 1 § 1-721
1051 Chapter 1 § 1-731
1052 Chapter 15 § 15-402
1053 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1054 Repealed by 1125
1055 Tabled
1056 Chapter 15 §§ 15-403, 15-404.1
1057 Chapter 20 §§ 20-101 – 20-103, 20-202,
20-303, 20-306, 20-307
1058 Repealed 675, §§ 15-501 – 15-512, and
678
1059 Chapter 1 §§ 1-1001 – 1-1008
1060 Chapter 15 § 15-201
1061 Chapter 16 § 16-109
1062 Chapter 27 § 27-704
1063 Tax Levy 2010
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:921
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1064 Chapter 24 §§ 24-1001 – 24-1009
1065 Chapter 1 § 1-732
1066 Repealed 290, 381, 675, §§ 15-602,
15-603, and 15-605
1067 Repealed 675, §§ 15-901 – 15-904, and
804
1068 Chapter 15 § 15-207
1069 Appendix B
1070 Repealed by 1137
1071 Chapter 18 § 18-101
1072 Chapter 25 § 25-105
1073 Chapter 27 § 27-806
1074 Tax Levy 2011
1075 Chapter 26 § 26-106
1076 Chapter 1 § 1-427
1077 Chapter 21 § 21-301
1078 Appendix B
1079 Chapter 24 §§ 24-201 – 24-208
1080 Chapter 27 § 27-807
1081 Chapter 16 §§ 16-103, 16-109
1082 Appendix C
1083 Chapter 27 §§ 27-202, 27-306
1084 Tax Levy 2012
1085 Chapter 25 §§ 25-201 – 25-207
1086 Chapter 1 §§ 1-1101 – 1-1105
1087 Chapter 15 § 15-405
1088 Chapter 1 §§ 1-341, 1-344, 1-381
1089 Not adopted
1090 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1091 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1092 Chapter 26 §§ 26-105, 26-106
1093 Chapter 18 § 18-203
1094 Tax Levy 2013
1095 Repealed by 1114
1096 Chapter 1 §§ 1-1121 – 1-1125
1097 Repealed by 1174
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:922
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1098 Chapter 27 §§ 27-1001 – 27-1006
1099 Chapter 15 §§ 15-205 – 15-216, 15-218,
15-303, 15-402, 15-403,
15-404.1, 15-405 – 15-409,
15-601, 15-602, 15-606,
15-607, 15-702, 15-706,
15-709, 15-801, 15-803,
15-804, 15-1002, 15-1006
1100 Chapter 27 Zoning Map Amendment
1101 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1102 Repealed by 1137
1103 Tabled
1104 Tax Levy 2014
1105 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1106 Chapter 15 § 15-209
1107 Chapter 27 Zoning Map Amendment
1108 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1109 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1110 Appendix D
1111 Chapter 27 §§ 27-202, 27-306, 27-402
1112 Chapter 15 §§ 15-201, 15-210
1113 Chapter 15 §§ 15-408, 15-602
1114 Repealed by 1189
1115 See Chapter 1 Part 7C
1116 See Chapter 1 Part 7B
1117 Chapter 15 §§ 15-409, 15-607, 15-804
1118 Tax Rate 2015
1119 Chapter 15 § 15-207
1120 Chapter 15 §§ 15-403, 15-602
1121 Chapter 6 Part 5
1122 Chapter 15 § 15-404.4
1123 Chapter 13 Part 4
1124 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1125 Chapter 1 Part 4A
1126 Chapter 16 Part 1
1127 See Chapter 1 Part 7B
1128 Chapter 27 §§ 27-202, 27-306, 27-402
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:923
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1129 Appendix B
1130 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1131 Chapter 15 § 15-407
1132 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1133 Chapter 26 Part 1
1134 Tax Rate 2016
1135 Chapter 15 § 15-201
1136 Repealed by 1189
1137 Chapter 1 Subpart 3G repealer, Part 8
1138 Chapter 15 § 15-404.1
1139 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1140 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1141 Chapter 7 Parts 1, 3, 4, 5
1142 Chapter 27 Zoning Map Amendment
1143 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1144 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1145 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1146 Chapter 1 § 1-102
1147 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1148 Chapter 15 § 15-406
1149 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1150 Tax Rate 2017
1151 Chapter 18 § 18-203
1152 Chapter 5 § 5-602
1153 Chapter 27 § 27-202, Part 11
1154 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1155 Chapter 1 § 1-407
1156 Chapter 1 § 1-103
1157 Chapter 15 §§ 15-403, 15-404.1
1158 Chapter 27 Zoning Map Amendment
1159 Chapter 5 Part 4
1160 Chapter 5 § 5-602
1161 Chapter 10 §§ 10-204, 10-205, 10-206,
10-207
1162 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1163 Chapter 1 §§ 1-341, 1-343
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:924
Ord. or Res. Disposition Number
1164 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1165 See Chapter 1 Part 7C
1166 Chapter 15 § 15-214
1167 Chapter 15 § 15-403
1168 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1169 Tax Rate 2018
1170 Chapter 27 Zoning Map Amendment
1171 Chapter 15 § 15-602
1172 Chapter 27 § 27-403
1173 Chapter 15 § 15-405
1174 Chapter 18 Part 3
1175 Chapter 15 § 602
1176 Chapter 1 Part 3G
1177 Chapter 5 § 5-601
1178 Chapter 15 § 15-219
1179 Chapter 15 § 15-602
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1180 10/15/2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: Off-Street
Unmetered Parking
Ch. 15, Pt. 6 5
1181 11/5/2018 Governmental and
Intergovernmental
Affairs
Appendix D 5
1182 11/5/2018 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: Off-Street
Unmetered Parking
Ch. 15, Pt. 6 5
1183 12/17/2018 Zoning Ch. 27 5
1184 12/17/2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM 5
1185 1/21/2019 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal: Testing,
Inspection, Repair,
and Replacement of
Building Sewers and
Sewer Laterals
Ch. 18, Pt. 5 5
1186 3/18/2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: General
Parking Regulations
Ch. 15, Pt. 4 5
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:925
Ord. or
Res.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
1187 3/18/2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: Off-Street
Unmetered Parking
Ch. 15, Pt. 6 5
1188 4/15/2019 Solid Waste: General
Regulations;
Collection and
Disposal; Recycling
Program
Ch. 20, Pt.
1; Ch. 20,
Pt. 2; Ch.
20, Pt. 3
5
1189 4/15/2019 Administration and
Government:
Associations,
Commissions
Ch. 1, Pt. 3 5
1190 5/20/2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: General
Parking Regulations
Ch. 15, Pt. 4 5
1191 8/19/2019 Zoning Ch. 27 5
1192 8/19/2019 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic: General
Parking Regulations
Ch. 15, Pt. 4 5
§ KO-101 EMMAUS CODE § KO-101
FWD:926