Foreword
Chapter FWD
FOREWORD
Adopting Ordinance
Chapter AO
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
Fee Resolution
Chapter FEES
FEE RESOLUTION
Municipal Code
Chapter 1
ADMINISTRATION AND GOVERNMENT
FWD:1

Part 1
AUTHORITIES
A.
Elizabethtown Area Community Services Authority.
§ 101. Intent. [Ord. 674, 5/21/1986, § 1]
The Borough Council of the Borough signifies their intent and desire to
jointly organize, along with the Townships of Conoy and Mount Joy and
West Donegal, all of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, an Authority under
the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, Act of May 2, 1945, P. L. 382,
as amended and supplemented (hereinafter referred to as the "Act"), for
the purpose of acquiring, holding, improving, maintaining, operating and
owning the property situated at 70 South Poplar Street, Elizabethtown,
Pennsylvania, hereinafter referred to as the "Poplar Street School Building."
§ 102. Authority. [Ord. 674, 5/21/1986, § 2]
The President of the Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of
the Borough are hereby authorized and directed to execute, on behalf of
the Borough, Articles of Incorporation for the Authority, in substantially the
following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with the requirements of the Municipality Authorities Act
of 1945, Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented,
the Townships of Conoy, Mount Joy and West Donegal and the Borough of
Elizabethtown, all of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania (hereinafter referred
to as "the Incorporating Municipalities"), desiring to incorporate an
Authority hereunder, do hereby certify that:
1. The name of the Authority shall be: "Elizabethtown Area Community
Services Authority."
2. This Authority is formed under the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
Act of May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented.
3. No other Authority organized under the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
as amended, is in existence in or for the incorporating municipalities or
any of them, except the following:
A. Bainbridge Water Authority;
B. Mount Joy Township Authority;
C. West Donegal Township Authority;
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities and the names and
addresses of the respective elected officials are as follows:
§ 101 FOREWORD § 102
FWD:3
§ 103. Notice. [Ord. 674, 5/21/1986, § 3]
The President of the Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of
the Borough are further directed to cause notice of the substance of this
Part, including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and
of the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the Act.
§ 104. Filing and Payment of Fees. [Ord. 674, 5/21/1986, § 4]
The President of the Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of
the Borough are further directed to cause the Articles of Incorporation,
together with the necessary proof of publication, to be filed with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform all other
A. Township of Conoy, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania:
[Here followed the names and addresses of the respective elected
officials.]
B. Township of Mount Joy, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania:
[Here followed the names and addresses of the respective elected
officials.]
C. Township of West Donegal, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania:
[Here followed the names and addresses of the respective elected
officials.]
D. Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania:
[Here followed the names and addresses of the respective elected
officials.]
5. The names, addresses, appointing municipality and terms of office of
the first of the Board of the Authority to be formed hereby are as
follows:
[Here followed the names, address and terms of office of the first
members of the Board.]
6. The purpose of the Authority shall be to acquire, hold, improve,
maintain, operate and own the property situated at 70 South Poplar
Street, Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
known as the Poplar Street School Building.
7. The ordinances authorizing the creation of said Authority certified from
the records of the Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown,
and the Board of Township Supervisors of the Townships of Conoy,
Mount Joy and West Donegal, all of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
together with required proofs of publication, are each submitted
herewith.
§ 102 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:4
acts and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of
the Authority, including payment of any filing fees required in connection
therewith.
§ 105. Appointment of First Members of the Board. [Ord. 674, 5/21/
1986, § 5]
The following named persons, each of whom is a resident and citizen of the
Borough, shall be and hereby are appointed as the first members of the
Board of the Authority for the following terms of office: [Here followed the
names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the Board.]
§ 106. Execution and Delivery of Deed. [Ord. 674, 5/21/1986, § 6]
The President of the Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough are hereby authorized and directed to execute and deliver a deed
conveying the Borough's interest in the Poplar Street School Building to the
Authority and to take any necessary action in connection therewith.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 106
FWD:5

B.
Elizabethtown Area Regional Authority.
§ 111. Intention to Join Authority. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 1]
Borough Council signifies the intention and desire to join with the Township
of Mount Joy and the Township of West Donegal to organize an authority
under the Pennsylvania Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, approved May
2, 1945, P.L. 382, known as the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, as
amended and supplemented (the "Act"), for the purposes of exercising any
and all powers conferred by the Act.
§ 112. Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 2]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough are authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of the Borough,
Articles of Incorporation for said authority, in substantially the following
form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with requirements of the Acts of Assembly, approved May 2,
1945, P.L. 382, as amended and supplemented, known as the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, and pursuant to ordinances duly enacted by the
municipal authorities of the Borough of Elizabethtown and the Townships of
Mount Joy and West Donegal, all located in Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
expressing the intention and desire of the municipal authorities of said
municipalities to organize an authority, jointly, under provisions of said
Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, said municipalities certify:
1. The name of the authority is "Elizabethtown Area Regional Authority."
2. The authority is formed under said Municipality Authorities Act of 1945,
as amended and supplemented.
3. No other authority has been organized under provisions of the Act of
Assembly, approved May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended and
supplemented, known as the Municipality Authorities Act of 1945, or
under provisions of the Act of Assembly approved June 28, 1935, P.L.
463, as amended and supplemented, and is in existence in or for the
incorporating municipalities, except that:
A. The Township of Mount Joy heretofore organized "Mount Joy
Township Authority," under the provisions of said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
B. The Township of West Donegal heretofore organized "West Donegal
Township Authority" under the provisions of said Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945, as amended and supplemented.
§ 111 FOREWORD § 112
FWD:7
§ 113. Notice of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 3]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough further are directed to cause notice of the substance of this Part,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the Act.
§ 114. Filing of Articles of Incorporation. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 4]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough further are directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation,
together with the necessary proofs of publication, to be filed with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to do all other acts
and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of such
joint authority, including payment of any filing fees required in connection
therewith.
C. The Borough of Elizabethtown, the Township of Mount Joy and the
Township of West Donegal, together with the Township of Conoy,
Lancaster County, heretofore organized the Elizabethtown Area
Community Services Authority.
4. The names of the incorporating municipalities are:
A. The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
B. The Township of Mount Joy, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
C. The Township of West Donegal, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
5. The names and addresses of the municipal authorities of said
incorporating municipalities are: [Here followed the names and
addresses of the municipal authorities of said incorporating
municipalities.].
6. The members of the Board of the authority shall be nine in number and
shall be apportioned as follow:
A. Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, three.
B. The Township of Mount Joy, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, three.
C. The Township of West Donegal, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
three.
7. The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the authority, each of whom is a citizen of the incorporating
municipality by which he is appointed, are as follows: [Here followed
the names, addresses and terms of offices of the first members of the
Board of authority.].
§ 112 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:8
§ 115. Membership of the Board. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 5]
The Board of the authority shall consist of nine members, three of whom are
appointed by the Borough of Elizabethtown, three of whom are appointed
by the Township of Mount Joy and three of whom are appointed by the
Township of West Donegal.
§ 116. Purpose. [Ord. 797, 6/3/1999, § 6]
The enactment of this Part is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of and
will increase the prosperity of the citizens of this Borough.
§ 115 FOREWORD § 116
FWD:9

C.
Elizabethtown Area Community Development Authority.
§ 121. Intent. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 1]
Borough Council signifies its intention and desire to organize an Authority
under the Economic Development Financing Law, as amended, 73 P.S. § 371
et seq. (The "law"), for the purposes of exercising any and all powers
conferred by the law.
§ 122. Authority. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 2]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough are authorized and directed to execute, in behalf of the Borough,
Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the following
form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
TO THE SECRETARY OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA:
In compliance with requirements of the Acts of Assembly, approved August
23, 1967, P.L. 251, as amended and supplemented, known as the Economic
Development Financing Law, as amended by the Act of December 17, 1993,
P.L. 490, 73 P.S. § 371 et seq., and pursuant to an Ordinance duly enacted
by the municipal authorities of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster
County, Pennsylvania, expressing the intention and desire of the municipal
authorities of said municipality to organize an authority, under provisions of
said Economic Development Financing Law, said municipality certifies:
1. The name of the authority is "Elizabethtown Industrial Development
Authority."
2. The authority is formed under said Economic Development Financing
Law, as amended and supplemented.
3. The name of the incorporating municipality is the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
4. The name and address of the municipal authorities of the said
incorporating municipality is: [Here followed the office, name and
address of the municipal authorities of the Borough.]
5. The members of the Board of the authority shall be nine in number.
6. The names and addresses and terms of office of the first members of the
Board of the Authority, which in accordance with the Economic
Development Financing Law shall be measured from January 1, 2001,
are as follows: [Here followed the names, addresses and terms of office
of the members of the first board of said Authority.].
7. The term of existence of the Authority shall be 50 years from its date of
incorporation.
§ 121 FOREWORD § 122
FWD:11
§ 123. Membership of the Board. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 3]
The Board of the Authority shall consist of five members.
§ 124. Funds. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 4]
The surplus assets of the Authority not reasonably required to meet or
provide for the obligations or operation of the Authority shall be
transferred, upon the written direction of the Borough, to the Borough, from
time to time.
§ 125. Notice. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 5]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough further are directed to cause notice of the substance of this Part,
including the substance of the foregoing Articles of Incorporation, and of
the proposed filing of such Articles of Incorporation to be published as
required by the law.
§ 126. Filing and Payment Fees. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 6]
The President of Borough Council and the Secretary, respectively, of the
Borough further are directed to cause such Articles of Incorporation,
together with the necessary proofs of publication, to be filed with the
Secretary of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and to do all other acts
and things necessary or appropriate to effect the incorporation of such
Authority, including payment of any filing fees required in connection
therewith.
§ 127. Purpose. [Ord. 825, 3/15/2001, § 7]
The enactment of this Part is deemed necessary for the benefit and
preservation of the public health, peace, comfort and general welfare of and
will increase the prosperity of the citizens of this Borough.
8. The Authority shall have all powers authorized by the Economic
Development Financing Law.
§ 122 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 127
FWD:12
Part 2
VOLUNTEER FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 201. Recognition of Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association. [Ord.
3/17/1931, 3/17/1931; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 202. Certification to Auditor General. [Ord. 3/17/1931, 3/17/1931;
as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
Commonwealth, the name of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 203. Annual Appropriation. [Ord. 3/17/1931, 3/17/1931; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
There is annually appropriated from the Borough Treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough Treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies in pursuance of 1984 Act of
December 18, No. 205, §§ 701 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association within 60 days of receipt.
The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of service
established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
1. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough.
Friendship Fire & Hose Co. No. 1
The above named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
2. The above named association of the Borough is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:13

Part 3
POLICE DEPARTMENT
A.
Established.
§ 301. Department of Police Established; Salaries. [Res. 6/15/1954,
6/15/1954; as amended by Ord. 376, 8/19/1958; by Ord. 558, 12/19/
1972; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
There shall be established in the Borough of Elizabethtown a Department of
Police which shall consist of sufficient members to maintain law and order
within the Borough limits, as affixed from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council.
§ 302. Powers and Duties of Police. [Res. 6/15/1954, 6/15/1954]
The members of said police force shall have such powers and duties as are
set forth in the Borough Code and in other applicable Acts of Assembly.
§ 303. Civil Service Commission to be Created. [Res. 6/15/1954, 6/
15/1954]
Immediately upon and after appointments shall be made by the Borough
Council, which shall bring the total number of full-time policemen to three,
there shall be created in conformity with the Act of Assembly, a Civil Service
Commission, as provided by law.
§ 304. Part Time Police. [Ord. 600, 12/3/1977, §§ 1-3; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. The Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown hereby declares
its intent to create and hereby creates the position of part time police
officer.
2. Part time police officers shall be appointed by and shall receive as
compensation for their services the pay established for the position
from time to time by the police collective bargaining agreement.
3. Part time police while on active duty shall have the same powers as and
the same duties as full time police officers of the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 304
FWD:15

B.
Civil Service Commission.
§ 311. Definition of Terms. [Ord. 899, 11/20/2008]
1. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases,
wherever used in these rules and regulations, shall be construed to
have the meanings indicated herein:
APPLICANT — Any individual who applies in writing to the Commission
in response to a legally advertised notice of vacancy and/or examination
for any position in the Police Department.
APPOINTING AUTHORITY — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manager of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
CERTIFICATION — The submission to the appointing authority
pursuant to its request of three names taken from the eligible list
developed by the Civil Service Commission. The Civil Service
Commission may derive the eligible list either from applications made
directly to the Borough or from the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police
Association joint hiring process.
CHAIRPERSON — The Chairperson of the Civil Service Commission of
the Borough of Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
COMMISSION — The Civil Service Commission of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
ELIGIBLE — A person whose name is recorded on a current eligible list
or furlough list, however derived.
ELIGIBLE LIST — The list of names of persons who have passed all
examinations for a particular position in the Police Department,
whether administered directly by the Civil Service Commission, its
designee or by the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association
through its joint hiring process.
EXAMINATION — The series of tests given to candidates to determine
their qualifications for a position in the Police Department, whether
administered directly by the Civil Service Commission, its designee or
by the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association through its joint
hiring process.
FURLOUGH LIST — The list containing the names of persons
temporarily laid off from positions in the Police Department because of
a reduction in the number of officers.
§ 311 FOREWORD § 311
FWD:17
§ 312. The Commission. [Ord. 899, 11/20/2008]
POLICE OFFICER — For purposes of these rules and regulations, an
entry-level, sworn, full-time position in the Police Department.
PROBATIONER — An officer in the Police Department who has been
appointed from an eligible list but who has not yet completed the work
test period.
REDUCTION IN RANK — A change to a different position or rank which
results in a decrease in salary and/or position where the employee
fulfilled all of the requirements of these rules and regulations for both
the prior and current position or rank. However, a decrease in salary
without a change to a different position or rank shall not necessarily
constitute a reduction in rank.
REMOVAL — The permanent separation of a police officer from the
Police Department.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Civil Service Commission of the
Borough of Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania.
SUSPENSION — The temporary separation, with or without pay, of a
police officer from the Police Department (does not apply to layoffs or
furloughs).
2. Gender. The words "he," "his," "him" and "men," when used in these
rules and regulations, represent both the masculine and the feminine
genders.
1. Civil Service Commission.
A. The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be
residents of the Borough and shall be appointed by the Borough
Council initially to serve for the terms of two, four and six years,
and as terms thereafter expire shall be appointed for terms of six
years.
B. Any vacancy occurring in the Commission for any reason
whatsoever shall be filled by the Borough Council for the unexpired
term within the period of 30 days after such vacancy occurs.
C. Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the
discharge of the duties of his/her office, shall take an oath or
affirmation to support the Constitution of the United States and of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and to perform his/her official
duties with fidelity. No Civil Service Commissioner shall receive
compensation.
D. Council may appoint no more than three qualified electors of the
Borough to serve as alternate members of the Commission. The
term of office of the alternate members shall be six years. If seated
under Section 4611741 (relating to organization of Commission), an
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
§ 311 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 312
FWD:18
discussions of the Commission to the same and full extent as
provided by law for Commission members, including specifically
the right to cast a vote as a voting member during the proceedings,
and shall have all the powers and duties specified in this Part and
as otherwise provided by law. An alternate member may not hold
another office in the Borough. An alternate may participate in any
proceeding or discussion of the Commission but may not vote as a
member of the Commission unless designated as a voting alternate
member under Section 461174.2 [Added by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/
2019]
2. Offices Incompatible with Civil Service Commissioner. No
Commissioner shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed
office under the United States government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the Commonwealth, except
that one member of the Commission may be a member of the Council of
the Borough. One Commissioner may be a member of the teaching
profession.
3. Organization of Commission; Quorum. The Commission first appointed
shall organize within 10 days of its appointment and shall elect one of
its members as its Chairperson and one as the Secretary. The
Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the first Monday of
January of each even-numbered year. Two members of the Commission
shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the Commission shall be
valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
[Amended by Ord. 967, 12/18/2014]
4. Duties of Chairperson. The Chairperson, or in his or her absence the
Vice Chairperson, shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the
Commission, decide all points of order or procedure and perform any
duties required by law or these rules and regulations.
5. Duties of the Secretary. The Secretary or his or her designee (attorney,
etc.) shall carry on, at the direction of the Commission, all official
correspondence of the Commission, send out all notices required by law
and these rules and regulations, keep a record of each examination or
other official action of the Commission and perform all other duties
required by law or these rules and regulations.
6. Meetings. Except for the biennial organization meeting, all meetings
shall be held either at the call of the Chairperson or at the call of two
members of the Commission. The Commission shall have the discretion
to determine whether meetings shall be open to the public when not
specifically regulated by law or these rules and regulations. The
Secretary of the Commission shall give each Commissioner 24 hours'
notice, in writing, of each and every meeting of the Commission.
1. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1174.
2. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1174.
§ 312 FOREWORD § 312
FWD:19
7. Clerks and Supplies. The Borough Council shall furnish the Commission
with such supplies and clerical assistance as may be necessary for the
Commission to fulfill its duties. In addition, the Commission may retain
counsel, and any other consultants or experts, including physicians and
psychiatrists, as are necessary. The elected and appointed officials of
the Borough shall assist the Commission with all reasonable and
appropriate efforts, including compensation for any counsel or experts
retained by the Commission.
8. Amendment of Rules and Regulations. The Commission may amend,
revise, void or replace these rules and regulations for any reason by
action of a majority of the Commission at any properly convened
meeting of the Commission. Before any changes to these rules and
regulations become effective, those changes must be approved by the
Borough Council. These rules and regulations, and any amendments
thereto, shall be made available to the public for distribution or
inspection.
9. Minutes and Records.
A. The Commission shall keep minutes of its proceedings and records
of examinations and other official actions. All records of the
Commission shall be preserved and disposed of according to the
Retention and Disposition Schedule for Records of Pennsylvania
Municipalities issued by the Local Government Records Committee
under the authority of 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 1381 et seq.
B. Any and all records related to recommendations of applicants for
appointment filed with the Commission shall be open to public
inspection, subject to reasonable regulation. The Secretary shall
keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member
upon each question. If the member is absent or fails to vote, the
Secretary shall indicate that fact in the minutes. Records relating
to disciplinary actions shall be open to the public unless sealed in
accordance with these regulations.
10. Investigations. The Commission shall have the power to make
investigations concerning all matters relating to the administration and
enforcement of these rules and regulations. The Chairperson of the
Commission is authorized to administer oaths and affirmations in
connection with such investigations.
11. Subpoenas.
A. The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas over the
signature of the Chairperson, or his/her designee, to require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers
at any hearing. The fees of such witnesses for attendance and
travel shall be the same as for witnesses appearing in the Court of
Common Pleas of Lancaster County and shall be paid from
appropriations for the incidental expense of the Commission.
§ 312 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 312
FWD:20
§ 313. Applications and Qualifications. [Ord. 899, 11/20/2008]
B. All officers in public service and employees of the Borough shall
attend and testify when required to do so by the Commission.
C. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena issued
by the Commission, upon conviction of such refusal or neglect, that
person shall be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $600 plus
costs and, in default of the payment of such fine and cost, shall be
imprisoned not to exceed 30 days.
D. If any person shall refuse or neglect to obey any subpoena, the
Commission may apply by petition to the Court of Common Pleas of
Lancaster County for its subpoena, requiring the attendance of
such persons before the Commission or the court to testify and to
produce any records and papers necessary, and in default thereof
shall be held in contempt of court.
12. Annual Report. The Commission shall make an annual report to the
Borough Council, containing a brief summary of its work during the
year and a full accounting for any expenditures of public monies. The
annual report shall be available for public inspection.
1. Eligibility for Examination. In order to be eligible for participation in
any examination for any position with the Police Department, every
applicant must submit a completed application form either to the
Borough Police Department if the Commission elects to administer the
test itself or, alternatively, to the Commission or to the Lancaster
County Chiefs of Police Association through its joint hiring process
which the Commission is also authorized to use as part of its testing
procedure before the deadline stated by the Commission for that
specific examination. The application form is incorporated into these
rules and regulations by reference and is available from the Borough.
The alternative application and testing procedure administered by the
Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association through its joint hiring
process, as amended, is available from the Borough and from the
Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association and is incorporated by
reference. The applicant must make an oath or affirmation that the
application is completed truthfully, and the applicant is subject to the
penalties of 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904 relating to unsworn falsification to
authorities. [Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
2. Discrimination. The Borough is an equal opportunity employer. It is the
Borough's and the Commission's policy to grant equal employment
opportunities to qualified persons without regard to race, religion,
color, national origin, gender, age, veteran's status, marital status or
non-job-related physical or mental handicap or disability. The Borough
and the Commission will provide equal opportunities in employment
and promotion.
§ 312 FOREWORD § 313
FWD:21
3. Availability. Application forms shall be available to all interested
persons from the Borough Police Department and from such other
offices and officers that the Commission, from time to time, may choose
to designate, including the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police
Association through its joint hiring process.
4. Age and Residency Requirements. All applicants must have reached
their 21st birthday before the deadline for submitting completed
applications. An applicant need not be a resident of the Borough. The
Council of the Borough may authorize the Commission, by rule or
regulation, to require officers to comply with existing and future
residency requirements after appointment to such position.
5. General Qualifications: All Applicants. Every applicant for any position
in the Police Department shall possess a diploma from an accredited
high school or a graduate equivalency diploma. In addition, every
applicant must be a United States citizen, be physically and mentally fit
to perform all of the essential job functions of a police officer and, prior
to appointment, possess a valid motor vehicle operator's license issued
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The Civil Service Commission
may authorize consideration of applicants for the position of police
officer who have not completed all police training required by 53
Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2161 to 2164. However, in accordance with said Act, no
police officer who may be hired shall be eligible to receive any salary,
compensation or other consideration for the performance of duties as a
police officer, nor shall any police officer engage in the enforcement of
criminal laws or the enforcement of moving traffic violations or be
authorized to carry a firearm until such person has met all
requirements required by the Commission and has been certified by the
Commission to act in the position as a police officer.
6. General Qualifications: Applicants for Corporal and Lieutenant.
[Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
A. In addition to meeting the qualifications in Subsection 5, above, all
applicants for a promotional position, except Chief, shall have not
received a formal written reprimand for one year prior to the
deadline for submitting applications and shall not have been
suspended at any time two years prior too the deadline for
submitting applications. Any formal written reprimand or
suspension to which the applicant has timely appealed pursuant to
a grievance procedure or these rules and regulations shall be
disregarded unless the appeal is resolved prior to the creation of
the eligibility list.
B. The Civil Service Commission shall post in a conspicuous place in
the Police Department a notice for promotional exams. All qualified
officers shall notify the Commission within 30 days of the posted
notice of their intent to take the examination posted. Notification
shall be in writing and addressed to the Commission.
§ 313 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 313
FWD:22
C. All applicants shall have continuous prior service with the Police
Department of Elizabethtown Borough as follows:
(1) An applicant for the position of corporal shall have at least
three years of continuous service with the Department.
(2) An applicant for the position of Lieutenant shall have at least
seven years of continuous experience with the Police
Department and have attained and held the rank of corporal or
detective for a period of at least one year.
D. All applicants for promotions shall be capable of performing all of
the essential job functions for that rank as outlined in the official
manual.
E. Eligible candidates may not be serving a probationary period at
time of application.
7. Rejection of Applicant. The Commission may refuse to examine or, if
examined, may refuse to certify as eligible after examination any
applicant who is found to lack any of the minimum qualifications for
examination prescribed in these rules and regulations for the particular
position for which the applicant has applied. In addition, the
Commission may refuse to examine or, if examined, may refuse to
certify any applicant who is physically or mentally unfit to perform the
full duties of the position applied for, is illegally using a controlled
substance, as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act
(Public Law 91-513, 21 U.S.C. § 802), or who is guilty of any crime
involving moral turpitude or of infamous or notoriously disgraceful
conduct, or who has been dismissed from public service for delinquency
or misconduct in office, or who is affiliated with any group whose
policies or activities are subversive to the forms of government set forth
in the constitutions and laws of the United States and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. [Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/
2019]
8. Recording and Filing of Applications. Applications for positions in the
Police Department shall be received at the Borough building only after
the position(s) have been properly advertised and before the deadline
for receiving applications, which must be set forth in the public
advertisement. Applications will be received by the Borough officer
designated in the public advertisement or that officer's designee. That
person shall record the receipt of all applications and provide each
applicant with notice of the time and place for the first portion of the
testing procedure, the written examination. Any application containing
material errors or omissions may, at the discretion of the Commission,
be returned to the applicant for correction prior to the deadline for
filing applications, after which no new applications or amended
applications will be accepted. All applications must be returned in
person or, if mailed, postmarked by the established closing date.
Applications filed late will not be accepted.
§ 313 FOREWORD § 313
FWD:23
§ 314. Examination and Grading Procedure. [Ord. 899, 11/20/2008]
9. Hearing for Disqualified Applicants. Any applicants or other persons
who believe that they are aggrieved by the actions of the Commission in
refusing to examine or to certify them as eligible after examination may
request a hearing before the Commission. Within 10 days after such
request, the Commission shall designate a time and place for the
hearing. The applicant or aggrieved party may appear personally or by
counsel and may present testimony and evidence. The applicant or
aggrieved party must make his/her request for a hearing in writing
within 10 calendar days of the date when the party knew or should have
known of the Commission's action which is being challenged. Hearings
shall be held in accordance with the requirements of the civil service
provisions of the Borough Code, 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 461183(b), as amended.3
[Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
10. Public Notice. The Commission shall conspicuously post in the Borough
building notice of the time and place of every examination, together
with the information as to the type of position to be filled, the
requirements for that position, where applications may be obtained for
the examination, and the deadline for filing those applications. In
addition, at least two weeks prior to each examination, publication of
the notice shall occur in at least one newspaper of general circulation
and/or a newspaper circulating generally in the Borough.
1. General Examination Requirements for Position of Police Officer. The
examination for police officer will consist of a written and an oral
examination which will be graded on a 100-point scale, with the written
examination representing 40% of the final score and the oral
examination representing 60% of the final score. In addition, each
candidate will undergo a content-based task test and a background
investigation. These tests and investigation will be graded on a pass/fail
basis for each applicant. After an applicant has been extended an offer
of employment, final appointment shall be contingent upon the
applicant passing a physical and psychological examination. The
written examination may also be administered by the Lancaster County
Chiefs of Police Association through its joint hiring process. [Amended
by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
2. General Examination Requirements for the Position of Corporal and
Sergeant. [Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
A. The examination for the positions of Corporal and Lieutenant shall
include a written and an oral examination which will be graded on a
100-point scale, with the written examination representing 40% of
the final score and the oral examination representing 60% of the
final score.
3. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1183(b).
§ 313 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 314
FWD:24
3. Notice of Examination. The Commission may appoint a written
examination administrator, an oral examination administrator, a
content-based task examiner, a medical examiner, a polygraphist and a
psychological examiner to conduct the appropriate examination
required by these rules and regulations. The administrator of the
written and the physical exams may be, but is not limited to, a member
of the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association.
4. Written Examinations. The written examination shall be graded on a
one-hundred-point scale, and an applicant must score 70% or higher in
order to continue in the application process. Applicants scoring less
than 70% shall be rejected by the Commission or its designee. Within
45 days after the administration of the written examination, all
applicants shall be given written notice of their test results, and passing
applicants shall be scheduled for an oral examination appointment. If
the written test is administered by the Lancaster County Chiefs of
Police Association through its joint hiring process, then the top 12
applicants shall be scheduled for an oral examination appointment with
the Commission or its designee. If the Commission determines that
additional oral examinations beyond the top 12 applicants are required,
it will schedule them.
5. Oral Examinations. If the Commission administers the written test, then
every applicant who scored 70% or higher in the written examination
shall be given an oral examination, which will be graded on a 100-point
scale, with a score of 70% or higher necessary for passing.
Alternatively, if the written test is administered by the Lancaster
County Chiefs of Police Association through its joint hiring process,
then the top 12 applicants shall be scheduled for an oral examination
appointment with the Commission or its designee. If the Commission
determines that additional oral examinations beyond the top 12
applicants are required, it will schedule them. The oral examination
shall involve questioning applicants on how they would handle
situations relevant to police work. Within 45 days after the applicants'
oral examination, they shall be informed of the score in their oral
examination and total overall score, and each passing applicant shall be
informed of the date for the content-based task test. If the applicant has
been part of the Lancaster County Chiefs of Police Association joint
hiring process, then the physical fitness or agility examination will have
been completed prior to the oral examination. [Amended by Ord. No.
992, 5/16/2019]
6. Veterans' Preference Points. Pursuant to the Veterans' Preference Act,
any applicant for the position of police officer who qualifies as a soldier
under this Act shall receive an additional 10 points on top of his/her
total score if that applicant had received passing scores under
Subsections 1, 4 and 5, above. Veterans' preference points do not apply
to promotional examinations.
7. Physical Agility Test. Either before or after the written examination, a
candidate must submit to a physical fitness or agility examination that
§ 314 FOREWORD § 314
FWD:25
§ 315. Certification of the List of Eligibles and Appointment. [Ord.
899, 11/20/2008]
is job-related and consistent with business necessity, which will be
graded on a pass/fail basis for every applicant. The physical agility test
may be administered by either the Commission or the Lancaster County
Chiefs of Police Association joint hiring process. [Amended by Ord.
No. 992, 5/16/2019]
8. Background Investigation.
A. The Commission shall request the Chief of Police or the Chief's
designee to conduct a background investigation on the top
applicants for the open position. If more than one police officer
position is being offered, background checks will be performed on
the quantity of candidates as decided on and directed by the
Commission. If the Commission determines that additional
background investigations beyond the top applicants are required,
it will schedule them. The background investigation shall include
interviews with the candidate's family, acquaintances, current and
former employers, current and former neighbors, references and
current and former teachers and school officials. In addition, the
candidate's credit history and record of criminal convictions should
be investigated, and the candidate will be administered a
polygraph examination by a certified polygraphist. The candidate
may be interviewed directly when the information collected during
the background investigation requires clarification or explanation.
B. After the background investigation is completed, the Chief or his/
her designee shall make a written recommendation to the
Commission on whether the candidate is appropriate for
consideration for appointment as a police officer.
C. Appropriateness of the candidate shall be based on the criteria set
forth in § 313, Subsection 7, of these rules and regulations. This
recommendation shall be in writing; and if the recommendation is
to disqualify, then a detailed written explanation of the reasons for
disqualification must be included. The Commission shall make the
final determination on whether the information collected during
the background investigation warrants rejection of the candidate.
1. Within 60 days after the Commission considers the recommendation of
the Chief of Police or his/her designee, each candidate will be informed
of whether he/she has passed the background investigation.
A. Creation of Eligibility List.
(1) At the completion of the examination requirements set forth in
§ 314, written examination, oral examination and background
investigation, the Commission shall rank all passing candidates
on a list, with the candidate receiving the highest score at the
§ 314 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 315
FWD:26
top of the list and the candidate receiving the lowest passing
score at the bottom of the list. Candidates who qualify for
veterans preference points shall have those points added to
his/her passing score prior to being ranked on the eligibility
list but after the completion of the examination requirements,
set forth in § 314, written examination, oral examination (but
before the background investigation). For promotional
positions, fulfilling the performance requirement set forth in
§ 313, Subsection G, is also required. In the case of tied scores,
the tie will be broken by giving preference to the candidate
who submitted a final completed application first. If both tied
candidates submitted his/her complete applications on the
same day, then the candidates shall be ranked in alphabetical
order by surname.
(2) The eligibility list should be valid for one year from the date the
Commission ranks all passing candidates, assigns veterans'
preference points and formally adopts the eligibility list. The
Commission may, at its sole discretion, by a vote of the majority
of the Commission at a duly authorized Commission meeting,
extend the list for an additional year. The Commission may, at
its sole discretion, void an eligibility list at any time for any
reason.
2. Appointment.
A. If no furlough list exists or if positions remain to be filled after all of
the officers on the furlough list were offered re-employment, every
position, except that of Chief of Police, shall be filled only in the
following manner:
(1) The Borough Council shall notify the Commission of any
vacancy which is to be filled and shall request the certification
of three names from the list of eligibles.
(2) If three names are not available, then the Commission may
certify the name(s) remaining on the list.
(3) The Borough Council shall make an appointment from one of
the three names certified, with sole reference to the merits and
fitness of the candidates. However (for initial appointment to
the position of police officer), when one of the three candidates
on the certified list is a veteran, that candidate shall be
selected.
B. The Borough Council may fill any vacancy in an existing position in
the Police Department which occurs as a result of retirement,
resignation, disability or death by the reappointment or
reinstatement of a former employee of the Police Department who
had been furloughed. Except for physical and psychological
examinations, no other testing shall be required for a furloughed
employee or a rehired or reappointed employee.
§ 315 FOREWORD § 315
FWD:27
C. The Borough Council may object to one or more of the persons
certified for the reasons set forth in § 313, Subsection 7, of these
rules and regulations. If the candidate to whom the Borough
Council objects fails to timely exercise the rights of appeal under
§ 313, Subsection 9, or if the Commission declines to uphold the
appeal, the Commission shall strike the name of that candidate
from the eligibility list and certify the next-highest name of
inclusion on the list of three candidates for each name stricken off.
3. Appointment of Chief of Police. In the case of a vacancy in the office of
Chief of Police or equivalent official, the appointing authority has full
discretion in selecting the individual to fill such position. If the
appointing authority requests the Commission to subject that person to
a noncompetitive examination, and if that person successfully passes
the noncompetitive examination, then the Commission shall notify the
appointing authority of the results of the examination and that person
may only be removed from the position of Chief of Police for the reasons
set forth in § 316, Subsection L.
4. Physical and Psychological Examinations. After the Borough Council
selects a candidate from the certified list of three for appointment to
the vacant position, such candidate shall be offered the position;
however, that offer shall be conditional and subject to a physical
examination and a psychological examination by the appropriate
medical expert consistent with the requirements of Section 461189 of
the Borough Code,4 which are incorporated by reference as if fully set
forth herein. If the candidate successfully passes the physical and
psychological examinations, then that employee shall be appointed to
the vacant position in the Police Department for which the application
was submitted. Failure to pass either examination shall result in the
candidate being rejected for appointment. The rejected candidate may
appeal this decision under § 313, Subsection 9. [Amended by Ord. No.
992, 5/16/2019]
5. Probationary Period.
A. Every successful candidate to the position of police officer or to a
promotional position with the Police Department shall serve a
twelve-month probationary period (for newly hired police officers,
the one-year probationary period shall not commence until after
the officer has completed training under 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 2161 to
2164).
B. During the probationary period, a newly hired officer may only be
dismissed for the reasons set forth in § 313, Subsection 7. A
promoted officer, during probation, may be returned to a prior rank
only for cause for the reasons set forth in § 313, Subsection 7.
4. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1189.
§ 315 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 315
FWD:28
§ 316. Suspensions, Removals and Reductions in Rank. [Ord. 899,
11/20/2008]
C. However, at the end of the twelve-month probationary period, if the
conduct of the probationer has not been satisfactory to the Borough
Council, the probationer shall be notified, in writing, that the
appointment will not be permanent. At that time, a newly hired
officer's employment shall end, and a promoted officer shall return
to a previous rank. Any officer who is not informed in writing that
his/her performance has been unsatisfactory prior to the end of his
probationary period shall receive a permanent appointment to the
new position. Any probationer who is notified in writing that his
appointment will not be made permanent has no right of appeal
under these rules.
1. Grounds for Disciplinary Action.
A. No person appointed to a position in the Police Department
pursuant to these rules and regulations may be suspended without
pay or removed, and no person promoted in rank pursuant to these
rules and regulations may be reduced in rank, except for the
following reasons:
(1) Physical or mental disability affecting the officer's ability to
continue in service, in which case the officer shall receive an
honorable discharge from service.
(2) Neglect or violation of any official duty.
(3) Violation of any law which provides that such violation
constitutes a misdemeanor or felony.
(4) Inefficiency, neglect, intemperance, immorality, disobedience
of orders or conduct unbecoming an officer.
(5) Intoxication while on duty.
(6) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or
election campaign while on duty or in uniform or while using
Borough property otherwise than to exercise the person's own
right of suffrage. [Amended by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
(7) Engaging or participating in the conduct of a political or
election campaign for an incompatible office as provided in
Section 1104(f)5 (relating to appointments and incompatible
offices). [Added by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019]
B. No officer shall be removed for religious, racial or political reasons.
A statement of any charges made against any officer so employed
5. Editor's Note: See 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 1104(f).
§ 315 FOREWORD § 316
FWD:29
shall be furnished to the officer within five days after those charges
have been adopted by the Borough Council.
2. Furloughs.
A. If, for reasons of economy or other reasons, it shall be deemed
necessary by the Borough to reduce the number of full-time police
officers in the Department, then the Borough shall apply the
following procedure:
(1) If the number of full-time police officers eligible for retirement
is insufficient to effect the necessary reductions in numbers, or
if there are no persons eligible for retirement, or if no
retirement or pension fund exists, then the reductions shall be
effected by furloughing the person or persons, including
probationers, last appointed to the respective force.
B. Such removal shall be accomplished by furloughing in numerical
order commencing with the person last appointed until such
reduction shall have been accomplished. In the event that the
appointing authority decides to increase the Police Department, the
furloughed officers shall be reinstated in order of their seniority in
the Department if the furloughed officer accepts reinstatement in
writing within 30 days of receiving notice of the opening. These
reductions-in-force provisions are not applicable to the Chief of
Police.
3. Notice of Suspension, Removal or Reduction in Rank.
A. Whenever a police officer is suspended, removed or reduced in
rank, the specific charges warranting such actions shall be stated
in writing by the Borough Council. The charges shall be stated
clearly and in sufficient detail to enable the officer to understand
the charges and to allow the officer an opportunity to respond to
those charges. The charges shall specify the subsection of
Subsection 1, above which provides the basis for the disciplinary
action as well as an explanation of the factual circumstances upon
which the appointing authority relied in finding a violation of
Subsection 1, above.
B. Within five days after the Borough Council has voted to impose the
disciplinary action, a written statement of the charges shall be
delivered to the officer, either by personal service or by certified
and registered mail. In addition, the charges shall notify the officer
of the right to appeal under Subsection, 4, below of these rules and
regulations. A copy of the statement of charges shall also be served
upon the members of the Civil Service Commission.
4. Hearings on Suspensions, Removals and Reductions in Rank.
A. The officer who has been suspended, removed or reduced in rank
may appeal the decision of the Borough Council by written notice to
§ 316 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 316
FWD:30
the Secretary of the Commission at 600 S. Hanover Street,
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania, 17022, requesting a hearing. This
request shall be received by the Commission within 10 days after
the officer received notice of the discipline. The officer may make
written answers to any charges filed not later than the date fixed
for the hearing. Failure of the officer to provide written answers to
any of the charges shall not be deemed an admission by the officer.
B. The Commission shall schedule a hearing within 10 days from the
officer's written request for a hearing, unless continued by the
Commission for cause at the request of the Commission, the
Borough Council, or the officer. At any such hearing, the officer
against whom the charges have been made may be present and
maybe represented by counsel and may call witnesses and present
testimony and documentation in defense. The Borough may also be
represented by counsel, call witnesses and present evidence as is
necessary to support the charges. A stenographic record of all
testimony shall be taken at every hearing and preserved by the
Commission. In the event the charges are dismissed, the record
shall be sealed and shall not be available for public inspection.
C. In conducting the hearing, the Commission's standard of review
shall be to determine whether sufficient evidence has been
presented to support the statutory reason for the disciplinary
action. If the Commission finds that sufficient evidence has been
introduced to support the charge, the Commission shall not modify
the penalty imposed by the Borough Council unless it finds that the
penalty imposed was arbitrary, discriminatory or an abuse of the
Council's discretion. In considering the appropriateness of the
discipline, the Commission shall not substitute its judgment for that
of the Borough Council. The Commission may request posthearing
briefs and shall issue a written decision containing specific findings
of fact and conclusions of law within 60 days of receipt of the
hearing transcript and any briefs.
5. Hearing Procedure.
A. All testimony shall be given under oath administered by the
Chairperson or in the absence of the Chair, the Vice Chairperson.
The Commission shall have the power to issue subpoenas as set
forth in § 312, Subsection 11. The hearing shall be open to the
public unless, prior to the commencement of the hearing, a written
or oral request to close the hearing is made by either the charged
officer or the Borough. A stenographic record of all testimony taken
at said hearings shall be filed with and preserved by the
Commission, which record shall be sealed and not be available for
public inspection in the event the charges are dismissed.
B. If the Commission sustains the charges, the officer who was
suspended, removed or reduced in rank may file an appeal with the
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days from the date of entry by the
§ 316 FOREWORD § 316
FWD:31
Commission of its final order. No order of suspension shall be made
by the Commission for a period longer than one year. In the event
that the Commission fails to uphold the charges, then the person
sought to be suspended, removed or demoted shall be reinstated
with full pay for the period of the suspension, removal or demotion,
and no charges related to the suspension, removal or reduction in
rank shall be officially recorded in the officer's record.6
6. Editor's Note: Former § 317, Forms (Ord. 899, 11/20/2008), which immediately followed
this section, was repealed by Ord. No. 992, 5/16/2019.
§ 316 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 316
FWD:32
Part 4
PENSIONS
A.
Police Pension Plan.
§ 401. Establishment and Continuation. [Ord. 903, 2/5/2009; as
amended by Ord. 913, 1/21/2010; by Ord. 931, 11/17/2011; by Ord.
962, 11/20/2014]
1. The Borough of Elizabethtown previously established the Elizabethtown
Borough Police Pension Plan.
2. The Borough of Elizabethtown, in order to clarify the exact status and
terms of the conditions of the plan and to continue its compliance with
the tax-exempt retirement plan requirements of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, Section 401(a), desires to enact a
restatement of the plan in its entirety with appropriate amendments.
3. The Borough of Elizabethtown hereby repeals previous ordinances
relating to the Elizabethtown Borough Police Pension Plan with an
effective date prior to the adoption date of the amendment and
restatement of the plan with respect to benefits accruing on or after the
amendment and restatement effective date, and the attached
amendment and restatement of the plan is enacted.7
4. The Borough of Elizabethtown hereby repeals previous ordinances
relating to the plan's trust fund with an effective date prior to the
adoption date of the amendment and restatement of the trust, and the
attached amendment and restatement of the trust is enacted.
5. This Part 4A appoints the Secretary of the Borough as the agent
designated and authorized to execute the attached amendment to the
Police Pension Plan on behalf of the Borough Council.
7. Editor's Note: The Police Pension Plan and all amendments are on file in the Borough
offices.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 401
FWD:33

B.
Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan.
§ 411. Establishment and Continuation. [Ord. 904, 2/5/2009; as
amended by Ord. 912, 1/21/2010; by Ord. 932, 11/17/2011; by Ord.
963, 11/20/2014]
1. The Borough of Elizabethtown previously established the Elizabethtown
Borough Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan.
2. The Borough of Elizabethtown, in order to continue its compliance with
the tax-exempt retirement plan requirements of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986, as amended, Section 401(a), desires to enact an
amendment to the plan.
3. The attached amendment and restatement of the Elizabethtown
Borough Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan is hereby enacted.8
4. This Part 4B appoints the Secretary of the Borough as the agent
designated and authorized to execute the attached amendment and
restatement to the Nonuniformed Employee Pension Plan on behalf of
Borough Council.
8. Editor's Note: The Nonuniformed Employees Pension Plan and all amendments are on file
in the Borough offices.
§ 411 FOREWORD § 411
FWD:35

Part 5
ATTORNEY FEES
§ 501. Collection of Delinquent Accounts. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 2]
The Municipal Claims and Tax Lien Law, as amended by Act 1-1996,
provides in part that charges, expenses and fees incurred in the collection
of any delinquent account, including reasonable attorney fees under said
Act may be added to the amount of municipal claims for failure to pay
promptly. Said Act further provides in part that "attorney fees incurred in
the collection of any delinquent account shall be in an amount sufficient
to compensate attorneys undertaking collection and representation of a
municipality and actions involving claims arising under this Act. A
municipality by ordinance . . . . shall adopt the schedule of attorney fees."
This Part is intended to and shall adopt a schedule of attorney fees for said
representation of the Borough in actions involving municipal claims.
§ 502. Attorney Fees. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 3; as amended by Ord.
972, 2/18/2016]
Attorney fees to be charged in any matter involving municipal claims actions
shall be calculated and included at 10% of the amount of the past due
balance sought to be collected but in no event less than $300 per claim.
§ 503. Duplicate Recovery of Attorneys Fees. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997,
§ 4]
Any time attorney fees are awarded pursuant to any provision of law, then
the Borough shall not be entitled to duplicate recovery of attorney fees
under this Part.
§ 504. Notice Sent to Owner. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 5]
At least 30 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees in connection
with the collection of a delinquent account, the Borough shall, by United
States certified mail, return receipt requested, postage prepaid, mail to the
owner the notice required by § 507 of this Part.
§ 505. Notice Sent by First Class Mail. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 6]
If within 30 days of mailing the notice in accordance with the foregoing,
the certified mail is refused or unclaimed or the return receipt is not
received, then at least 10 days prior to assessing or imposing attorney fees
in connection with the collection of a delinquent account, the Borough shall,
by United States First Class Mail, mail to the owner the notice required by
this Part.
§ 506. Duty of Borough. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 7]
The notice required by this Part shall be mailed to the owner's last known
post office address by virtue of the knowledge and information possessed by
§ 501 FOREWORD § 506
FWD:37
the Borough and by the Lancaster County office responsible for assessments
and revisions of real estate taxes. It shall be the duty of the Borough to
determine the owner's last known address known to the said Tax Collector
and/or Lancaster County Assessment Office.
§ 507. Notice Information. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 8]
The notice to the owner shall include the following:
§ 508. Pending Suits. [Ord. 776, 3/20/1997, § 10]
Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed to affect any suit or
proceeding pending in any court or any rights acquired or liability incurred
or any cause of action existing prior to the enactment of this Part.
A. A statement of the Borough's intent to impose or assess attorneys fees
within 30 days of the mailing of the certified mail notice set forth above
or within 10 days of mailing of the regular mail notice sent out in
accordance with the foregoing.
B. The manner in which the imposition of assessment of attorney fees may
be avoided by payment of the delinquent account.
§ 506 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 508
FWD:38
Part 6
PLANNING COMMISSION
§ 601. Commission Established. [Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1]
A Planning Commission is hereby created under the authority of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, No. 247,
as amended.
§ 602. Membership; Compensation. [Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 594, 10/19/1976; by Ord. 649, 10/28/1983]
The Planning Commission shall consist of five members who shall serve
without compensation, except that they shall be reimbursed for necessary
and reasonable expenses incurred in carrying out their Commission duties.
All members shall be residents of the Borough of Elizabethtown.
§ 603. Term of Office. [Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1; as amended by
Ord. 570, 2/19/1974]
The term of each member shall be four years, or until his successor is
appointed and qualified. The term is to begin on the first Monday in January
next succeeding. The members of the existing Planning Commission shall
continue in office until the end of the term for which they are appointed, at
which time their successors shall be appointed, as provided by this Part.
§ 604. Conduct of Business. [Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1; as amended
by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman, who shall
serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
§ 605. Powers and Duties. [Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1]
1. The Planning Commission shall have the powers and duties in regard to
zoning, subdivision and land development, building, housing, planning
and the Official Map, as conferred by § 209, as amended, of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
2. The Commission may employ administrative and technical services
either as consultants or as regular employees to aid in carrying out its
duties.
3. It may, with the consent of the Borough Council, accept and utilize any
funds, personnel or other assistance made available by the county,
Commonwealth or Federal government, or from private sources.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 605
FWD:39

Part 7
OFFICE OF BOROUGH MANAGER
§ 701. Creation of Office. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 1]
The office of the Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Elizabethtown, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any
time to abolish such office.
§ 702. Election; Removal From Office. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 703. Qualifications. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 3; as amended by Ord.
558, 12/19/1972, § 1; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. No. 995,
12/19/2019]
The Borough Manager shall be a citizen of the United States and at least 21
years of age. The Borough Manager shall have such technical and executive
ability and such training and experience as to enable him to perform the
duties imposed upon the office in a businesslike manner.
§ 704. Bond. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 4; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give a bond
to the Borough, with a bonding company as surety, in the amount as
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, premium for the said
bond to be paid for by the Borough of Elizabethtown. The bond of the
Borough Manager may be included in, and the Manager may be bonded
1. As soon as practicable after the enactment of this Part, the Borough
Council shall elect, by a majority vote of all its members, one person to
fill the office of Borough Manager. In the case of a vacancy, the Council
shall fill said office by majority vote of all its members.
2. Council may remove the Borough Manager for cause (dishonesty, willful
neglect of duty, persistent insubordination, willful destruction of
Borough property or records, etc.) at any time. Without cause, Council
may by majority vote terminate the employment of the Borough
Manager at any time upon 30 days written notice to the Manager. In
such event, the Borough Manager, if requested by Council, shall
continue to render services and shall be paid regular compensation up
to the date of termination, and, in addition thereto, shall be paid on the
date of termination a severance allowance equivalent to one year's
salary. Without cause, the Manager may resign upon 30 days written
notice to Council. In such event, the Borough Manager shall continue to
render services and shall be paid regular compensation up to the date
of termination, but no severance allowance shall be paid to him.
§ 701 FOREWORD § 704
FWD:41
under and covered by, the blanket bond now in force and effect for all
Borough employees.
§ 705. Compensation. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 5]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by resolution of Council.
§ 706. General Duties. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 6; as amended by
Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1]
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and duties shall
relate to the general management of all Borough business not expressly by
statute or ordinance imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers. The
Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager, subject
to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative and
nonjudicial powers and duties subject to the Borough Code.
§ 707. Specific Duties. [Ord. 397, 4/19/1960, § 7; as amended by
Ord. 421, 1/16/1962; by Ord. 558, 12/19/1971, § 1; by Ord. 567, 11/
20/1973; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager shall
include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all Borough
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
not have been delegated to the Manager by Council, as the case may
be.
B. He shall hire and, when he shall deem it necessary for the good of the
service, shall suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision,
provided that all full time policemen shall be suspended or discharged
in accordance with the Borough Code and other laws of the
Commonwealth. Provided further, that the Manager shall report, at the
next regular meeting thereafter of Council, any action taken by
authority of this § 807(B).
C. He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as Council shall determine, a budget for
the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In preparing
the budget, the Manager, or an officer designated by him, shall obtain
from the head of each department, agency, board or officer, estimates of
revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as he requests.
The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before
submitting the budget to the Council.
D. He shall be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
§ 704 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 707
FWD:42
E. He shall hold the offices of Borough Secretary, Code Officer, Treasurer
and Zoning Officer, and shall perform all the duties of all such officers in
addition to the specific duties assigned to the Manager by this Part.
Borough Council may, it is so chooses, appoint the same person to hold
the same offices of Secretary and Treasurer of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, said person to receive such compensation for his or her
services as Council shall prescribe.
F. He shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council and of its
committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and he shall
receive notice of all special meetings of Council and of its committees.
G. He shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply
facts pertinent thereto.
H. He shall keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs;
submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances and
such other reports as the Council shall request; and shall make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems necessary.
I. He shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the
fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
J. He shall see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
K. He may employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the
functions of the Borough.
L. He shall attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law, and he
shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same
except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other
Borough officer by statute.
M. He shall see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all the
Borough's claims.
N. He shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough, and he shall
purchase, in accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all
supplies and equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments
and other offices of the Borough. He shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time, or when directed by Council,
make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all Borough supplies and equipment. He
shall have power to purchase supplies and equipment for the use of the
Borough.
§ 707 FOREWORD § 707
FWD:43
O. He shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all times and in all
matters that the best interests of the Borough and of the general public
may be maintained.
P. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. He, or an officer designated by
him, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints, and the Manager
shall report thereon to Council.
§ 707 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 707
FWD:44
Part 8
COMPENSATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
§ 801. Compensation of Mayor. [Ord. 635, 11/17/1981; as amended
by Ord. 681, 12/18/1986, § 3-1; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord.
893, 12/20/2007]
The Mayor of the Borough of Elizabethtown shall receive as compensation
the sum of $270 per month.
§ 802. Compensation of Council Members. [Ord. 635, 11/17/1981;
as amended by Ord. 681, 12/18/1986, § 3-2; by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001; by Ord. 893, 12/20/2007]
Members of the Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown shall
receive as compensation the sum of $270 per month.
§ 803. Compensation of Tax Collector. [Ord. 631, 1/29/1981; as
amended by Ord. 944, 2/7/2013]
The salary or compensation of the Tax Collector for the Borough of
Elizabethtown shall be $50 per year, and no commissions or other
compensation shall be paid for collection of taxes for and on behalf of the
Borough, commencing with taxes levied and collected in the calendar year
2013.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 803
FWD:45

Part 9
PUBLIC RECORDS
§ 901. Open Records Officer. [Res. 2008-8, 12/18/2008]
The Board hereby appoints the Borough Manager as the Borough Open
Records Officer.
§ 902. Policy for Requests for Records. [Res. 2008-8, 12/18/2008]
The Borough Council hereby adopts the policy for requests for inspection
and duplication of public records attached hereto as Exhibit A and
incorporated therein.9
9. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 901 FOREWORD § 902
FWD:47
Chapter 2
ANIMALS
§ 902 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 902
FWD:48
Part 1
DOGS RUNNING AT LARGE
§ 101. Prohibitions. [Ord. 11/15/1954; as amended by Ord. 604, 2/
21/1978; by Ord. 613, 10/17/1978; by Ord. 655, 8/16/1984]
1. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to fail to keep
such dog at all times either confined so it cannot escape the premises of
the owner or firmly secured by means of a collar and chain or other
device so that it cannot stray beyond the premises on which it is
secured or on a leash and under the reasonable control of the owner or
handler.
2. The term "owner" shall include every person having a right of property
in such dog, every person who keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his
care and every person who permits such dog to remain on or about any
premises occupied by him. The word "handler" shall include every
person other than an owner who has custody and control of such dog.
3. It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any female dog to permit
such female dog to go beyond the premises of such owner or keeper at
any time she is in heat, unless such female dog is properly confined.
4. It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler or keeper of any dog to
permit such dog to enter the area comprising the Elizabethtown
Community Park, leashed or unleashed.
5. It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any
dog to allow such dog to run at large at any time, either upon any of the
streets, alleys or public grounds in the Borough of Elizabethtown or
upon the property of another, other than the owner, handler, custodian
or keeper of such dog.
6. It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any
dog to allow such dog confined on that person's premises to disturb or
unduly annoy the public by reason of noise produced by excessive,
continuous or untimely barking. "Untimely barking" shall include noise
or barking which shall interrupt the rest or sleep of members of the
public.
7. It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any
dog to allow such dog under his control to defile or defecate on any
sidewalk, walkway or the property of another. It shall be the duty of the
person in control of a dog which defecates on any sidewalk, walkway or
the property of another to promptly clean up and remove all feces
discharged and to dispose of such feces in a lawful and sanitary manner.
8. It shall be the responsibility of the owner(s) of every dog to ensure that
the dog has been inoculated with canine distemper and rabies shots,
and such proof shall be required to be presented to any police officer or
Borough Health Officer upon demand.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 102
FWD:49
§ 102. Seizure of Dogs; Notice of Seizure to Owners; Redemption.
[Ord. 11/15/1954; as amended by Ord. 604, 2/21/1978; by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001; by Ord. 935, 1/19/2012]
§ 103. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 11/15/1954; as amended by
Ord. 558, 12/19/1972, § 1; by Ord. 604, 2/21/1978; by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001; and by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
Any owner, handler, custodian, or keeper of any dog who shall violate any
of the provisions of § 101 of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and the
costs of prosecution, including the Borough's reasonable attorneys' fees, for
the first offense and not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
of prosecution, including the Borough's reasonable attorneys' fees, for each
subsequent offense; provided, however, that such fine and costs shall be in
addition to any payments required under § 102 of this Part.
1. It shall be the duty of every police officer to seize and detain any dog
which is found running at large, either upon the public streets or
highways of the Borough of Elizabethtown or upon the property of
someone other than the owner of such dog and unaccompanied by the
owner or keeper. It shall be the privilege of every police officer to kill
any dog which is found running at large and is deemed, after due
consideration by the police officer, to constitute a threat to the public
health and public welfare. The Chief of Police or his/her agents shall
cause any dog bearing a proper license tag and so seized and detained
to be properly kept and fed and shall cause immediate notice, either
personal or by registered or certified mail, to be given to the person in
whose name the license was procured, or his agent, to claim such dog
within five days.
2. The owner of a dog so detained shall pay a penalty, in an amount as
determined from time to time by resolution, to the Borough and all
reasonable expenses incurred by reason of its detention to the
detaining parties before the dog is returned.
3. If, after five days from the giving of such notice, such dog has not been
claimed, the Chief of Police or his/her agent shall dispose of such dog by
sale or by destruction in a humane manner. No dog so caught and
detained shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection.
§ 102 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:50
Part 2
KEEPING OF CATS
§ 201. Duties and Responsibilities of Owners and Handlers. [Ord.
655, 8/16/1984, § II; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 202. Penalties. [Ord. 655, 8/16/1984, § III; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
1. The term "owner" shall include every person having a right of property
in such cat and every person who keeps or harbors such cat or has it in
his/her care, and every person who permits such cat to remain on or
about any premises occupied by them. The word "handler" shall include
every person other than an owner who has custody and control of such
cat.
2. It shall be unlawful for the owner, handler, custodian or keeper of any
cat to allow such cat under his control to defile or defecate on any
sidewalk, walkway or the property of another. It shall be the duty of the
person in control of the cat which defecates on any sidewalk, walkway
or the property of another to promptly clean up and remove all feces
discharge and to dispose of such feces in a lawful and sanitary manner.
1. The Borough Police Department shall be empowered to enforce any and
all parts of this Part upon notification of such violation, a record of
which shall be on file in the Borough Office and a copy maintained by
the Borough Health Officer.
2. Any owner, handler, custodian, or keeper of any cat who shall violate
any of the provisions of § 201 of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000
and the costs of prosecution, including the Borough's reasonable
attorneys' fees, for the first offense and not less than $150 nor more
than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution, including the Borough's
reasonable attorneys' fees, for each subsequent offense. [Amended by
Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
§ 201 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:51

Part 3
ANIMAL DEFECATION
§ 301. Animal Defecation on Public and Private Property Restricted.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
No person having possession, custody or control of any animal shall
knowingly or negligently permit any dog or other animal to commit any
nuisance, i.e., defecation, upon any gutter, street, driveway, alley, curb or
sidewalk in the Borough, or upon the floors or stairways of any building
or place frequented by the public or used in common by the tenants, or
upon the outside walls, walkways, driveways, alleys, curbs or stairways of
any building abutting on a public street or park, or upon the grounds of
any public park or public area, or upon any private property other than the
property of the owner of such animal.
§ 302. Disposal of Animal Feces. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended
by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
§ 303. Dogs Accompanying Blind or Handicapped Persons
exempted. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The provisions of §§ 301 and 302 hereof shall not apply to a guide dog
accompanying any blind person, or to a dog used to assist any other
physically handicapped person.
§ 304. Penalties. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. No.
995, 12/19/2019]
Any owner, handler, custodian, or keeper of any animals who shall violate
any of the provisions of § 301 of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 and the
costs of prosecution, including the Borough's reasonable attorneys' fees, for
the first offense and not less than $150 nor more than $1,000 plus costs
of prosecution, including the Borough's reasonable attorneys' fees, for each
subsequent offense.
A. Any person having possession, custody or control of any dog or other
animal which commits a nuisance, i.e., defecation, in any area other
than the private property of the owner of such dog or other animal, as
prohibited in § 301, shall be required to immediately remove any feces
from such surface and either:
A. Carry same away for disposal in a toilet.
B. Place same in a nonleaking container for deposit in a trash or litter
receptacle.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 304
FWD:53
Chapter 3
BICYCLES
§ 304 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 304
FWD:54
Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 101. Residents: License Required; Responsibility of Parents or
Guardians. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 2]
No person who resides in the Borough of Elizabethtown shall ride or propel
a bicycle upon any street or public alley or on any public path set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles unless such bicycle shall have been licensed
and a license plate shall have been attached thereto as provided herein.
The parent of any child and the guardian of any ward shall not authorize or
knowingly permit any such child or ward to violate any of the provisions of
this Part.
§ 102. Nonresidents; License Required; License Plates. [Ord. 811, 5/
18/2000, § 3]
No person not a resident of the Borough of Elizabethtown shall ride or
propel a bicycle ordinarily kept within or rented from any place within the
limits of said Borough, on any street or public alley or on any public path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, unless such bicycle shall have been
licensed and a license plate shall have been attached thereto as provided
herein.
§ 103. Issuance of License; Fee; Serial Numbers Assigned; Time of
Issuance. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 4]
The Mayor or Chief of Police is hereby authorized and directed to issue
bicycle licenses at a fee in an amount as established from time to time by
resolution. Such licenses shall be provided by the Borough and shall be
serially numbered, and the Mayor or Chief of Police shall keep a record of
the same, which record shall include the name and address of the holder of
each license and serial number of the bicycle for which the license is issued.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate from time to time when bicycle
licenses shall be issued.
§ 104. Nontransferability. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 5]
No bicycle license shall be transferable from one person to another. Any
licensee may have such license transferred from one bicycle to another, at
no cost, upon proper application to the Mayor or Chief of Police, who shall
grant such transfer and make a record of the same.
§ 105. Attachment of License Plate; Replacement. [Ord. 811, 5/18/
2000, § 6]
Every bicycle license shall be attached to the bicycle for which it was issued
in a conspicuous place. Every holder of a bicycle license shall promptly
replace any license issued to him which may have been lost or disfigured
to such an extent as to be illegible. Replacement licenses shall be obtained
§ 101 FOREWORD § 105
FWD:55
from the Mayor or Chief of Police in the same manner as is provided
herein for original licenses, and a fee, as established from time to time by
resolution, shall be payable thereafter.
§ 106. Suspension of License. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 7]
No license, transfer or replacement shall be granted to any person during
any period of suspension of his license.
§ 107. Compliance with Vehicle and Traffic Ordinances. [Ord. 811,
5/18/2000, § 8]
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle upon any street or
public alley in the Borough of Elizabethtown in violation of the Vehicle Code
or in violation of any traffic ordinance of the Borough of Elizabethtown.
§ 108. Operation and Equipment. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 9]
1. No bicycle shall be operated upon a sidewalk downtown, on Market
Street, from Mechanics Alley to Washington Street and on High Street,
from Cherry Alley to Poplar Street.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle upon a street or
sidewalk in such a manner as to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
3. The operator of a bicycle shall always give way to pedestrian traffic.
4. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped.
5. Elizabethtown Borough Police Department officers, in performance of
their official duties, shall be exempted from the rules and regulations
contained in this Section.
6. It shall be unlawful for a person propelling a bicycle to operate the
bicycle at a speed greater than is reasonable ad prudent under the
circumstances then existing.
7. It shall be unlawful for a person operating a bicycle to carry any
package, bundle or article which prevents the operator from keeping as
least one hand upon the handlebar.
8. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a bicycle wit a wheel
diameter of more than 17 inches upon any sidewalk in the Borough.
Whenever any person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, such person
shall yield right-of-way to any pedestrian and shall give audible signal
before overtaking a passing such pedestrian.
9. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a bicycle upon a street other
than upon the roadway against the curb or upon the sidewalk in a rack
to support the bicycle, or against the building or at the curb in such
manner as to afford the least obstruction to pedestrian traffic.
§ 105 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 108
FWD:56
§ 109. Requirement for Serial and/or Identification Number. [Ord.
811, 5/18/2000, § 10]
Every bicycle shall contain a readable serial or identification number which
shall be placed upon or incorporated into the bicycle in such manner as to
be a permanent part of the bicycle.
§ 110. Removal or Falsification of Serial and/or Identification
Number. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 11]
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride, transport, or possess any bicycle
with a false, removed, altered or unreadable serial and/or identification
number.
§ 111. Dealing with Pedalcycles and/or Bicycles with Removed or
Falsified Numbers. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 12]
It shall be unlawful for any person to buy, receive, possess, sell, offer for
sale, or dispose of any pedalcycle or bicycle or any part bearing a serial
10. The operator of a bicycle emerging from any alley, driveway or building
shall, upon approaching a sidewalk of the sidewalk area extending
across any alleyway, yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians
approaching on said sidewalk areas, and upon entering the roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on said roadway.
11. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a bicycle upon any street
or public alley in the Borough of Elizabethtown to propel such bicycle
abreast or to the left of any other person so propelling a bicycle, except
in passing such bicycle or on paths or parts of paths set aside for the
use of bicycles. "Abreast" is defined as being that condition existing
when the front wheel on one bicycle shall be opposite any portion of
another bicycle traveling in the same direction.
12. Every bicycle shall be equipped with a braking system which will stop
the bicycle in 15 feet from an initial speed of 15 miles per hour on a dry,
level, clean pavement.
13. No bicycle shall be used to carry more persons at one time than the
number for which it is designed and equipped for except that an adult
rider may transport a child in a bicycle child carrier which is securely
attached to the bicycle or in a trailer which is towed by the bicycle. All
riders must have a bonafide regular seat which is securely attached to
the bicycle.
14. Every bicycle when in use between sunset and sunrise shall be
equipped on the front with a lamp which emits a beam of white light
intended to illuminate the bicycle operator's path and visible from a
distance of at least 500 feet to the front and a red reflector, red light or
light-emitting diode or similar device on the rear which shall be visible
from 500 feet to the rear.
§ 108 FOREWORD § 111
FWD:57
or identification number, knowing that a serial or identification number has
been removed, altered, falsified or is unreadable.
§ 112. Replacement of Serial and/or Identification Number. [Ord.
811, 5/18/2000, § 13]
§ 113. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 14]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof:
1. General Rule. No bicycle from which the serial or identification number
has been removed, altered, falsified or unreadable shall be licensed
without a proper replacement number.
2. Police Department to Affix Replacement Identification Number. Before
a bicycle license can be obtained, the owner shall apply to the Police
Department for a replacement identification number on a form
furnished by the Police Department which shall contain the full name,
address and telephone number of the owner, the make and model of the
bicycle and proof of ownership as the Chief of Police may deem
necessary.
3. The identification number shall be affixed to the frame, under the pedal
crankcase of the bicycle.
4. Cost of Affixing Identification Number. The Police Department shall
charge a fee, as established from time to time by resolution, for affixing
an identification to each bicycle.
5. Format of Identification Number. The Police Department shall affix a
replacement identification number which shall be a five-digit number.
A. The first two digits shall be the last two digits of the current year.
B. The last three digits shall be the sequential number, starting with
001, of the identification number issued for that calendar year.
A. For §§ 102 through 109:
(1) For a first offense, have the bicycle impounded by the Police
Department for a period not exceeding 15 days.
(2) For a second offense, have the bicycle impounded by the Police
Department for a period not to exceed 30 days.
(3) For a third or subsequent offense, have the bicycle impounded by
the Police Department for a period not to exceed 60 days and/or be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100,
plus the costs of prosecution.
B. For §§ 110 through 112:1.
§ 111 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 113
FWD:58
§ 114. Bicycle License Fee and Replacement Serial Number Fee.
[Ord. 811, 5/18/2000, § 15; as amended by Res. 2003-4, 9/18/2003,
§ 3]
(1) For a first offense of §§ 110, 111, 112, the bicycle shall be
impounded by the Police Department until such time as ownership
can be proven by written documentation, but not less than 30 days,
and/or be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $100, plus costs of prosecution.
(2) For a second or subsequent offense of §§ 110, 111, 112, the bicycle
shall be impounded by the Police Department until time as
ownership can be proven by written documentation, but not less
than 60 days, and be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $300, plus costs of prosecution.
1. The fee for acquiring a bicycle license is $1 and may be changed from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
2. The fee for affixing a replacement serial or identification number is $1
and may be changed from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council.
§ 113 FOREWORD § 114
FWD:59
Chapter 4
BUILDINGS
§ 114 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 114
FWD:60
Part 1
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 101. Assignment of Numbers. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914; as
amended by Ord. 352, 8/19/1958; and by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
All buildings or improvements fronting on any of the public roads, streets,
squares or avenues in the Borough shall be assigned a number by the
Borough Manager in the manner hereinafter designated.
§ 102. Method of Assignment. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914; as
amended by Ord. 352, 8/19/1958; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The number so assigned by the Borough Engineer shall be assigned by him
as follows:
A. The buildings in the Centre Square shall be numbered beginning with
Number One at the east corner of Centre Square and North Market
Street; and thence moving towards the east, allotting a number, in
consecutive order; for every 15 feet of frontage on said square, thence
moving towards the south, west and north until numbers have been
assigned for the whole Centre Square.
B. The buildings on North and South Market Streets and East and West
High Streets shall be numbered as follows:
(1) Beginning at Centre Square, the buildings on the first square,
north, south, east and west, respectively, on said streets shall be
numbered from one to a number not exceeding 100, and on the
second squares, from 100 to a number not exceeding 200, and to
each and every subsequent square, numbers in the consecutive
hundred following shall be allotted. North and South Market
Streets and East and West High Streets are hereby designated as
cardinal streets. The buildings on all those streets, roads and
avenues north and south, east or west from any one on said
cardinal streets shall be numbered from said cardinal streets in like
manner, allotting a number for every 15 feet of frontage and a
consecutive hundred for every square. Buildings on any street,
road or avenue which run from any one of said cardinal streets to
another cardinal street shall be numbered in like manner,
beginning, however, at the intersection of said diagonal streets
with said cardinal street which is nearest the Centre Square.
C. Commercial establishments with suites will be numbered in order as
Suites 101, 102, etc., on the first floor and Suites 201, 202, etc., on the
second floor, as such. Apartments on the ground floor will begin with
101, move to 201 on the second floor, 301 on the third floor, as such.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:61
§ 103. Odd and Even Numbers. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914]
The numbers shall be assigned to the sides of the said streets, roads or
avenues alternately, commencing on the north and east sides, respectively,
so that all odd numbers will be on the north and east sides of said streets
and all even numbers will be on the south and west sides of said streets.
§ 104. Duty of Owners of Buildings. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914; as
amended by Ord. 352, 8/19/1958; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The owner of every building, within 30 days after he has received the
aforesaid certificate of occupancy, or in the case of a new building, within 30
days after the completion of the same, or the occupation of the same in case
it is occupied before completion, shall cause to be placed and maintained
in a conspicuous place at or near the front or principal place of entrance
to such building, in figures not less than four inches high, as required by
the International Residential Code, the proper number for such building or
entrance. In small numbers and letters, each apartment or business suite
shall display the assigned unit number.
§ 105. Use of Other Numbers Unlawful. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914]
No owner shall place or maintain upon any building in said Borough any
number or numbers other than the proper number or numbers for such
building as herein determined.
§ 106. Buildings Fronting on Alleys. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914; as
amended by Ord. 352, 8/19/1958]
If any property owner wishes to place and maintain a number on any
building fronting upon any alley in the Borough, such property owner,
before placing such number, shall obtain from the Borough Engineer a
certificate setting forth the proper number for such building, which number
the Engineer shall ascertain according to the provisions of this Part in
regard to streets. Only the proper number, as indicated in such certificate,
shall be placed upon any such building.
§ 107. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 8/18/1914, 8/18/1914, § 32-8;
as amended by Ord. 352, 8/19/1958; and by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person or persons, partnership, firm or corporation, being the owner of
any building in the Borough, who shall violate any of the provisions of this
Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a
term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day's continuance of a
violation of any of the provisions of this Part after conviction thereof shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:62
Chapter 5
CODE ENFORCEMENT
§ 107 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:63

Part 1
EXISTING STRUCTURES AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
A.
Requirements.
§ 101. General. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 100.0]
1. Title. This Part shall be known as the "Existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Elizabethtown "hereinafter
referred to as the "Existing Structures Code or "This Code."
2. Scope. This Part is to protect the public health, safety and welfare in all
existing structures, residential and nonresidential, and on all existing
premises as hereinafter provided by:
A. Establishing minimum maintenance standards for all structures
and premises for basic equipment and facilities for light,
ventilation, space heating and sanitation; for safety from fire; for
space, use and location; and for safe and sanitary maintenance of
all structures and premises now in existence.
B. Establishing minimum requirements for all existing buildings and
structures for means of egress, fire protection systems and other
equipment and device necessary for safety from fire.
C. Providing for rehabilitation and reuse of existing structures and
allowing differences between the application of the Code
requirements to new application of the Code requirements to new
construction and the application of the Code requirements to
alterations and repairs.
D. Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants of all
structures.
E. Providing for administration, enforcement and penalties.
3. Intent. This Part shall be construed liberally and justly to insure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued
use and maintenance of structures and premises.
4. Other Regulations. The provisions in this Part shall not be construed to
prevent the enforcement of other ordinances or regulations which
prescribe standards other than are provided herein.
5. Application of Other Codes. Any repairs or alterations to a structure, or
changes of use therein, which are caused directly or indirectly by the
enforcement of this Part shall be done in accordance with the
procedures and provisions of the building, plumbing and mechanical
codes listed in Appendix A of this Part.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:65
§ 102. Validity. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 101.0]
§ 103. Existing Structures. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 102.0]
§ 104. Approval. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 103.0]
6. Existing Remedies. The provisions in this Part shall not be construed to
abolish or impair existing remedies of the Borough or its officers or
agencies relating to the removal or demolition of any buildings which
are dangerous, unsafe and unsanitary.
7. Workmanship. All repairs, maintenance work, alterations or
installations which are required for compliance with this Part shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike and acceptable manner so as
to secure the results intended by this Part.
1. Validity. If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or
phrase of this Part shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever,
such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Part which
shall continue in full force and effect, and to this end the provisions of
this Part are hereby declared to be severable.
2. Saving Clause. This Part shall not affect violations of any other
ordinance, code or regulation existing prior to the effective date hereof,
and any such violation shall be governed and shall continue to be
punishable to the full extent of the law under the provisions of those
ordinances, codes or regulations in effect at the time the violation was
committed.
1. Alterations or Repairs. Alterations or repairs to existing structures shall
conform to the BOCA Building Code for new construction. Alteration or
repairs shall not cause an existing structure to become unsafe or
adversely affect the performance of the building.
2. Other Ordinances. As provided in § 101(2), this Part establishes
minimum requirements for the initial and continued occupancy and use
of all structures and premises and does not replace or modify
requirements otherwise established by ordinance which are additional
or more stringent for the construction, repair, alteration or use of
structures, equipment or facilities.
1. Approved Materials and Equipment. All materials, equipment and
devices approved for use by the Code Official shall be constructed and
installed in accordance with such approval.
2. Modification. When there are practical difficulties involved in carrying
out the structural or mechanical provisions of this Part, the Code
Official shall be permitted to vary or modify such provision upon
application of the owner or the owner's representative, provided that
the spirit and intent of the law shall be observed and public welfare and
safety assured.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:66
§ 105. Enforcement Authority. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 104.0]
§ 106. Duties and Powers of Code Official. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988,
§ 105.0; as amended by Ord. 864, 11/17/2005, § 312]
3. Records. Applications for modification and final decision of the Code
Official shall be in writing and shall be officially recorded in the
permanent records of the department.
4. Used Materials and Equipment. Used materials, equipment and devices
shall not be reused unless thy have been reconditioned, tested and
placed in good and proper working condition and approved for use by
the Code Official.
5. Alternative Materials and Equipment. The provisions of this Part are not
intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction
not specifically prescribed by this Part, provided any such construction
shall be approved when the Code Official finds that the proposed design
is satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this Part,
and that the material, method or work offered is, for the purpose
intended, at least the equivalent of that prescribed in this Part in
quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety.
6. Research and Investigations. The Code Official shall require that
sufficient technical data be submitted to substantiate the proposed use
of any material or assembly, and if it is determined that the evidence
submitted is satisfactory proof of performance for the use intended, the
Code Official shall approve its use subject to the requirements of this
Part, the costs of all tests, reports and investigations required under
these provisions shall be paid by the applicant.
1. Officer. If shall be the duty and responsibility of the Code Official to
enforce the provisions of this Part as herein provided. The Borough
Manager(s) may enforce any section of this Part.
2. Relief from Personal Liability. Any Code Official, officer or employee
who acts in good faith and without malice in the discharge of duties of
enforcement of this Part is relieved of all personal liability for any
damage accruing to persons or property as a result of such acts or
alleged failure to act. Further, the Code Official shall not be held liable
for any costs in any action, suit or proceeding that is instituted by the
Code Official in the enforcement of this Part. In any of these actions, the
official or employee shall be defended or represented by the Borough
Solicitor until the final termination of the proceedings.
3. Official Records. An official record shall be kept of all business and
activities of the department specified in the provisions of this Part.
1. General. The Code Official shall enforce all the provisions of this Part.
2. Notices and Orders. The Code Official shall issue all necessary notices
and orders to abate illegal or unsafe conditions to insure compliance
§ 104 FOREWORD § 106
FWD:67
with the requirements or this Part for the safety, health, and general
welfare of the public.
3. Rental Properties. All dwelling units, apartments, rooming units and
hotels or other residential rental units as defined in Part 3, Residential
Rental Units Regulations of this chapter, which are let for occupancy
shall be subject to all inspections authorized and required by Chapter 5
of this Code, and this Part, to random inspections by the Codes
Compliance Official, and to inspections if the Codes Compliance Official
reasonably determines that an inspection is necessary. [Amended by
Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
4. Nonconforming Conditions. If additional nonconforming conditions are
encountered during the course of any approved alteration or repair
which were not considered or known initially, the Code Official shall
have the authority to require compliance with this Part of such
additional conditions. The determination of what is necessary to bring
such conditions into compliance shall take into consideration the use of
alternative and equivalent approaches as provided for in this Part. The
Code Official shall have the authority to approve construction changes
in the field when conditions are encountered which make the originally
approved work impracticable, provided such changes in approved work
can be readily determined to be in compliance with this Part and are
requested by the owner or the owner's agent prior to such construction
changes. Such changes shall be specifically documented by the owner
or the owner's agent describing the change in work and the reasons and
justification for the change, and shall be filed with the permit for the
project.
5. Right of Entry. If any owner, occupant, or other person in charge of a
structure subject to the provisions of this Part refuses, impedes,
inhibits, interferes with, restricts, or obstructs entry and free access to
any part of the structure or premises where inspection authorized by
this Part is sought, the administrative authority shall be permitted to
seek, in a court of competent jurisdiction, an order that such owner,
occupant or other person in charge cease and desist with such
interference.
6. Access by Owner or Operator. Every occupant of a structure or
premises shall give the owner or operator thereof, or agent or
employee, access to any part of such structure or its premises at
reasonable times for the purpose of making such inspection,
maintenance, repairs or alterations as are necessary to comply with the
provisions of this Part.
7. Credentials. The Code Official or the Code Official's authorized
representative shall disclose proper credentials of their respective
office for the purpose or inspecting any and all buildings and premises
in the performance of duties under this Part.
§ 106 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 106
FWD:68
§ 107. Condemnation. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 106.0]
8. Coordination of Enforcement. Inspection of premises, the issuance of
notice and orders and enforcement thereof shall be the responsibility of
the Code Official so charged by the Borough. Whenever inspections are
necessary by any other department, the Code Official shall make
reasonable effort to arrange for the coordination of such inspections so
as to minimize the number of visits by inspectors, and to confer with the
other departments for the purpose of eliminating conflicting orders
before any are issued. A department shall not however, delay the
issuance of any emergency orders.
9. Rule Making Authority. The Code Official shall have power as may be
necessary in the interest of public safety, health and general welfare, to
adopt and promulgate rules and regulations to interpret and implement
the provision of this Part to secure the intent thereof and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions;
but such rules shall not have the effect of waiving working stresses or
fire protection requirements specifically provided in this Part or
violating approved practice involving public safety.
10. Annual Report. At least annually, the Code Official shall submit to the
Borough Council a written statement of operations in the form and
content as shall be prescribed by the Borough.
1. General. When a structure or part thereof is found by the Code Official
to be unsafe, or when a structure or part thereof is found unfit for
human occupancy or uses, or is found unlawful, it shall be condemned
by Borough Council pursuant to the provisions of this Part and shall be
placarded and vacated. It shall not be reoccupied without approval of
the Code Official. Unsafe equipment shall be placarded and placed out
of service.
2. Unsafe Structure. An unsafe structure is one in which all or part thereof
is found to be dangerous to life, health, property, or the safety of the
public or its occupants by not providing minimum safeguards for
protection from fire or because it contains unsafe equipment or it is so
damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty
construction or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is
likely.
3. Unsafe Equipment. Unsafe equipment includes any boiler, heating
equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or
within the structure which is in such disrepair or condition that it is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of
the premises or structure.
4. Structure Unfit for Human Occupancy. A structure is unfit for human
occupancy or use whenever the Code Official finds that it is unsafe,
unlawful, or because of the degree in which it lacks maintenance or is in
§ 106 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:69
§ 108. Notices and Orders. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 107.0; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
disrepair, is unsanitary, vermin or rat infested, contains filth and
contamination, or lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating
facilities or other essential equipment required by this Part, or because
its location constitutes a hazard to its occupants or to the public.
5. Unlawful Structure. An unlawful structure is one found to be occupied
by more persons than permitted under this Part, or was erected, altered
or occupied contrary to law.
6. Closing of Vacant Structures. If the structure or part thereof is vacant
and unfit for human habitation, occupancy or use and is not in danger of
structural collapse, the Code Official shall be permitted to post a
placard of condemnation on the premises and order the structure
closed up so it will not be an attractive nuisance to youngsters. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in
the order, the Code Official shall cause it to be closed through any
available public agency or by contract or arrangement by private
persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real
estate.
1. Notice to Owner or to Person or Persons Responsible. Whenever the
Code Official determines that there has been a violation of this Part or
had reasonable grounds to believe that a violation has occurred, or
whenever the Code Official has condemned any structure or equipment
under the provisions of § 107, notice shall be given to the owner or the
person or persons responsible therefore in the manner prescribed
below, If the Code Official has condemned the property or part thereof,
the Code Official shall give notice to the owner and to the occupants of
the intent to placard and to vacate the property or to order equipment
out of service.
2. Form. Such notice prescribed in § 108(1) shall:
A. Be in writing.
B. Include a description of the real estate sufficient for identification.
C. Include a statement of the reason or reasons why it is being issued.
D. Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time for the repair
and improvements required to bring the dwelling unit or structure
into compliance with the provisions of this Part.
E. Include an explanation of the owner's right to seek modification or
withdrawal of the notice by petition to an appeals board or
appropriate review board.
§ 107 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 108
FWD:70
§ 109. Placarding. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 108.0]
3. Service. Such notice shall be deemed to be properly served upon such
owner if a copy thereof is delivered to the owner personally; or by
leaving the notice at the usual place of abode, in the presence of
someone in the family of suitable age and discretion, who shall be
informed of the contents thereof; or by certified or registered mail,
addressed to the owner at the last known address, with return receipt
requested; or if the supplied registered letter is returned with receipt
showing that it has not been delivered, and the enforcement officer
does not otherwise know that the person to whom notice is directed has
not otherwise received same, then by:
A. Posting a copy of the notice in a conspicuous place in or about the
structure affected by such notice; and
B. By publication of the notice of the action once in the legal
publication, if any, designated by the court in Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, and in one newspaper of general circulation within
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania. The publication notice shall
contain the name of the action, and the name of the party involved
and state the nature of the action.
4. Service on Occupant. When a condemnation order is served on an
occupant other than the owner or person responsible for such
compliance, a reasonable time to vacate the property after
noncompliance shall be stated. Tenants, owners or persons responsible
for compliance must vacate at the time set for correction of defects if
there is failure of compliance.
5. Penalties. Penalties for noncompliance with orders and notice shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 111.2.
6. Transfer of Ownership. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any
dwelling unit or structure who has received a compliance order or upon
whom a notice of violation has been served to sell, transfer, mortgage,
lease or otherwise dispose of to another until the provisions of the
compliance order or notice of violation have been complied with, or
until such owner shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee
or lessee, a true copy of any compliance order or notice of violation
issued by the Code Official and shall furnish to the Code Official a
signed statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee,
acknowledging the receipt of such compliance order or notice of
violation and fully accepting the responsibility without condition for
making the corrections or repairs required by such compliance order or
notice of violation.
1. Placarding of Structure. After the condemnation notice required under
the provisions of this Part has resulted in an order by virtue of failure to
comply within the time given, the Code Official shall post on the
premises or structure or parts thereof, or on defective equipment, a
§ 108 FOREWORD § 109
FWD:71
§ 110. Emergency Orders. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 109.0]
§ 111. Violations, Penalties, and Enforcement. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988,
§ 110.0; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord. 889, 9/20/
2007, § 2; by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013; by Ord. 960, 9/18/2014]
placard bearing the words: "Condemned as Unfit for Human Occupancy
or Use," and a statement of the penalties provided for any occupancy
or use or for removing the placard. The owner or the person or persons
responsible for the correction of violations shall remove themselves
from the property on failure to comply with the correction order in the
time specified, but other occupants shall be given a reasonable time
thereafter to vacate.
2. Prohibited Use. Any person who shall occupy a placarded premises or
structure or part thereof, or shall use placarded equipment, and any
owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises shall be liable for the penalties provided
by this Part.
3. Removal of Placard. The Code Official shall remove the condemnation
placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the condemnation
and placard action were based have been eliminated. Any person who
defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of the
Code Official shall be subject to the penalties provided by this Part.
1. General. Whenever the Code Official finds that an emergency exists on
any premises, or in any structure or part thereof, or on any defective
equipment which requires immediate action to protect the public's
health and safety or that of the occupants thereof, the Code Official
shall, with proper notice and service in accordance with the provisions
of § 108, issue an order reciting the existence of such an emergency and
requiring the vacating of the premises or such action taken as is
necessary to meet such emergency. Notwithstanding other provisions of
this Part, such order shall be effective immediately, and the premises or
equipment involved shall be placarded immediately upon service of the
order.
2. Hearing. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply with
that order. Such person shall thereafter, upon petition directed to the
appeals board, be afforded a hearing as prescribed in this Part. Under
emergency conditions, such person shall file a petition for appeal within
72 hours of such order and the Appeals Board will hold a hearing within
15 days of the appeal notice. Depending upon the findings of the board
at such hearing as to whether the provisions of this Part have been
complied with, the board shall continue such order or modify or revoke
it.
1. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy
any structure or equipment regulated by this Part, or cause same to be
§ 109 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 111
FWD:72
done, contrary to or in conflict with or in violation of any of the
provisions of this Part.
2. Penalty. Any person, firm or corporation, who shall violate any
provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. The costs shall include,
without limitation, any court filing fees and the expenses incurred by
the Borough for its employees to collect any such sums as well as
attorney fees incurred by the Borough. Each day beyond the effective
date of the notice that a violation continues after due notice has been
served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof, shall be
deemed a separate offense.
3. Prosecution. In case any violation order is not promptly complied with,
the Code Compliance Official, following consultation with the Borough
Council and/or Borough Solicitor, shall be authorized to institute an
appropriate action or proceeding to exact the penalty provided in
§ 111.2. The Code Compliance Official shall have further authority to
consult with the Borough Solicitor as to whether it would also be
appropriate to proceed at law or in equity against the person
responsible for the violation and to so proceed if deemed necessary for
the purpose of ordering that person:
A. To restrain, correct or remove the violation or refrain from any
further execution of work.
B. To restrain or correct the erection, installation or alteration of such
structure;
C. To require the removal of work in violation.
D. To prevent the occupation or use of the structure or part thereof
erected, constructed, installed or altered in violation of, or not in
compliance with, the provisions of this Part, or in violation of a plan
or specification under which an approval, permit or certificate was
issued.
4. Service Fees for Reoccurring Violations. When a property has been
declared a public nuisance due to refuse accumulation, insect, vermin
or rodent infestation, lack of required utilities, facilities, equipment or
other property maintenance violations listed in this Part, deemed a
detriment to the occupants of a property or the public-at-large and/or
cause a blighting condition, the Code Compliance Official will notify the
responsible party. In the event of a reoccurrence of the violation, a
service charge established by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Elizabethtown by ordinance or resolution shall be assessed against the
responsible party. Repeat offender service fees shall be payable to the
Borough of Elizabethtown within 15 days of receipt of the Borough
invoice setting forth the service fee. Failure to timely pay said fee will
§ 111 FOREWORD § 111
FWD:73
§ 112. Demolition. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 111.0]
result in the Borough instituting appropriate action against the offender
to recover both the service fee and any related administrative fees.
5. Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket Procedures. In addition
to other enforcement mechanisms available to the Borough under this
Part, the Code Compliance Official is authorized to issue public safety
official notices for Property Maintenance Code violations and Quick
Tickets for violations including, but not limited to, high weeds and
grass, garbage, failure to clear snow and ice from public sidewalks,
accumulation of rubbish, animal waste and improper storage. The Code
Compliance Official may issue a Quick Ticket in addition to or in lieu of
issuing a notice of violation. The Code Compliance Official shall serve
the ticket by mail, personally delivering the ticket to the property owner
or property management office or company responsible for said
property in violation or by affixing the ticket to the property where the
violation exists. The Code Compliance Official may use more than one
form to serve the ticket to the violator. The Quick Ticket penalties for
the above-referenced violations shall be payable within 15 days. Repeat
offenders shall be subject to additional penalties. Failure to pay the
Quick Ticket within 15 days may result in a summary citation being
issued through the local Magisterial District Judge's office. The
Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown shall approve Quick
Ticket forms and penalty amounts by resolution. Appeals of this Section
shall be made pursuant to § 113 of this Part.
1. General. The Code Official, upon a direction by the Borough Council,
shall order the owner of the premises upon which is located any
structure or part thereof, which in the Code Official's judgment is so
old, dilapidated or is in such a state of disrepair to be dangerous,
unsafe, unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation, occupancy
or use, and so that it would be unreasonable to repair the same, to raze
and remove such structure or part thereof; or if it can be made safe by
repairs, to repair and make safe and sanitary or to raze and remove at
the owner's option; or where there has been a cessation of normal
construction of any structure for a period of one year, to raze and
remove such structure of part thereof.
2. Unreasonable Repairs. Whenever the Code Official, Borough Council
and necessary consultants determine that the cost of such repairs
would exceed 100% of the current value of such structure, such repairs
shall be presumed unreasonable and it shall be presumed for the
purpose of this Section that such structure is a public nuisance which
shall be ordered razed without option on the part of the owner to repair.
3. Order. The order shall specify a time in which the owner shall comply
therewith and specify repairs, if any. It shall be served on the owner of
record or an agent where an agent is in charge of the building and upon
the holder of any encumbrance of record in the manner provided for
service of a summons by a court of record. If the owner or a holder of an
§ 111 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 112
FWD:74
§ 113. Right to Appeal. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 112.0]
encumbrance of record cannot be found, the order shall be served by
posting it on the main entrance of the building and by publishing it
once each week for three successive weeks in a newspaper authorized
to provide service by publication.
4. Restraining Actions. Anyone affected by any such order may within 15
days after service of such order apply to a court of record for an order
restraining the Code Official from razing and removing such structure
or parts thereof. The court shall determine whether the order of the
Code Official is reasonable, and if found reasonable, the court shall
dissolve the restraining order, and if found not reasonable, the court
shall continue the restraining order or modify it as the circumstances
may require.
5. Failure to Comply. Whenever the owner of a property fails to comply
with a demolition order within the time prescribed, the Code Official
shall cause the structure or part thereof to be razed and removed,
either through an available public agency or by contract or
arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such razing and
removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the
structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.
6. Salvage Materials. When any structure has been ordered razed and
removed, the Borough Council or other designated person under said
contract or arrangement aforesaid shall have the right to sell the
salvage and valuable materials at the highest price obtainable. The net
proceeds of such sale, after deducting the expenses of such razing and
removal, shall be promptly remitted with a report of such sale or
transaction, including the items of expense and the amounts deducted,
for the use of the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any order of
a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the report
shall so state.
1. Petition. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this Part, or of any
rule of regulation adopted pursuant thereto, shall have the right to
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the board;
provided that such person shall file, in the office of the board, a written
petition requesting such hearing and containing a statement of the
grounds therefore within 30 days after the day the notice was served.
2. Appeals Board. In order to protect existing structures in the Borough
from overly vigorous enforcement of the provisions of this Part, there
shall be and is hereby created a Code Appeals Board, hereafter referred
to as the Board, consisting of five members who shall be appointed by
the Borough Council.
3. Membership. Whenever possible, the membership of the Board shall
consist of the Board of Health Office, a member of Borough Council, a
§ 112 FOREWORD § 113
FWD:75
§ 114. Definitions. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 201.0; as amended by
Ord. 744, 9/16/1993, § 2; by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; by Ord. 945, 2/21/
2013]
fire company official, a builder or contractor, and a licensed engineer.
At least three members shall have been a resident of the Borough.
Borough Council shall appoint each member for a term of five years.
Borough Council shall appoint a Borough official to serve as secretary
to the Board. This official shall be a nonvoting member of the Board.
4. Vote. The Board shall hear all appeals relative to the enforcement of
this Part, and by a concurring vote of the majority of its members shall
reverse or affirm wholly or partly, or modify, the decision appealed
from, and shall make such order or determination as in its opinion
ought to be made. In the case of a tied vote, the action shall be deemed
a confirmation of the decision of the Code Official.
5. Financial Interest. A member of the Board shall not participate in any
appeal in which that member has a direct or indirect financial interest,
or is engaged as a contractor, or is engaged in the preparation of plans
and specifications or in which that member has any personal interest.
6. Records. The secretary of the Board shall keep a record of each meeting
so that the record shows clearly the basis for each decision made by the
Board.
1. General.
A. Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms
shall, for the purpose of this Part, have the meanings indicated in
this Part.
B. Interchangeability. Words used in the present tense include the
future; words in the masculine gender include the feminine and
neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the
singular.
C. Terms Defined in Other Codes. Where terms are not defined in this
Part and are defined in the building, plumbing or mechanical codes
listed in Appendix A, they shall have the same meaning ascribed to
them as in those codes.
D. Terms Not Defined. Where terms are not defined, through the
methods authorized by this Section, they shall have their ordinarily
accepted meanings such as the context shall imply.
E. Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit," "multifamily dwelling,"
"premises," "residential building," or "rooming unit" are used in
this Part, they shall be construed as though they were followed by
the words, "or any part thereof." [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
§ 113 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 114
FWD:76
2. Applied Meaning of Words and Terms.
ABATEMENT — The reduction of, removal of or encapsulation of lead,
followed by thorough clean up and post clean up treatment, from the
surfaces and sources that promote exposure resulting in the possibility
of lead toxicity or poisoning, which abatement shall be in a manner
approved or determined to be appropriate by the Borough. The method
of abatement and subsequent disposal of lead shall not present a hazard
to health from fumes, dust or vapors by inhalation, ingestion or
absorption through the skin and mucous membranes and shall be in
accordance with all applicable laws, ordinances, regulations and safety
standards of the Borough, State and Federal agencies.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit as defined
in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
APPROVED — Approved by the Code Official.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building which is partly or completely
below grade.10
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A bed-and-breakfast
establishment as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
BUILDING CODE — The Building Code officially adopted by the
Borough of Elizabethtown, or other such codes officially designated
by the Borough for the regulation of construction, alteration, addition,
repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy and maintenance
of buildings and structures.
CENTRAL HEATING — The heating system permanently installed and
adjusted so as to provide the distribution of heat to all habitable rooms,
bathrooms and water closet compartments from a source outside of
these rooms.
CODE OFFICIAL — The official who is charged with the administration
and enforcement of this Part, or any duly authorized representative.
CONDEMN — To adjudge unfit for use or occupancy.
DORMITORY — A space in a building where group sleeping
accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same
family group, in one room, or in a series of closely associated rooms.
DWELLINGS — See § 114(1)(E).
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete, independent
lining facilities for one or more persons including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation. (See § 114.1E.)
ELEVATED BLOOD LEAD LEVEL — A blood lead level of a child under
six years of age confirmed by venous sample to be equal to or greater
10.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “boarding house,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 114 FOREWORD § 114
FWD:77
than the lead level defined as elevated by the United States for Centers
Disease Control.
EXPOSED SURFACE — All interior surfaces of a dwelling and those
exterior surfaces of a dwelling which are readily accessible to children
under six years of age, such as stairs, decks, porches, railings, windows,
doors and siding. Any yard or other area in the vicinity of a dwelling
including, without limitation, any soil, yard or other area which may be
subject to contamination from flaking or peeling lead based coatings or
any other source of lead is also considered an exposed surface.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS — The open space on the premises and
on adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such
premises.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rats or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or
making inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison
spraying, fumigating, trapping, or by any other approved pest
elimination methods.11
FAMILY — A family as defined in Chapter 27.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/
16/2017]
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
HABITABLE SPACE — Space in a structure for living, sleeping, eating
or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet compartments, closets, halls, storage or
utility space, and similar areas are not considered habitable space.12
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or group of buildings where more than
six individual sleeping quarters that may have separate entrances are
offered for compensation, to transient occupants as defined in this
Part, licensed under applicable laws and regulations. Such a use may
have ancillary services, such as recreational facilities, dining services,
meeting rooms, and/or fitness centers.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
INFESTATION — The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin or other pests.
LEAD BASED COATING — Any paint, varnish, glaze or other applied
liquid surface coating and putty or plaster which contains a quantity of
lead in excess of 0.6 milligrams per square centimeter of surface.
LET FOR OCCUPANCY or LET — To permit possession or occupancy
of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building or structure by a
person who shall be the legal owner or not be the legal owner of record
thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license,
11.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “family,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
12.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “hotel,” which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 114 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 114
FWD:78
or pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement or contract for the
sale of land.
MAINTENANCE — Acts or repair and other acts to prevent a decline
in the condition of grounds, structures, and equipment; such that the
condition does not fall below the standards established by this Part and
other applicable statutes, codes and ordinances.13
MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is self-propelled (except an
electric personal assistive mobility device or vehicle which is propelled
solely by human power), as well as any other trailer, tag-along or
other item which is required to be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Motor Vehicles, whether self-propelled or
not. A motor vehicle shall include but not be limited to cars, all forms
of trucks, motorcycles, motor-driven cycles, motorized pedicycles, and
motor homes. The use of the specific examples of a "motor vehicle"
is not intended to nor shall it diminish the general language of the
definition.
MULTIFAMILY APARTMENT HOUSE — A building or portion thereof
containing more than two dwelling units and not classified as a one or
two family dwelling.
OCCUPANT — Any person living and/or sleeping in dwelling unit or
having possession of a space within a building.
ONE FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing one dwelling unit.
OPENABLE AREA — That part of a window or door which is available
for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
OWNER — Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a
legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the State, county or Borough as holding title to the property;
or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of
the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of any such person if ordered to take possession of real property
by a court.
PERSON — An individual, corporation, partnership or any other group
acting as a unit.
PLUMBING FIXTURE — A receptacle or device which is either
permanently or temporarily connected to the water distribution system
of the premises, and demands a supply of water therefrom; or
discharges used water, liquid-borne waste materials, or sewage either
directly or indirectly to the drainage system of the premises; or which
requires both a water supply connection and a discharge to the
drainage system of the premises.
13.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "motel," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 114 FOREWORD § 114
FWD:79
PREMISES — A lot, plot or parcel of land including the buildings or
structures thereon. (See § 114(1)(E).)
PUBLIC NUISANCE —
RESIDENTIAL BUILDING — A building in which sleeping
accommodations or sleeping accommodations and cooking facilities as
a unit are provided; except when classified as an "institution" under the
building code listed in Appendix A. (See § 114(1)(E).)14
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A residential rental unit as defined
in Chapter 5, Code Enforcement, Part 3, Residential Rental Units
Regulations.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
ROOMING UNIT — A rooming unit as defined in Chapter 27,
Zoning.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke, and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons,
The physical condition, or use of any premises regarded as a public
nuisance at common law.
(1)
Any physical condition, use or occupancy of any premises or its
appurtenances considered an attractive nuisance to children,
including, but not limited to, abandoned wells, shafts, basements,
excavations and unsafe fences or structures.
(2)
Any premises which has unsanitary sewerage or plumbing
facilities.
(3)
(4) Any premises designated as unsafe for human habitation or use.
Any premises which is manifestly capable of being a fire hazard,
or is manifestly unsafe or unsecured as to endanger life, limb or
property.
(5)
Any premises from which the plumbing, heating and/or facilities
required by this Part have been removed or from which utilities
have been disconnected, destroyed, removed or rendered
ineffective, or the required precautions against trespassers have
not been provided.
(6)
Any premises which is unsanitary, or which is littered with rubbish
of garbage, or which has an uncontrolled growth of weeds.
(7)
Any structure or building that is in a state of dilapidation,
deterioration or decay; faulty construction; overcrowded; open,
vacant or abandoned; damaged by fire to the extent as not to
provide shelter, in danger of collapse or failure and dangerous to
anyone on or near the premises.
(8)
14.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "rooming house," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 114 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 114
FWD:80
§ 115. General Requirements. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, Art. 3; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; by Ord.
945, 2/21/2013]
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other
similar materials.
SHORT-TERM LODGING ACCOMMODATION — A short-term lodging
accommodation as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
STRUCTURE — That which is built or constructed, including without
limitation because of enumeration, buildings for any occupancy or use
whatsoever, fences, signs, billboards, fire escapes, chute escapes,
railings, water tanks, towers, open grade steps, sidewalks or stairways,
tents or anything erected and framed of component parts which is
fastened, anchored or rests on a permanent foundation or on the
ground.
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY — Transient occupancy as defined in
Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
TRANSIENT OCCUPANT — A person, as defined in this Part, who uses,
possesses, or occupies a dwelling unit or portion thereof for a period
of 30 consecutive calendar days or less.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing two dwelling units.
VENTILATION — The natural or chemical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to or removing air from any space.
WORKMANLIKE — Whenever the words "workmanlike state of
maintenance and repair" are used in this Part, they shall mean that such
maintenance and repair shall be made in a reasonably skillful manner.
YARD — An open unoccupied space on the same lot with a building
extending along the entire length of street, or rear or interior lot line.
YARD WASTE — Shall consist of garden residues, leaves, shrubbery,
tree trimmings, grass clippings, dirt, sod, chipped wood, mulch, and
tree branches.
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Part shall govern the minimum
conditions for maintenance of exterior property, premises and
structures. Premises shall comply with the conditions herein
prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain such
structures and premises in compliance with these requirements. A
person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for
§ 114 FOREWORD § 115
FWD:81
occupancy or use premises which do not comply with the following
requirements of this Section.
C. Vacant Structures and Land. All vacant structures and premises
thereof or vacant land shall be maintained in a clean, safe, secure,
and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a
blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
2. Exterior Property Areas.
A. Sanitation. All exterior property areas and premises shall be
maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary condition free from any
accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
B. Containers. The operator of every establishment producing
garbage, vegetable wastes, or other putrescible materials shall
provide, and at all times cause to be used, leak proof approved
containers provided with close fitting covers for the storage of such
materials until removed from the premises for disposal. It shall be
unlawful to permit the accumulation or residue of liquids, solids or
a combination of such material on the bottom or side of containers
and that the interior of the containers shall be kept clean by
thorough rinsing and draining as often as necessary.
C. Grading and Drainage. All premises shall be graded and
maintained so as to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water
thereon, or within any structure located thereon. Stagnant water
shall be determined as any accumulation that has not dispersed
within seven days of the last recorded local rainfall with the
exception of water retention areas and/or reservoirs approved by
the Code Official.
D. Loading Areas. All loading areas, automobile service stations and
drive-in food establishments shall be paved with bituminous,
concrete or equivalent surfacing and shall be free from dirt and
other litter and kept in good repair. When lighted for nighttime use,
lights shall not be permitted to cast directly upon dwellings nearby.
E. Insect and Rat Control. An owner of a structure or property shall be
responsible for the extermination of insects, rats, vermin or other
pests in all exterior areas of the premises, except that the occupant
shall be responsible for such extermination in the exterior areas of
the premises of a single family dwelling. Whenever infestation
exists in the premises of other than a single family dwelling,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner.
F. Public Areas. All sidewalks, steps, driveways, parking spaces and
similar paved areas for public use shall be kept in a proper state of
repair, free of all snow, ice, mud, overhanging trees and shrubs
which obstruct walkways and other debris and shall be maintained
free of hazardous conditions. If any sidewalk or driveway or portion
thereof, by virtue of its state of repair, shall constitute a danger to
§ 115 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:82
public health and safety, the sidewalk or driveway or portion
thereof shall be replaced. Steps shall comply with the requirements
for exterior stairs. Any trees, shrubbery and/or vegetation abutting
a public sidewalk or public street or public alley shall be
maintained to a minimum height of 10 feet of clearance above the
public sidewalk or public right-of-way and at a minimum height of
16 feet above any public street or public alley.
G. Weeds. All lots shall be maintained free from weeds in excess of six
inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be
defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation other than
trees or shrubs provided, however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers and gardens. The area between the curb and the
street should be maintained free from weeds or plant growth.
H. Storage Areas.
(1) All approved open salvage yards and open storage areas shall
be completely obscured from surrounding property by an
approved solid screen not less than six feet (1,829 mm) in
height. Storage of debris, junk or construction materials,
which are not associated with an approved use or permitted
construction at that site, shall be prohibited.
(2) Temporary storage of materials associated with an approved
use is permitted for 90 days from the date of delivery. Storage
of materials associated with an approved use shall not be
stored in a front yard for more than 30 days from the date of
delivery.
(3) Storage of lawn and landscape equipment, items dealing with
snow removal, household items, toys, recreational equipment,
trash receptacles, transportation devices and furniture shall be
strictly prohibited from being stored in the front yard as
defined within the Zoning Ordinance.15
(4) Storage of items on a front or side porch shall be confined to
the appropriate outdoor style furniture and decorations. Toys,
boxes, recycling and trash receptacles, indoor furniture,
loaded trash bags, clothes, appliances and items associated
with indoor residential uses shall be prohibited from being
stored on the front and/or side porches.
I. Exhaust Vents. A person shall not construct, maintain, or operate
pipes, ducts, conductors, fans, or blowers discharging gases,
steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or
particulate wastes so as to discharge directly upon abutting or
adjacent public and private property or that of another tenant.
15.Editor's Note: See Chapter 27, § 201.
§ 115 FOREWORD § 115
FWD:83
J. Accessory Structure. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, fences and walls, shall be maintained structurally sound
and in compliance with all applicable provisions of Subsections 3
and 4. Should an accessory structure abut a public alley or street,
the accessory structure shall display the site address in accordance
with Chapter 5, Part 1, § 115, Subsection 3B. [Amended by Ord.
975, 6/16/2016]
K. Motor Vehicles. Motor vehicles shall be subject to the requirements
of Subsections 2L and 2M.
L. Residential Areas. Except as may be provided in other regulations,
no unregistered and/or uninspected motor vehicle shall be parked
on any property (including driveway area) in a residential district
or residential use for a period in excess of 90 days, which ninetyday
period shall be calculated beginning with the day that the
registration and/or inspection of the vehicle became void. Said
vehicle shall not at any time be in a state of major disassembly or
disrepair, nor shall it be in the process of being stripped or
dismantled. A motor vehicle of any type shall not at any time
undergo overhaul, including body work, in a residential district or
area, unless such work is performed inside a structure or similarly
enclosed area designed and approved for such purposes. If any
such unregistered/uninspected motor vehicle is, before the
expiration of the ninety-day period, moved in to an enclosed
structure, it shall not be a violation of this section.
M. Nonresidential Areas. Motor vehicles which are currently
unregistered and/or uninspected for a period in excess of 90 days,
which ninety-day period shall be calculated beginning with the day
that the registration and/or inspection of the vehicle became void,
or in a state of major disassembly or disrepair or in the process of
being stripped and stored outdoors on any property in a
nonresidential district shall be removed or brought into compliance
with this Part.
N. Disposition of Yard Waste. Yard waste shall not be disposed of on
public rights-of-way, streets and/or alleys.
3. Exterior Structure.
A. General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good
repair, structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to
the health, safety or welfare of the occupants and so as to protect
the occupants from the adverse effects of the environment.
B. Site Address. Buildings shall have approved address numbers,
building numbers or approved building identification placed in a
position that is plainly legible and visible from the street or public
alley fronting the structure(s). These numbers shall contrast with
their background. Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or
§ 115 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:84
alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of four inches
(102 mm) high with a minimum stroke width of 1/2 inch (12.7
mm). Where access is by means of a private road and the building
address cannot be viewed from the public way, a monument, pole
or other sign or means shall be used to identify the structure.
[Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
C. Structural Members. All supporting structural members of all
structures shall be kept structurally sound, free of deterioration
and maintained capable of safely bearing the dead and live loads
imposed upon them.
D. Exterior Surfaces (Foundations, Walls and Roof). Every foundation,
exterior wall, roof and all other exterior surfaces shall be
maintained in a workmanlike state of maintenance and repair and
shall be kept in such condition as to exclude rats.
E. Foundation Walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained so as to
carry the safe design and operating dead and live loads and shall be
free from open cracks and breaks, so as not to be detrimental to
public safety and welfare.
F. Exterior Walls. Every exterior wall shall be free of holes, breaks,
loose or rotting boards or timbers, and any other conditions which
might admit rain or dampness to the interior portions of the walls
or to the occupied spaces of the building. All exterior surface
materials, including wood, composition, or metal siding, shall be
maintained weatherproof and shall be properly surface coated
when required to prevent deterioration.
G. Roofs and Drainage. The roof shall be structurally sound, tight, and
not have defects which might admit rain. All principal use
structures shall have roof spouting attached to a down spout. Roof
drainage shall be adequate to prevent rain from causing dampness
or deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the building. Roof
water from principal and/or accessory structures shall not be
discharged in a manner that creates a nuisance to owners or
occupants of adjacent premises or that creates a public nuisance.
[Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016; and by Ord. No. 995, 12/
19/2019]
H. Decorative Features. All cornices, entablatures, belt courses,
corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and similar decorative
features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage
and in a safe condition.
I. Signs, Marquees, and Awnings. All canopies, marquees, signs,
metal awnings, stairways, fire escapes, standpipes, exhaust ducts
and similar overhand extensions shall be maintained in good repair
and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a safe and sound
condition. They shall be protected from the elements and against
§ 115 FOREWORD § 115
FWD:85
decay and rust by the periodic application of weather coating
material such as paint or other protective treatment.
J. Chimneys and Towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks,
and similar appurtenances shall be maintained structurally safe,
sound and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of metal or wood
shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by
periodic application of weather-coating materials such as paint or
similar surface treatment.
K. Stair and Porches.
(1) Every stair, porch, fire escape, balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use
and capable of supporting the anticipated loads and shall be
maintained in sound condition and good repair. Every stair,
porch and fire escape shall be maintained free of hazardous
conditions such as snow, ice, mud and other debris.
(2) Every flight of stairs which is more than four risers high shall
have a handrail on at least one side of the stair and every open
portion of a stair, fire escape, porch, landing or balcony which
is more than 30 inches (762mm) above the grade below shall
have guardrails. Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches
(762mm) nor more than 34 inches (864mm) high, measured
vertically above the nosing of the treads. Guardrails shall be
not less than 30 inches (762mm) high above the floor or the
porch, landing or balcony. Every handrail and guardrail shall
be firmly fastened and capable of bearing normally imposed
loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
L. Window and Door Frames. Every window, door and frame shall be
constructed and maintained in such relation to the adjacent wall
construction so as to be weather tight.
M. Weather tight. Every window and exterior door shall be fitted
reasonably in its frame and be weather tight. Weather stripping
shall be used to exclude wind or rain from entering the dwelling or
structure and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
N. Glazing. Every required window sash shall be fully supplied with
approved glazing materials which are without open cracks and
holes.
O. Openable Windows. Every window, other than a fixed window, shall
be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position by
window hardware.
P. Insect Screens.
(1) During the period from April 1 to December 1 every door and
window or other outside opening used for ventilation purposes
§ 115 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:86
serving any building containing habitable rooms, food
preparation areas, food service areas, or any areas where
products used in food for human consumption are processed,
manufactured, packaged, or stored, shall be supplied with
approved tight-fitting screens of not less than 16 mesh per inch
and every swinging screen door shall have a self-closing device
in good working condition.
(2) Exception. Screen doors shall not be required for out-swinging
doors or other types of opening which make screening
impractical, provided other approved means such as air
curtains or insect repellent fans are employed.
Q. Door Hardware. Every exterior door and its hardware shall be
maintained in good condition. Door locks on all doors entering
dwelling units shall be in good repair and capable of tightly
securing the door.
R. Basement Hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent the entrance of rats, rain
and surface drainage water into the structure.
S. Guards for Basement Windows. Every basements window which is
openable shall be supplied with rat-proof shields, or storm windows
or other material affording protection against the entry of rats.
4. Interior Structure.
A. General. The interior of a structure and its equipment shall be
maintained in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary
condition so as not to pose a threat to the health, safety or welfare
of the occupants or visitors, and to protect the occupants from the
environment.
B. Structural Members.
(1) The supporting structural members of every building shall be
maintained structurally sound, not showing any evidence of
deterioration which would render them incapable of carrying
the imposed loads.
(2) In every existing building used for business, industrial,
mercantile or storage occupancy, in which heavy loads or
concentrations occur or in which machinery is introduced, the
owner or occupant shall cause the weight that each floor will
safely sustain to be calculated by a registered architect or
engineer and filed with the Code Official, and after such
acceptance by the Code Official, to be posted on each floor in a
conspicuous place.
C. Interior Surfaces. Floors, walls (including windows and doors)
ceilings, and other interior surfaces shall be maintained in good,
§ 115 FOREWORD § 115
FWD:87
clean and sanitary condition. Peeling paint, cracked or loosed
plaster, decayed wood, and other defective surface conditions shall
be eliminated.
D. Bathroom and Kitchen Floors. Every toilet, bathroom and kitchen
floor surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to permit
such floor to be kept in a clean and sanitary condition.
E. Free from Dampness. Every building, basement and crawl space
shall not be maintained in a manner that fosters decay or
deterioration of the structure.
F. Sanitation. The interior of every structure shall be maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition free from any accumulation of rubbish,
refuse or garbage. Rubbish, garbage, and other refuse shall be
properly kept inside temporary storage facilities as required under
§ 120(2).
G. Storage. Garbage or refuse shall not be allowed to accumulate or
be stored in public halls or stairways.
H. Insect and Rat Harborage. All structures shall be kept free from
insect and rat, mice and vermin infestation, and where insects or
rats are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by approved
processes which will not be injurious to human health. After
extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
reinfestation.
I. Exit Facilities. All interior stairs and railings and other exit facilities
of every structure shall be maintained in sound condition and good
repair by replacing treads and risers that evidence excessive wear
or are broken, warped or loose. Every inside stair shall be so
constructed and maintained as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the anticipated loads.
J. Handrails and Guardrails. Every flight of stairs which is more than
four risers high shall have a handrail on at least one side of the
stair, and every open portion of a stair, landing or balcony which is
more than 30 inches (762mm) above the floor or grade below shall
have guardrails. Handrails shall be not less than 30 inches
(762mm) nor more than 34 inches (864mm) high, measured
vertically above the nosing of the tread or above the floor of the
landing or balcony. Guardrails shall be not less than 30 inches
(762mm) high above the floor of the landing or balcony. Every
handrail and guardrail shall be firmly fastened and capable of
bearing normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good
condition.
5. Swimming Pools. Swimming pools shall operate in a safe and sanitary
manner at all times. Should the swimming pool discontinue use, the
pool shall be properly emptied and dismantled within 30 days after
receiving notice from the Codes Compliance Official. Water from the
§ 115 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:88
§ 116. Light, Ventilation and Space Requirements. [Ord. 687, 2/18/
1988, Art. 4]
pool shall not be discharged onto adjacent properties or rights-ofway.
Operation of swimming pools shall be in strict conformity and
compliance with Chapter 27, Part 13, § 1319. [Added by Ord. 980, 12/
15/2016]
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
conditions and standards for the light, ventilation and space for the
occupancy of a structure. All light, ventilation and space conditions
shall comply with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as
they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such light and ventilation and space conditions in
compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any
premises which do not comply with the following requirements of
this Section.
C. Access to Public Property. All structures shall be provided access to
public property. Such access means shall be maintained
unobstructed.
D. Open Space. An open space, when used for the origin of light and
ventilation, shall be maintained and unobstructed.
E. Alternative Devices. In place of the means for natural light and
ventilation herein prescribe, alternative arrangement of windows,
louvers, or other methods and devices that will provide the
equivalent minimum performance requirements shall be permitted
when complying with the building code listed in Appendix A.
2. Light.
A. General. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient light so
not as to endanger health and safety.
B. Common Halls and Stairways. Every common hall and stairway in
every building, other than one and two family dwellings, shall be
adequately lighted with an illumination of at least 60 watt standard
incandescent light bulb or equivalent for each 200 square feet
(18.60 m2) of floor area, provided that the spacing between lights
shall not be greater than 30 feet (9,144mm). Every exterior
stairway shall be illuminated with a minimum of one foot candle
(10.76 lux) at floors, landings and treads.
C. Other Spaces. All other spaces shall be provided with natural or
artificial light of sufficient intensity and so distributed as to permit
§ 115 FOREWORD § 116
FWD:89
the maintenance of sanitary conditions, and the safe use of the
space and the appliances, equipment and fixtures.
3. Ventilation.
A. General. All spaces or rooms shall be provided sufficient natural or
mechanical ventilation so as not to endanger health and safety.
Where mechanical ventilation is provided in lieu of the natural
ventilation, such mechanical ventilating systems shall be
maintained in operation during the occupancy of any structure or
portion thereof. When part of the air provided by a mechanical
ventilation system is recirculated, the portion or volume of air
recirculated shall not be recirculated to a different residential
space or occupancy of dissimilar use from which it is withdrawn.
B. Process Ventilation. Where any process permits and where
injurious, toxic, irritating or noxious fumes, gases, dust or mists are
generated by said process, a local exhaust ventilation system shall
be provided to remove the contaminating agent at the source so
that it is not allowed to permeate the general atmosphere of the
workroom. Air so exhausted shall be exhausted to the exterior and
shall not be recirculated to any space, including the space from
which it is withdrawn.
C. Clothes Dryer Exhaust. Clothes dryer venting systems shall be
independent of all other systems and shall be vented in accordance
with the manufacturer's recommendations.
4. Dwelling Unit Limitations.
A. Separation of Units. Dwelling units shall be separate and apart
from each other. Sleeping rooms shall not be used as the only
means of access to other sleeping rooms or habitable spaces.
B. Privacy. Hotel units, lodging units and dormitory units shall be
designed to provide privacy, and be separate from other adjoining
spaces.
C. Common Access. A habitable space, bathroom or water closet
compartment which is accessory to a dwelling unit shall not open
directly into or be used in conjunction with a food store, barber or
beauty shop, doctor's or dentist's examination or treatment room or
similar room used for public purposes.
D. Below Grade Rooms. Rooms partially or completely below grade
shall not be used as habitable space unless:
(1) Floors and walls are water-tight so as to prevent entry of
moisture.
(2) Total window area, total openable window area and ceiling
height are in accordance with this Part.
§ 116 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 116
FWD:90
(3) Required minimum window area of every habitable space is
entirely above the grade adjoining such window areas.
(4) Means of egress and emergency escape are provided in
accordance with this Part.
5. Space Requirements.
A. Area for Sleeping Purposes. Every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
(6.51m2) of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping
purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 40 square
feet (4.65m2) of floor area for each additional occupant. [Amended
by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
B. Overcrowding. Dwelling units shall not be occupied by more
occupants than permitted by the minimum occupancy area
requirements of Table 1.
C. Combined Spaces. Combined living room and dining room spaces
shall comply with the requirements of Table 1 if the total area is
equal to that required for separate rooms and if the space is so
located that it functions as a combination living room/dining room.
Table 1
Minimum Occupancy Area Requirements
Minimum Occupancy Area in Square Feet Space
(Square Meters)
1-2 Occupants 3-5 Occupants 6 or more
Living Room(a) No
requirements
120(11.16) 150(13.95)
Dining Room(a) No
requirements
80(7.44) 100(9.30)
Kitchen 50(4.65) 50(4.65) 60(5.58)
Bedrooms Shall comply with § 115.1A
Note (a). See § 116.5C for combined living room/dining room
spaces.
D. Prohibited Use. Kitchens, nonhabitable spaces and public spaces
shall not be used for sleeping purposes.
E. Minimum Ceiling Heights.
(1) Habitable spaces shall have a clear ceiling height over the
minimum area required by this Part at not less than 7 1/3 feet
(2,235mm), except that in attics or top half-stories the ceiling
height shall be not less than seven feet (2,134mm) over not less
§ 116 FOREWORD § 116
FWD:91
§ 117. Plumbing Facilities and Fixture Requirements. [Ord. 687, 2/
18/1988, Art. 5; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
than 1/3 of the minimum area required by this Part when used
for sleeping, study or similar activity. In calculating the floor
area of such rooms, only those portions of the floor area of the
room having a clear ceiling height of five feet (1,524mm) or
more shall be included.
(2) Exception. Hallways, corridors, bathrooms, toilet rooms,
kitchens and habitable basements used as recreation rooms
shall have a ceiling height of not less than seven feet
(2,134mm) to the lowest projection from the ceiling.
F. Correctional Institutional Occupancies. It is not intended that this
Part regulate the space requirements of correctional institutions.
G. Minimum Room Widths. Every habitable space shall have a clear
room width of not less than seven feet (2,134mm) at the narrowest
point exclusive of projections affecting less than 10% of the floor
area and exclusive of floor areas of alcoves and entry ways not
included in meeting the floor area requirements listed in Table 1.
Exception: Kitchens require a clear passageway of not less than
three feet (914mm) between counter, appliances and/or walls.
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
plumbing facilities and fixtures shall comply with the requirements
herein prescribed insofar as they are applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such plumbing facilities and fixtures in compliance with
these requirements. A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant
or let to another for occupancy or use any structure or portion
thereof or premises which do not comply with the following
requirements of this Section.
2. Required Facilities.
A. Dwelling Units. Every dwelling unit shall include its own plumbing
facilities with are in proper operating condition, can be used in
privacy, and are adequate for personal cleanliness and the disposal
of human waste. The following minimum plumbing facilities set
forth in Subsection 2B, 2C and 2D shall be supplied and maintained
in sanitary, safe working condition.
B. Water Closet and Lavatory. Every dwelling unit shall contain within
its walls, a room separate from habitable spaces, which affords
privacy and a water closet supplied with cold running water. A
lavatory shall be placed in the same room as the water closet or
located in another room, in close proximity to the door leading
§ 116 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 117
FWD:92
directly into the room in which said water closet is located. The
lavatory shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
C. Bathtub or Shower. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which
affords privacy to a person in said room and which is equipped with
a bathtub or shower supplied with hot and cold running water.
D. Kitchen Sink. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink apart
from the lavatory required under Subsection 2B, and such sink
shall be supplied with hot and cold running water.
E. Rooming Units. At least one water closet, lavatory basin, and
bathtub or shower properly connected to an approved water and
sewer system and in good working condition shall be supplied for
each four rooming units within a dwelling, wherever said facilities
are shared. Every lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be
supplied with hot and cold water at all times. [Amended by Ord.
983, 11/16/2017]
F. Hotels/Motels. Where private water closets, lavatory basin, and
bathtub or shower are not provided, one water closet, one lavatory
and one bathtub or shower accessible from a public hallway shall
be provided on each floor for each 10 occupants. Each lavatory,
bathtub, or shower shall be supplied with hot and cold water at all
times. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
G. Other Structures. In nonresidential structures, the requirements
for sanitary facilities shall comply with the minimum requirements
of the plumbing code listed in Appendix A for such facilities for
such use and occupancy.
3. Toilet Rooms.
A. Privacy. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall be designed and
arranged to provide privacy.
B. Direct Access. Toilet rooms and bathrooms shall not be used as a
passageway to a hall or other space, or to the exterior. A toilet room
or bathroom in a dwelling unit shall be accessible from any
sleeping room without passing through another sleeping room.
C. Same Story. Toilet rooms and bathrooms serving hotel/motel units,
or dormitory units, unless located within such respective units, or
directly connected thereto, shall be provided on the same story
with such units and be accessible only from a common hall or
passageway. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
D. Floors. Bathrooms and toilet rooms shall be provided with floors of
moisture resistant material.
E. Partitions. Every nonresidential structure that requires or supplies
a water closet shall provide within the toilet room partitions,
enclosures, or compartments for privacy and shall comply with
§ 117 FOREWORD § 117
FWD:93
fixture clearance requirements of the plumbing code listed in
Appendix A for such installations.
4. Plumbing Fixtures.
A. General. All plumbing fixtures shall be maintained in a safe and
usable condition. All plumbing fixtures shall be approved
nonabsorbent material.
B. Connections. Water supply lines, plumbing fixtures, vents and
drains shall be properly installed, connected and maintained in
working order and shall be kept free from obstructions, leaks and
defects and capable of performing the function for which they are
designed. All repairs and installations shall be made in accordance
with the provisions of the building and plumbing codes listed in
Appendix A.
C. Maintained Clean and Sanitary. All plumbing facilities shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition by the occupant so as
not to breed insects and rats or produce dangerous or offensive
gases or odors.
D. Access for Cleaning. Plumbing fixtures shall be installed to permit
easy access for cleaning both the fixture and the area about it.
E. Water Conservation. Plumbing fixtures which are replaced shall be
of watersaving construction and use as required by the energy and
plumbing codes listed in Appendix A.
5. Water System.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public water system or to a Pennsylvania DEP approved private
water system. All sinks, lavatories, bathtubs and showers shall be
supplied with hot and cold running water.
B. Contamination. The water supply shall be maintained free from
contamination and all water inlets for plumbing fixtures shall be
located above the overflow rim of the fixture. Shampoo basin
faucets, janitor sink faucets, and other hose bibs or faucets to
which hoses are attached and left in place, shall be protected by an
approved atmospheric type vacuum breaker or an approved
permanently attached hose connection vacuum breaker.
C. Supply. The water supply system shall be installed and maintained
to provide at all times a supply of water to plumbing fixtures,
devices, and appurtenances in sufficient volume and at pressures
adequate to enable them to function satisfactorily.
D. Water Heating Facilities. Where hot water is provided, water
heating facilities shall be installed in an approved manner, properly
maintained, and properly connected with hot water lines to the
§ 117 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 117
FWD:94
§ 118. Mechanical and Electrical Requirements. [Ord. 687, 2/18/
1988, Art. 6]
fixtures required to be supplied with the hot water. Water heating
facilities shall be capable of heating water to such a temperature
as to permit an adequate amount of water to be drawn at every
required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub, shower and laundry
facility or other similar units, at a temperature of not less than
110° F. (43° C.). Every gas burning water heater shall be vented
to a chimney or other venting device leading to outdoor space. A
gas-burning water heater shall not be located in any bathroom,
bedroom or other occupied room normally kept closed, unless
adequate combustion air is provided. There shall be installed on
water heaters as approved combination temperature and pressure
relief valve. All water heating appliances shall be properly installed
and maintained in accordance with this Part.
6. Sewage System.
A. General. Every sink, lavatory, bathtub or shower, drinking fountain,
water closet or other facility shall be properly connected to either a
public sewer system or to a Borough approved private sewage
disposal system.
B. Maintenance. Every plumbing stack, waste and sewer line shall be
so installed and maintained as to function properly and shall be
kept from obstructions, leaks, and defects to prevent structural
deterioration or health hazards. All repairs and installations shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the building and
plumbing codes listed in Appendix A.
7. Storm Drainage. An approved system of storm water disposal shall be
provided and maintained for the safe and efficient drainage of roofs and
paved areas, yards and courts, and other open areas on the premises.
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section shall govern the minimum
mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment to be provided.
All mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment shall comply
with the requirements herein prescribed insofar as they are
applicable.
B. Responsibility. The owner of the structure shall provide and
maintain such mechanical and electrical facilities and equipment in
compliance with these requirements. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any
premises which does not comply with the following requirements of
this Section.
2. Heating Facilities.
§ 117 FOREWORD § 118
FWD:95
A. Residential Buildings.
(1) Every owner of any structure who rents, leases or lets one or
more dwelling units or guest rooms on terms, either express or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupants thereof shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from September 15 to April 30
to maintain a room temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.),
in all habitable spaces, bathrooms, and toilet rooms during the
hours between 6:30 a.m. and 10:30 p.m. of each day and
maintain a temperature of not less than 60° F. (16° C.) during
other hours. The temperature shall be measured at a point
three feet (914mm) above the floor and three feet (914mm)
from exterior walls.
(2) Exception. When the exterior temperature falls below 0° F.
(-18° C.) and the heating system is operating at its full capacity,
a minimum room temperature of 60° F. (16° C.) shall be
maintained at all times.
B. Other Structures.
(1) Every owner of any structure who rents, leases, or lets the
structure or any part thereof on terms, either express or
implied, to furnish heat to the occupant thereof; and every
occupant of any structure or part thereof on terms, either
express or implied, to supply its own heat, shall supply
sufficient heat during the period from October 1 to May 15 to
maintain a temperature of not less than 65° F. (18° C.) during
all working hours in all enclosed spaces or rooms where
persons are employed and working. The temperature shall be
measured at a point three feet (914mm) above the floor and
three feet (914mm) from the exterior walls.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) Processing, storage and operation areas that require
cooling or special temperature conditions.
(b) Areas in which persons are primarily engaged in vigorous
physical activities.
C. Cooking and Heating Equipment. All cooking and heating
equipment, components, and accessories in every heating, cooking,
and water heating device shall be maintained free from leaks and
fire, health and accident hazards. All installations and repairs shall
be made in accordance with the provisions of the building code and
mechanical code listed in Appendix A. Portable cooking equipment
employing flame is prohibited, except for approved residential type
food trays or salvers which are heated by a candle or alcohol lamp.
D. Installation. All mechanical equipment shall be connected to an
approved chimney or vent.
§ 118 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 118
FWD:96
E. Flue. All vented fuel-burning equipment shall be connected to an
approved chimney or vent.
F. Clearances. All required clearances to combustible materials shall
be maintained.
G. Safety Controls. All safety controls for fuel-burning equipment shall
be maintained in effective operation.
H. Combustion Air. A supply of air for complete combustion of the fuel
and for ventilation of the space shall be provided for the fuelburning
equipment.
I. Unauthorized Devices. Devices purporting to reduce gas
consumption by attachment to a gas appliance, to the gas supply
line thereto, or the vent outlet or vent piping therefrom shall not be
used unless labeled for such use and the installation is specifically
approved.
J. Portable unvented heaters. The use of portable unvented fuel-fired
heating equipment as a primary or secondary heat source shall be
prohibited. [Amended by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
K. Toxic Emissions. Any wood burning stove, fireplace or other similar
heat source shall not emit any toxic fumes which are in violation or
do not conform to Federal or State regulations for that type of
emission.
L. Boiler Inspection. Each boiler and pressure vessel, other than
boilers locate within a dwelling unit, shall be inspected a minimum
of once every two years. The inspection shall determine that the
boiler operates in accordance with the manufacturer's
requirements and that all safety devices and controls function
correctly.
M. Fireplaces. Fireplaces, and other construction and devices
intended for use similar to a fireplace, shall be stable and safe.
N. Climate Control. When facilities for interior climate control
(heating, cooling, and/or humidity) are integral functions of
structures used as dwelling units or other occupancies, such
facilities shall be maintained and operated in a continuous manner
in accordance with the designed capacity.
O. Portable, Electric Space Heaters. The use of portable, electric
space heaters as a secondary heat source shall be permitted in
accordance with the following regulations. [Added by Ord. No.
995, 12/19/2019]
(1) Listed and Labeled. Only UL or ETL listed and labeled
portable, electric space heaters shall be used.
§ 118 FOREWORD § 118
FWD:97
(2) Power Supply. Portable, electric space heaters shall be plugged
directly into an approved receptacle.
(3) Extension Cords. Portable, electric space heaters shall not be
plugged into extension cords.
(4) Prohibited Areas. Portable, electric space heaters shall not be
operated with three feet of any combustible materials.
Portable, electric space heaters shall only be operated in
locations for which they are listed.
(5) Safety. All portable heaters shall meet the following criteria:
(a) A portable, electric space heater shall have a "tip-over"
feature that automatically shuts off the heater if it is
knocked over or if the heater becomes unbalanced.
(b) A portable, electric space heater shall be turned off if left
unattended.
(c) A portable, electric space heater shall not have a "timing"
device to start or stop heating operations.
(d) The heating element or combustion chamber shall be
permanently guarded as to prevent accidental contact by
persons or materials.
3. Electrical Facilities.
A. Facilities Required. Every building or part thereof used for human
occupancy shall be adequately and safely provided with an
electrical system in compliance with the requirements of this
subsection. The provisions of Subsection 3A, 3B, 3C, and 3D shall
be considered absolute minimum requirements. The size of units
and the usage of appliance and equipment shall be used as a basis
for determining the need for additional facilities in accordance with
NFPA 70 listed in Appendix A.
B. Receptacles. Every habitable space in a dwelling unit, and every
guest room, shall contain at least one remote receptacle, outlet.
Every bathroom shall contain at least one receptacle.
C. Lighting Fixtures. Every public hall, interior stairway, water closet
compartment, bathroom, laundry room and furnace room shall
contain at least one electric lighting fixture.
D. Service. When the electrical system requires modification to
correct inadequate service as defined in § 118.3F, the service shall
be corrected to a minimum of 60 ampere, three wire service.
E. Installation. All electrical equipment, wiring and appliances shall
be installed and maintained in a safe manner in accordance with all
§ 118 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 118
FWD:98
§ 119. Fire Safety Requirements. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, Art. 7; as
amended by Ord. 729, 8/20/1992, § 1; by Ord. 737, 3/18/1993, § 1; by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
applicable laws. All electrical equipment shall be listed by
Underwriters Laboratories.
F. Defective System. Where it is found that the electrical system in a
structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants or the structure by
reason of inadequate service, improper fusing, insufficient outlets,
improper wiring or installation, deterioration or damage, or for
similar reason, the Code Official shall require the defects to be
corrected to eliminate the hazard.
4. Elevators, Escalators and Dumbwaiters.
A. General. Elevators, dumbwaiters and escalators shall be
maintained to safely sustain the loads to which they are subject, to
operate properly, and to be free of physical and fire hazards.
B. Elevators.
(1) In buildings equipped with passenger elevators, at least one
elevator shall be maintained in operation at all times when the
building is occupied.
(2) Exception. Buildings equipped with only one elevator shall be
permitted to have the elevator temporarily out of service for
testing or servicing.
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section shall be in addition to the
requirements listed in Chapter 7, Fire Prevention, of the Code of
Ordinances.
B. Responsibility. The owner of any structure shall provide and
maintain firesafety facilities and equipment in compliance with the
International Fire Code of 2009, promulgated by the International
Code Council, and any amendments, supplements, revisions,
additions or replacements thereto. A person shall not occupy as
owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy or use any
premises which do not comply with the requirements of this
Section and Chapter 7 of the Code of Ordinances.
2. Means of Egress.
A. Duel Egress. Every residential building exceeding two stories in
height above grade, not including basements, shall be provided
with not less than two approved independent exits from each floor
above the second floor, fully accessible to each occupant on the
floor. See Section R311 of the International Residential Code of
2009, promulgated by the International Code Council, and any
§ 118 FOREWORD § 119
FWD:99
§ 120. Responsibilities of Persons. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, Art. 8; as
added by Ord. 823, 2/15/2001]
amendments, supplements, revisions, additions or replacements
thereto, for additional requirements.
(1) Existing fire escapes, as of the date of the enactment hereof,
shall be continued to be accepted as a component in the means
of egress in existing buildings only, provided that they are
structurally sound and are in approved working condition.
(2) Portable ladders and similar approved emergency escape
devices that are permanently mounted to the inside wall are
permitted, provided that the approved device allows the
occupant to descend to a roof or ground level, and if the room
is used for sleeping, the individual occupying the room must be
able to use the escape device.
(3) Where a new fire escape is proposed or is required by the Code
Official in accordance with this Chapter and all applicable
Borough ordinances, the construction requirements must
conform to the specifications contained in the International
Fire Code and the International Residential Code.
(4) Permanent fire escapes located on the street front portion of a
structure must conform to the setback requirements contained
in the Borough Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 27).
(5) Emergency Escape. Requirements for sleeping rooms in the
basement must meet the regulations of the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code.
(6) Smoke and Carbon Monoxide Detectors. Smoke and carbon
monoxide detectors shall be in use as may be required by the
International Residential Code and the International Fire
Code.
1. General. The provisions of this Section shall govern the responsibilities
of persons for the maintenance of structures, and the equipment and
premises thereof.
2. Sanitary Condition.
A. Cleanliness. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof shall
keep that part of the structure or premises thereof which that
occupant occupies, controls, or uses in a clean and sanitary
condition. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more
dwelling units shall maintain, in a clean and sanitary condition, the
shared or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
§ 119 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 120
FWD:100
B. Disposal of Rubbish. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof
shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by
placing it in rubbish containers equipped with tight fitting covers.
C. Disposal of Garbage. Every occupant of a structure or part thereof
shall dispose of garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing
it in garbage disposal facilities, or if such facilities are not
available, by removing all nonburnable matter and securely
wrapping such garbage and placing it in approved garbage storage
containers.
D. Collection of Garbage and Rubbish. Garbage and rubbish shall be
collected as frequently as determined by the Code Official to be
essential to protect the public health.
E. Garbage Storage Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied
with an approved garbage disposal facility, which shall be any
adequate mechanical food waste grinder in each dwelling unit, an
approved incinerator unit in the structure for the use of the
occupants of each dwelling unit, or an approved outside garbage
can or cans as required in § 115.2B. Such facilities shall be
sufficient to meet the needs of the occupants.
F. Rubbish Storage Facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied
with approved containers and covers for storage of rubbish, and
the owner, operator or agent in control of such dwelling shall be
responsible for the removal of such rubbish.
G. Food Preparation. All spaces used or intended to be used for food
preparation shall contain suitable space and equipment to store,
prepare and serve foods in a sanitary manner. There shall be
adequate facilities and services for the sanitary disposal of food
wastes and refuse, including facilities for temporary storage when
necessary.
H. Supplied Fixtures and Equipment. The owner or occupant of a
structure or part thereof shall keep the supplied equipment and
fixtures therein clean and sanitary, and shall be responsible for the
exercise of reasonable care in their proper use and operation. The
owner shall maintain the equipment and fixtures in good and
proper operating condition.
I. Furnished by Occupant. The equipment and fixtures furnished by
the occupant of a structure shall be properly installed and shall be
maintained in good working condition, kept clean and sanitary and
free of defects, leaks or obstructions.
3. Extermination.
A. Owner. The owner of any structure shall be responsible for
extermination within the structure prior to renting, leasing or
selling the structure.
§ 120 FOREWORD § 120
FWD:101
B. Tenant-Occupant. The tenant-occupant of any structure shall be
responsible for the continued rat-proof condition of the structure,
and if the tenant-occupant fails to maintain the rat-proof condition,
the cost of extermination shall be the responsibility of the tenantoccupant.
C. Single Occupancy. The occupant of a structure containing a single
dwelling unit or of a single nonresidential structure shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rats or other pests
in the structure or on the premises.
D. Multiple Occupancy. Every owner, agent or operator of two or more
dwelling units or multiple occupancies or nonresidential structures
and rooming units shall be responsible for the extermination of any
insects, rats or other pests in the public or shared areas of the
structure and premises. When infestation is caused by failure of an
occupant of a unit of the two or more dwelling units or by an
occupant or lessee of a nonresidential structure to prevent such
infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be responsible
for such extermination. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
E. Continued Rat Infestation. Continuing or repeated incidents of rat
infestation determined from the official records as provided in
§ 105(3) of this Part shall require the installation of rat and vermin
proof walls. The rat and vermin proof walls shall be installed in
accordance with the building code listed in Appendix A.
4. Composting.
A. General. The provisions of this Section shall govern the
responsibilities of persons for the establishment and maintenance
of compost piles or structures.
B. Compost Material. The following items may be composted: leaves,
grass clippings, yard waste, fruit rinds or scraps, and vegetable
scraps. The following items may not be composted: meat, dairy
product, kitchen vegetables cooked with animal fats and human or
pet feces. All materials shall emanate from the property where the
composting is taking place. Compost material may not be
accumulated from the property of others.
C. Location of Compost. The compost pile, bin or structure shall be
located in the rear yard. The compost pile, bin or structure shall be
located at least 25 feet from any residential structure or dwelling
unit. No compost pile, bin or structure may be located nearer than
three feet from any property line.
D. Use of Compost. Composted material shall be used on the property
where it is stored. Compost material may not be used for
commercial purposes.
§ 120 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 120
FWD:102
§ 121. Hazard Abatement in Existing Buildings. [Ord. 687, 2/18/
1988, Art. 9; as amended by Ord. 744, 9/16/1993, § 1]
E. Compost Pile. A compost pile is a shallow pit not greater than one
foot in depth. Compost material is layered, usually in six inch
depths, in the pit. Lime or fertilizer may be applied after each layer
is distributed. The layers of compost materials may not exceed four
feet in height. If the compost pile is more than one foot above
grade, a structure such as a snow fence, chicken wire or wood
planks must be erected to prevent the wind from blowing away the
leaves or grass. The compost pile should be constructed with a flat
or oval-shaped top so that it will absorb water rather than shed it.
Compost piles may be placed on open ground in accordance with
above mentioned regulations.
F. Compost Bin. A compost bin is a commercially manufactured
container designed specifically for the composting of material.
Compost bins shall be constructed of wood or hard plastic to
prevent animals and rodents from entering the pile.
G. Size of Compost Pile. The compost pile or structure may not exceed
500 square feet, or 10% of the rear yard, whichever is less.
H. Maintenance. Compost piles, bins or structures shall be maintained
in a manner to preclude the spread of plant or animal disease, the
harboring of animals or rodents and the infestation of insects. A
compost pile shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner.
Material to be composted must be applied to the compost pile, bin
or structure in a timely fashion. Compost material may not be
stored in any garbage or leaf bag.
I. Gardens. Leaf and grass material may be placed on viable gardens
provided that all conditions contained in this Section are met.
1. General.
A. Scope. The provisions of this Section are intended to provide a
reasonable degree of safety to persons occupying existing buildings
that do not conform to the minimum requirements of the building
code listed in Appendix A by requiring the following alterations to
such existing buildings.
B. Application of Other Codes. All alterations to an existing building
which are caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this
Part shall be done in accordance with the applicable procedures
and provisions of the building, plumbing and mechanical codes and
NFIPA 70 listed in Appendix A.
C. Continued Maintenance. All service equipment, means of egress
devices and safeguards which are required by this Section or which
were required by a previous statute or another code in a building or
structure when erected, altered or repaired shall be maintained in
§ 120 FOREWORD § 121
FWD:103
good working order. The requirements of this § 120 are not
intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire
protection and safety systems and devices in existing buildings.
These requirements at intended to require that existing buildings
which do not comply with these provisions be altered to provide a
minimum level of safety as required herein.
D. Alternative Methods and Systems. The provisions of this Section
are not intended to exclude the acceptance and approval of
alternative methods and systems if such alternative methods and
systems provide equivalent safety to the occupant of the existing
buildings.
E. Responsibility. The owner of the existing building or structure shall
provide and maintain such facilities, equipment and systems in
compliance with these requirements and the fire prevention code
listed in Appendix A.
2. Means Egress.
A. Number of Exits.
(1) Every story used for human occupancy more than six stories
above grade shall be provided not less than two independent
exits. Every story used for human occupancy totally below
grade greater than 2,000 square feet (186m2) shall be
provided not less than two independent exits.
(2) Exceptions. A single exit is acceptable when:
(a) The building is equipped throughout with an automatic fire
suppression system and an automatic fire alarm system
with smoke detectors located in all corridors, lobbies and
common areas; or,
(b) The building is provided an automatic fire alarm system
and the exit is a smokeproof enclosure or pressurized
stairway; or,
(c) An existing fire escape conforming to the building code
listed in Appendix A is provided in addition to the single
exit.
(d) Stories complying with the requirements of the building
code listed in Appendix A.
B. Exit Enclosure. All interior exits shall be enclosed with approved
assemblies except as provided in Table 2.
§ 121 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 121
FWD:104
Table 2
Enclosure Exceptions
Building Use
Group
Exception Conditions16
Business When connecting not more than two floor
levels and less than 3,500) square feet per
floor, or when connecting not more than
three floor levels and the building is
equipped throughout with an approved
automatic fire suppression system.
Education When connecting not more than two floor
levels and the building is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic fire
suppression system.
Factory-Industrial
Storage
When connecting not more than two floor
levels, or when connecting not more than
three floor levels and the building is
equipped throughout with an approved
automatic fire suppression system.
Mercantile When connecting not more than two floor
levels and less than 2,000 square feet per
floor, or when connecting not more than two
floor levels and the building is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic fire
suppression system.
Residential —
Hotels
When connecting not more than two floor
levels and the building is equipped
throughout with an approved automatic fire
suppression system.
Residential —
Apartment
When connecting not more than two floor
levels with not more than four dwelling units
per floor, or when connecting not more than
three floor levels with not more than four
dwelling units per floor and the building is
equipped throughout with an approved
automatic fire suppression system.
Residential One and
Two Family
Dwellings
In every case.
C. Enclosure Rating. Enclosures connecting not more than six floor
levels shall have a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour
with approved opening protectives. Enclosures connecting more
16.One square foot equals 0.093m2.
§ 121 FOREWORD § 121
FWD:105
than six floor levels shall have a fire resistance rating of not less
than two hours with approved opening protectives.
D. Exit Capacity. The capacity of the exits serving a floor shall be
sufficient for the occupant load thereof as determined by the
building code listed in Appendix A.
E. Corridor Enclosure. All corridors serving an occupant load of
greater than 30 and openings therein shall provide an effective
smoke barrier. All transoms, louvers, doors and other openings
shall be closed or shall be self-closing.
F. Dead-End Travel Distance. All corridors which serve more than one
exit shall provide direct connection to such exits. The length of a
dead-end corridor shall not exceed 35 feet (10,668mm) when the
building is not equipped throughout with an automatic fire
suppression system. The dead-end travel distance limit shall be
increased to 70 feet (21,336mm) when the building is equipped
throughout with an automatic fire suppression system.
3. Shafts.
A. Enclosure. All shafts shall be enclosed as required by § 121.2B and
C for exits except elevator and supplemental stairway shafts which
are immediately adjacent to and not separated from floor openings
connecting the same floors served by the shaft. The opening
protectives shall provide a barrier to fire penetration. Building
service shafts such as trash chutes, utility and duct shafts shall be
enclosed as required by § 121.2B and C for exits.
4. Illumination and Signs.
A. Egress Illumination. All means of egress shall be equipped with
artificial lighting in accordance with the requirements for new
buildings in the building code listed in Appendix A. Emergency
lighting shall be provided in accordance with the requirements for
new buildings in the building code listed in Appendix A.
B. Exit Signs. All exits shall be indicated with exit signs in accordance
with the requirements for new buildings in the building code listed
in Appendix A.
C. Information Signs. A sign shall be provided at each floor landing in
all interior stairways more than three stories above grade,
designating the floor level above the floor of discharge. All elevator
lobby call stations on all floor levels in buildings more then 75 feet
(22,860mm) above the lowest level of fire department access shall
be marked with approved signs reading as follows: "Use Stairways
in Case of Fire — Do Not Use Elevators."
5. Fire Protection Systems.
§ 121 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 121
FWD:106
A. High Hazard Use. All buildings and portions thereof of high hazard
use shall be equipped throughout with an approved automatic fire
suppression system.
B. Commercial Kitchen Exhaust Systems. Commercial kitchen
exhaust hood and duct systems, other than steam tables,
completely enclosed ovens, cooking appliances located within a
dwelling unit and not used for commercial purposes and auxiliary
cooking equipment that does not produce greaseladen vapors, shall
be equipped with an approved automatic fire suppression system.
C. Fire Standpipes, All buildings having floors used for human
occupancy located more than six stories above grade shall be
provided with standpipes according to the building code listed in
Appendix A. The standpipes shall have a approved fire department
connection with hose connections at each floor level.
D. Tampering. Anyone tampering or interfering with the effectiveness
of a smoke detector shall be in violation of this Part.
E. Fire Alarm System.
(1) All buildings used as churches and for similar religious
purposes or of educational use shall be equipped with a manual
fire alarm system in accordance with the building code listed in
Appendix A.
(2) Exception. Sanctuary and nave areas of churches and similar
religious buildings.
6. Elevator Recall. All elevators having a travel distance of 25 feet
(7,620mm) or more above or below the primary level of elevator access
for emergency fire fighting or rescue personnel shall conform to the
requirements of Rule 211.3 ("Operation of Elevators Under Fire or
Other Emergency Conditions") of ASME A17.1 listed in Appendix A.
7. Smoke and Heat Detection. Each recirculating air or exhaust system
which serves more than one floor in buildings which exceed six stories
in height shall be equipped with approved smoke and heat detection
devices in accordance with the mechanical code listed in Appendix A.
The devices shall stop the fan(s) automatically and shall be of the
manual reset type. Automatic fan shutdown is not required when the
system is part of an approved smoke removal or control system.
8. Lead Poison Control.
A. Determination of Health Hazard. Any lead based coating shall be
considered a health hazard to a child under six years of age who
has demonstrated an elevated blood lead level, if:
(1) It exists in or about a dwelling in which a child under six years
of age who has demonstrated an elevated blood level
commonly resides or visits.
§ 121 FOREWORD § 121
FWD:107
(2) It is determined to be on any flaking, peeling, nonintact
deteriorated surface or on any exposed surface or in any oil or
dust found in or amount the dwelling or in any rugs, carpet or
other surface coverings in or about the dwelling.
(3) It contains a quantity of lead in excess of 0.6 milligrams per
square centimeter of surface when measured by a recognized
method of analysis.
B. Warning for Positive Test. Any lead based coating area must be
marked with warnings immediately upon positive testing and
notice of these areas given to the occupants of the time of testing to
avoid further child poisoning.
C. Notification of Violation and Abatement.
(1) Upon receipt of (a) notification by a certified medical physician
that a child under six years of age has an elevated blood level
and (b) an investigation indicating that there exists or may
exist in a dwelling in which the child resides or visits a lead
based coating which may cause or contribute to the child's
elevated blood lead level, the Borough has the authority to
order the owner and/or occupant of any dwelling in which the
child resides or visits to submit within 10 days a written report
including the results of testing and including an environmental
investigation stating whether there exists a health hazard. This
testing and environmental investigation shall be in accordance
with Subsection 8D. If the owner or occupant fails to provide
such written report, the Borough can perform or cause the
performance of the testing and environmental investigation at
the expense of the owner and/or occupant to determine
whether there exists a health hazard.
(2) If it is determined that there exists a health hazard the
Borough shall issue a violation notice ordering the owner and/
or occupant to abate the hazard in a reasonable time as
specified by the Borough. The owner and/or occupant shall
bear the cost of abatement and shall submit a written plan to
the Borough for review and approval prior to initiating said
abatement. The owner and/or occupant shall submit proof
satisfactory to the Borough of the abatement promptly upon
completion. If the owner and/or occupant fails to abate the
hazard in a reasonable time as specified by the Borough, the
dwelling shall be placarded with a sign that indicates: "This
property is unfit for human habitation due to lead poisoning
hazards and can not be reoccupied until the hazards are
abated." It shall be illegal for any one but the Borough to
remove the placard.
D. Testing Procedures and Standards. Testing and environmental
investigation may be performed by any public or private agency,
§ 121 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 121
FWD:108
§ 122. Saving Clause. [Ord. 687, 2/18/1988, § 4]
Nothing in this Part or in the existing structure code hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or
any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any course or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in this Part; nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any character be
lost, impaired or affected by this Part.
entity or firm approved by the Borough. The physical determination
of the lead content of surface material in a dwelling or of the lead
content of any exposed surface must be made by nondestructive
measurements using a recognized method of analysis. All
instruments used for inplace determination of lead content must
be operated by a certified operator with proof of the same being
submitted to the Borough.
§ 121 FOREWORD § 122
FWD:109

B.
Standards for Inspections.
§ 131. Standards for Inspections. [Res. 88-2, 2/18/1988; as amended
by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. Background. Borough Council has adopted the Existing Structures and
Property Maintenance Code on February 18, 1988. This code
establishes minimum maintenance standards and requirements for
existing properties. Furthermore, it provides standards for
rehabilitation and reuse of these structures found to be in
noncompliance. All structures and properties within the Borough are
subject to the provisions contained in the code. Borough Council shall
appoint a code official(s) who will represent the Borough and enforce
the provisions of the code. Borough Council shall set forth the
inspection criteria and reasonable fees for the inspections.
2. The code official(s) appointed by the Borough Council has the authority
under the provisions of the code to inspect properties and structures
within the Borough.
3. The following criteria are established to provide guidance for the code
official(s) to determine which properties or structures require an
inspection. An inspection may be held if one or more of the criteria
listed below is met:
A. Tenant complaint.
B. Past history of problems at a certain property or structure.
C. Complaint from a neighbor, if affected by the spread of insects or
rodents or concerning the exterior storage of debris, rubbish and
the like.
D. Referral from the Board of Health, Police Department, Fire
Company, Borough Office or other responsible agency.
E. Poor exterior appearance of a structure.
F. Poor exterior appearance of a property (i.e., storage of vehicles,
trash, rubbish and the like).
G. Unsatisfactory inspection results of one or more dwelling units
owned by the same landlord.
H. Random sampling of compliance with the mandatory smoke
detector requirement.
4. The fee for an inspection by the code official(s) shall be in an amount as
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council plus
applicable materials, if any. The fee will be charged to the owner of the
property and payable to the Borough. Above the minimum charge, the
inspection fees will be prorated in 1/2 hour increments.
§ 131 FOREWORD § 131
FWD:111
5. The complainant shall be responsible for the inspection fee when an
inspection is requested by that individual and the code official finds that
the circumstances under which the inspection was requested were
groundless or malicious.
§ 131 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 131
FWD:112
Part 2
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the Elizabethtown Borough
Construction Code Ordinance.
§ 202. Legislative Intent. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 1]
§ 203. Adoption of Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code. [Ord.
845, 6/17/2004, § 1]
The Borough hereby adopts the standards which the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry has made part of the Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code identified in § 403.21 of the L & I Regulations as
the Elizabethtown Borough Construction Code with the following additions
to the International Building Code, 2003:
1. By Act 45 of 1999, the Pennsylvania Legislature provided for the
adoption of a Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and directed the
Department of Labor and Industry to promulgate regulations for the
Uniform Construction Code. In 2002, the Department of Labor and
Industry adopted final regulations governing certification and training
of persons to administer the Uniform Construction Code, and on
January 10, 2004, the Department issued final regulations for the
administration of the Uniform Construction Code. The Uniform
Construction Code incorporates the International Building Code, 2003,
the International Residential Code, 2003, the International Existing
Building Code, 2003, the standards incorporated into such publications
by reference, and other publications as set forth in the L & I
Regulations. Borough Council desires to adopt and administer the
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code and establish administrative
and enforcement regulations.
2. In accordance with § 302(a) of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act,
this Part does not adopt the International Property Maintenance Code
and shall not be considered as a property maintenance code. All
Borough regulations governing the maintenance of properties shall be
in ordinances separate and distinct from the Elizabethtown Borough
Construction Code.
A. Section 202, Definitions, shall be amended by inserting the following
definitions in alphabetical order:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough.
BUILDING CODE OFFICIAL — A Borough official certified by L &
I under § 103 of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act. The term
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:113
§ 204. Administration and Enforcement of Elizabethtown Borough
Construction Code. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 1]
The Borough hereby adopts the provisions of Chapter 1, Administration,
of the International Building Code, 2003 and the provisions of the L & I
regulations set forth below to govern administration and enforcement of the
Elizabethtown Borough Construction Code. The administrative provisions
of other codes which L & I has made part of the DCC, including but
not limited to the International Residential Code, 2003, are not part of
includes an individual certified in a category established under Chapter
401 of the L & I Regulations to manage building code enforcement
activities, supervise building inspectors or plans examiners, issue
building permits, occupancy permits, notice of violations and orders to
vacate, and initiate prosecutions.
CONSTRUCTION CODE OFFICIAL — A Borough official or a third party
agency appointed by the Borough certified by L & I under Section 103
of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act in an appropriate category
established under Section 701(b) of the Pennsylvania Construction
Code Act to perform plan review of construction documents, inspect
construction or administer and enforce codes and regulations in that
category under the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act or related
statutes.
DEP — The Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
INTERMUNICIPAL AGREEMENT — The agreement among Conoy
Township, East Donegal Township, Elizabethtown Borough, Marietta
Borough, Mount Joy Township and West Donegal Township dated as of
July 1, 2002, establishing, inter alia, the Donegal-Elizabethtown Area
Appeals Board.
L & I — The Department of Labor and Industries of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
L & I REGULATIONS — All regulations adopted by L & I to implement
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act.
PENNSYLVANIA CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT — Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S.
§ 7210.101 et seq., as amended.
THIRD PARTY AGENCY — A person or firm duly appointed by Borough
Council to act as the Construction Code Official in the administration of
this Construction Code.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The Code adopted pursuant to
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act and the L & I Regulations.
B. Section 1612.3 is amended by inserting "Elizabethtown Borough" and
"October 1977, as revised in 2004-2005" in the respective blanks.
C. Section 3410.2 is amended by inserting the date of July 8, 2004, for
residential dwellings and July 8, 2004. for nonresidential structures.
§ 203 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:114
the Elizabethtown Borough Construction Code. The provisions of this
Construction Code govern if there is a conflict with the provisions of the
Codes set forth in § 403.21 of the L & I Regulations or the L & I Regulations
relating to administration or enforcement. Changes from the International
Building Code, 2003, Chapter 1, and the L & I Regulations to the
Elizabethtown Borough Construction Code are as follows:
A. Section 101.1. Insert "Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania."
B. Section 101.2 shall provide as follows:
101.2. Scope. These regulations shall control all matters concerning
the construction, alteration, addition, repair, removal, demolition,
location, occupancy and maintenance of all buildings and structures
and shall apply to existing or proposed structures except as such
matters are otherwise provided for in other ordinances or statutes,
including but not limited to the Borough Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance, Stormwater Management
Ordinance or in the rules and regulations authorized for promulgation
under the provisions of this Construction Code. Whenever there is a
conflict between the provisions of this Construction Code and any other
Borough Ordinance, including but not limited to the Zoning Ordinance,
it is the intent of Borough Council that the more stringent requirement
shall apply. All construction which the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act or the L & I Regulations exempt from compliance with the Uniform
Construction Code are exempt from the provisions of this Construction
Code. Items exempted from compliance with the Uniform Construction
Code by Sections 403.1(b) and 403.1(e) of the L & I Regulations do not
have to comply with the Construction Code but shall comply with all
other applicable Borough Ordinances.
C. Section 101.3 shall be amended by adding the following sentence to the
existing section:
It is the further intent of Borough Council that all construction within
the Borough shall comply with the provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act and all applicable regulations to implement the
Americans with Disabilities Act promulgated by Federal and State
regulatory agencies and with the Code Requirements for Housing
Accessibility, and this Code shall be interpreted in a manner which
fulfills this intent. It is also the further intent of Borough Council to
comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Construction Code
Act and the L & I Regulations.
D. Section 101.4.5 shall be deleted in its entirety.
E. Section 103, Department of Building Safety, shall be deleted in its
entirety and a new § 103, Administration, shall be inserted which shall
provide as follows:
§ 204 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:115
103.1. Building official. Borough Council shall appoint a person or
persons to serve as a building code official and a construction code
official as those terms are defined in the L & I Regulations. Both
the building code official and the construction code official shall be
considered the building official as such term is defined and used in this
Construction Code.
103.2. Powers and duties of building code official and construction
code official. The building code official shall have all powers set forth
in the L & I Regulations and shall have the powers and duties of the
building official set forth in this Construction Code. The construction
code official shall have the powers set forth in the L & I Regulations
and may also have the powers of the building official set forth in
this Construction Code. The respective duties and responsibilities of
the building code official and the construction code official shall be
determined by Borough Council and shall be within the limitations of
any certifications required or issued by L & I.
103.2.1. The building code official shall serve at the pleasure
of Borough Council. The building code official shall provide
supervision of the construction code official, receive uniform
construction code permit applications, address citizen inquiries,
concerns and complaints, issuing building permits, occupancy
permits, and manage code enforcement activities, including but
not limited to issuing notice of violations and orders to vacate, and
initiation of prosecutions.
103.2.2. The construction code official shall serve at the pleasure
of Borough Council. The construction code official shall perform
plan review of construction documents, issue Construction Code
permits, inspect construction, provide the building code official
with reports of inspections and recommendations upon issuance
of certificates of occupancy, and administer and enforce this
Construction Code. The construction code official may be a third
party agency.
103.2.3. An applicants for Construction Code permits shall submit
two complete copies of the application to the building code official.
The building code official shall transmit a complete copy of the
Construction Code permit application to the construction code
official for plan review, issuance of the Construction Code permit,
and inspection of construction. The construction code official shall
notify the applicant when plan review has been completed, and the
applicant shall pay plan review and estimated inspection fees to
the construction code official prior to issuance of the Construction
Code permit. The construction code official shall notify the
building code official when the work is complete and has
successfully had its final inspection. The building code official
shall issue the certificate of occupancy after receipt of notification
from the construction code official that the work has been finally
inspected and all fees have been paid.
§ 204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:116
103.3. Organization. Borough Council shall appoint such other
officers, technical assistants, inspectors and other employees as shall
be necessary for the administration of this Construction Code.
F. Section 104.4 shall be amended by inserting the following language
after the first sentence:
The building official shall have the right to reject any report performed
by any individual or agency unless the permit holder has requested and
obtained the prior approval of the building official for such individual
or agency to perform such inspection. Any individual or agency
performing such inspection and providing such report shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the building official that such
individual or agency has obtained all necessary certifications from L &
I.
G. Section 104.8 shall provide as follows:
104.8. Liability. The Borough and the building official shall have all
immunities and rights granted by the Pennsylvania Judicial Code,
including but not limited to Chapter 85.
H. Sections 105, Permits, 106, Construction Documents, and 111, Service
Utilities, of Chapter 1 of the International Building Code, 2003 shall not
be a part of the Borough Construction Code. The Borough hereby
adopts and incorporates §§ 403.41, 403.42, 403.42a, 403.43, 403.44,
403.47, 403.48, 403.61, 403.62, 403.62a, 403.63 and 403.66 of the L &
I Regulations to govern applications for and issuance of Construction
Code permits for nonresidential and residential construction with the
changes set forth below:
(1) Sections 403.42(a) and 403.62(a) shall be amended by inserting the
following at the end of the existing sections:
It shall be the joint responsibility of the owner, lessee, if any, and
the contractor to determine that a Construction Code permit (and
all other required permits and approvals) has been obtained before
performing any work. It shall be unlawful for any contractor or
subcontractor to perform any work for which a Construction Code
permit is required unless the owner and contractor obtain and post
a Construction Code permit as required by this Construction Code.
(2) Sections 403.42a(b) and 403.62a(b) shall be amended by inserting
the following at the end of the existing Sections:
At the time of filing an application for a Construction Code permit,
the applicant shall present to the building code official adequate
evidence that the applicant has obtained from all governmental
authorities having jurisdiction, all permits, licenses, approvals and/
or variances required in connection with the proposed use,
occupancy, construction, enlargement, alteration or demolition.
Such agencies shall include but not be limited to the Zoning Officer,
§ 204 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:117
Zoning Hearing Board, Lancaster County Conservation District,
public water service provider (where public water service is
proposed), Sewage Enforcement Officer (where on-lot sewage
disposal is proposed) or public sewage service provider (where
public sewer service is proposed), State Police Fire Marshal, DEP, L
& I and the Pennsylvania Departments of Community and Economic
Development and Transportation. No application for a Construction
Code permit is complete without a copy of any required zoning
permit and proof of any required subdivision and/or land
development approval, storm water management plan approval.
(3) Sections 403.43(h) and 403.63(h) shall be amended by inserting
the following at the end of the existing Sections:
The applicant shall post a copy of the Construction Code permit at
a location on the property clearly visible to members of the public.
I. A new § 108.1.2 shall be inserted which shall provide as follows:
108.1.2. Time of payment of fees. An applicant for a permit under this
Construction Code shall pay the Borough's administrative fee to the
Borough at the time of application.
Prior to the issuance of a Construction Code permit, the applicant
shall pay to the construction code official the plan review fee and
the estimated fee for all inspections required. If additional inspections
become necessary during the costs of construction, the applicant shall
reimburse the construction code official for all such costs within 15
days after the date of an invoice for such costs. An applicant shall
pay to the construction code official all fees and costs incurred for
all inspections required during the course of construction prior to the
issuance of a certificate of use and occupancy for the structure for
which a Construction Code permit has been issued.
J. Section 108.4 shall be revised to provide:
108.4. Work commencing before permit issuance. Any person who
commences any work on a building, structure, electrical, gas,
mechanical or plumbing system before obtaining the necessary
Construction Code permits shall be subject to an additional fee for
expedited processing which shall be equal to the fee which should have
been paid at permit application. The expedited processing fee shall
be paid in full in addition to the normal application fee prior to the
issuance of a Construction Code permit.
K. Section 108.6 shall be deleted in its entirety.
L. Sections 109.3, 109.4, 109.5, and 109.6 of the International Building
Code, 2003 shall be deleted and the Borough hereby adopts §§ 403.45,
403.64 and 403.86 of the L & I Regulations governing inspections with
the changes set forth below:
§ 204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:118
(1) Sections 403.64(g) shall be deleted in its entirety.
M. Section 110, Certificate of Occupancy, of the International Building
Code, 2003 is deleted. The Borough adopts §§ 403.46 and 403.65 of the
L & I Regulations governing certificates of occupancy. Sections 403.46
and 403.65 of the L & I Regulations are amended as follows:
(1) Section 403.46(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(10) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall not be deemed permission to occupy the structure or
commence a use if any other ordinance requires the issuance
of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
(2) Section 403.65(b) is amended by adding the following subsections:
(9) A statement that the issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall not be deemed permission to occupy the structure or
commence a use if any other ordinance requires the issuance
of a permit or certificate prior to use and occupancy.
N. Section 112, Board of Appeals, shall be amended in its entirety to
provide as follows:
112.1. Board of appeals. The Borough hereby appoints the Donegal-
Elizabethtown Area Appeals Board as the board of appeals under the
Elizabethtown Borough Construction Code. Members of the Donegal-
Elizabethtown Area Appeals Board shall be selected in accordance
with the Intermunicipal Agreement.
112.2. Authority of board of appeals. The board of appeals shall hear
and rule on appeals, requests for variances and requests for extensions
of time. An application or appeal shall be based upon, and the board of
appeals in making its decisions shall consider, those factors set forth
in the L & I Regulations.
112.3. Membership of board of appeals. A member of the board of
appeals shall be qualified by training and experience to pass on
matters pertaining to building construction. Members of the governing
body may not serve on the board of appeals. A board of appeals
member may not cast a vote or participate in a hearing in any appeal,
request for variance or request for extension of time in which the
member has a personal, professional or financial interest.
112.4. Operation of board. The board of appeals may establish policies
and procedures necessary to carry out its duties in accordance with
the Intermunicipal Agreement. The board shall annually select one
of its members to serve as chairperson and one of its members to
serve as vice chairperson. The board of appeals shall keep minutes
of its meetings and file a written decision on all appeals under this
Construction Code. The board of appeals shall provide notice of and
conduct its meetings in accordance with the Sunshine Act, 65 Pa. C.S.
§ 701 et seq.
§ 204 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:119
112.5. Procedures for applications and appeals. Any person desiring
to file an application or appeal to the board of appeals may file such
appeal with the building code official. All applications and appeals to
the board of appeals shall be in writing and shall specify the section
of this Construction Code from which relief is sought or the action of
the building official which is the subject of the appeal. The written
application or appeal shall state all of the grounds for the application
or appeal and shall include any necessary plans or specification to
provide the board of appeals with information to evaluate the
application or appeal and shall include the fee. No application appeal
will be considered complete without the necessary appeal fee. Any
appeal from a determination of the building official shall be filed within
20 calendar days of the determination.
112.5.1. Hearings. An applicant or appellant who desires to
present testimony to the board of appeals shall request a hearing
in the application or appeal. If the applicant or appellant does not
request a hearing, it will be assumed that the board of appeals
may render its determination based on the written information
submitted with the application or appeal and any additional
information available to members of the board of appeals.
112.5.2. Parties. The Borough shall be considered a party to all
appeals or applications filed with the board of appeals. Other
persons affected by the appeal or application who have made
timely appearances of record may also be recognized as parties
to the appeal or application.
112.5.3. Decision. The board of appeals shall render its decision
in writing within any time periods imposed in state laws or L & I
Regulations. The board of appeals shall provide the applicant or
appellant, the building official and the Borough with copies of the
appeal.
O. Section 113, Violations, shall provide as follows:
§ 204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:120
113.1. Unlawful Acts. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to erect, construct, alter, extend, repair, remove, demolish,
use or occupy, or to permit the erection, construction, alteration,
extension, repair, removal, demolition, use or occupancy of, any
building or structure or equipment regulated by this Construction
Code, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of this
Construction Code. It shall also be unlawful for any person to place
inaccurate or misleading information on an application or plan or to
omit relevant information from an application or a plan submitted to
the Borough.
113.2. Notice of Violation. The building official may serve a notice
of violation on any person responsible for the erection, construction,
alteration, extension, repair, removal, demolition, use, permission to
use, occupancy, or permission for occupancy of a building or structure
or equipment in violation of the provisions of this Construction Code,
or in violation of a detailed statement or a plan approved thereunder,
or in violation of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this Construction Code. Such notice shall order discontinuance of
the illegal action or condition and the abatement of the violation.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall not be a defense to an
enforcement action that the building official did not serve or that the
defendant did not receive a written notice of violation prior to the
institution of the enforcement action.
113.2.1. If an inspection reveals a violation of this Construction
Code, the construction code official shall discuss the inspection
results with the permit holder at the completion of the inspection.
113.2.2. When a violation relates to an unsafe building, structure,
or equipment, the building official shall proceed in accordance
with Section 403.84 of the L & I Regulations.
113.3. Prosecution of Violation. If the building code official has served
a notice of violation and the notice of violation is not complied with
within the time specified by the building official, or if the building
code official determines that there is insufficient time to serve a notice
of violation or that such notice of violation will have no practical
or beneficial effect, the building code official shall notify Borough
Council of the violation and shall request Borough Council to authorize
institution of enforcement proceedings against the violator and/or
authorize the Borough Solicitor to institute the appropriate
proceedings at law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate such
violation or to require the removal or termination of the unlawful
use of the building or structure in violation of the provisions of this
Construction Code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the building code official may institute
summary enforcement proceedings without prior authorization of
Borough Council.
§ 204 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:121
113.4. Violation Penalties. Any person who shall violate a provision
of this Construction Code or who shall fail to comply with any of
the requirements thereof or who shall erect, construct, alter, extend,
repair, remove, demolish, use or occupy, or permit the use or
occupancy of, any building or structure or equipment regulated by this
Construction Code in violation of the provisions of this Construction
Code or of an approved plan or of a directive of the building official
or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this
Construction Code or who shall permit the use, occupancy, erection,
construction, alteration, extension, removal, demolition or repair of
the building or structure or equipment in violation thereof, shall, upon
being found guilty in an enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough, pay a penalty of not less than $200 and not more than
$1,000 for each violation plus all costs of prosecution, which fines and
penalties may be collected as provided by law. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense, and each Section of
this Construction Code which is violated shall be deemed a separate
offense. The building official may request the Police Department to
make arrests for any offense against this Construction Code or orders
of the building official affecting the immediate safety of the public.
113.5. Abatement of Violation. The imposition of the penalties herein
prescribed shall not preclude the Borough Solicitor or the building
official from instituting appropriate action to prevent the unlawful
construction or to restrain, correct, or abate a violation, or to prevent
illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises or to stop an
illegal act, conduct, business, or use of a building or structure on or
about any premises.
P. Section 114.3 shall provide as follows:
114.3. Unlawful Continuance. Any person who shall continue any work
in or about the structure after having been served with a stop work
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove
a violation or unsafe condition, shall commit a violation of this
Construction Code and shall be subject to penalties or fines as provided
in Section 113.4 and remedies as provided in Section 113.5.
Q. Section 115, Unsafe Structures and Equipment, of the International
Building Code, 2003 is deleted. The Borough adopts § 403.84 of the L &
I Regulations governing unsafe buildings, structures, or equipment.
R. Table R301.2(1) of the International Residential Code, 2003 is hereby
completed by inserting the following information:
Ground snow load: 30 pounds per square foot.
Wind speed (mph): 90 mph.
Seismic design category: A, B, C, D.
Weathering: severe.
Frost line depth: 30 inches.
§ 204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:122
§ 205. Regulations and Ordinances in Effect Prior to Effective Date
of this Part. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 2]
It is expressly intended that the provisions of this Part shall not affect any
act done, contract executed or liability incurred prior to its effective date,
or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce
any rights, rule, regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to punish any
violation which occurred under any prior zoning regulation or ordinance. In
the event any violation has occurred under Chapter 5, Part 2, or Chapter 5,
Part 3, in effect prior to the effective date of this Part, prosecution may be
initiated against the alleged offender pursuant to the provisions of said prior
regulations, and the provisions and penalties provided in Chapter 5, Part
2, or Chapter 5, Part 3, prior to the effective date of this Part shall remain
effective as to said violation.
§ 206. Other Sections, Parts and Provisions of Code of Ordinances
Remain in Effect. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 3]
All other sections, parts and provisions of the Code of Ordinances of the
Borough of Elizabethtown shall remain in full force and effect as previously
enacted and amended.
§ 207. Savings Clause. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 4]
In the event any provision, section, sentence, clause or part of this Part shall
be held to be invalid, illegal or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such invalidity, illegality or unconstitutionality shall not affect
or impair the remaining provisions, sections, sentences, clauses or parts of
this Part, it being the intent of Borough Council that the remainder of the
Part shall be and shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 208. Effective Date. [Ord. 845, 6/17/2004, § 5]
This Part shall take effect and after its enactment by Borough Council of
the Borough of Elizabethtown as provided by law. The Uniform Construction
Code adopted by this Part shall take effect on July 8, 2004.
Termite: moderate to heavy.
Decay: slight to moderate.
Winter design temperature: 10°
Ice shield underlayment required: Yes
Flood hazard: October, 1977, as revised in 2004-2005
Air freezing index: 1000
Mean annual temperature: 50°
§ 204 FOREWORD § 208
FWD:123

Part 3
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNITS REGULATIONS
§ 301. Purpose and scope. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
The purpose of this Part and the policy of the Borough of Elizabethtown
shall be to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of
its citizens; to establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants
relating to residential rental units in the Borough; and to encourage owners
and occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within
the Borough. As a means to these ends, this Part provides for a systematic
inspection program, registration and licensing of residential rental units
and penalties. In considering the adoption of this Part, the Borough makes
the following findings:
§ 302. Definitions. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this Part, have the meanings indicated as follows:
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — An accessory dwelling unit as defined in
Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — A bed-and-breakfast
establishment as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/
16/2017]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
CODES COMPLIANCE OFFICIAL — A person designated by Borough
Council to enforce this Part, including performance of inspections, issuance
of residential rental licenses and issuance of citations.
CODES — Any state or local law, code or ordinance adopted, enacted or
in effect in and for the Borough, including, but not limited to, the Existing
Structures and Property Maintenance Code, codified as Chapter 5 of the
Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
A. There is a concern in the Borough with the failure of some property
owners to properly maintain residential rental units.
B. Borough records indicate there is a greater incidence of problems with
the maintenance and upkeep of residential properties which are not
owner-occupied as compared to those that are owner-occupied.
C. Borough records indicate that violations of the Borough's Ordinances
are generally less severe at owner-occupied units as compared to
residential rental units.
D. Borough records indicate that there are a growing number of
disturbances at residential rental units.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:125
COUNTY — The County of Lancaster.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT — Any act by an occupant of a residential rental
unit or by a person present at a residential rental unit involving public
drunkenness, consumption of an alcoholic beverage in public, public
urination or defecation, the unlawful deposit of trash or litter on public or
private property, damage to or destruction of public or private property,
the obstruction of public roads, streets, highways or sidewalks, interference
with emergency or police services, unreasonable noise as defined by the
Borough Noise Nuisance Ordinance, codified as Part 2, Noise Nuisance, of
Chapter 10, of the Code of Ordinances, use of profane or obscene language
or gestures, indecent exposure, fighting or quarreling, or any other act
defined as disorderly conduct in the Pennsylvania Crimes Code or any act
prohibited in Chapter 10, Part 2 of the Borough's Code of Ordinances or
which otherwise injures or endangers the health, safety or welfare of the
residents of the Borough residing in the neighborhood or vicinity of the
gathering. It is not necessary that such conduct, action, incident or behavior
constitute a criminal offense, nor that criminal charges be filed against any
person in order for said person to have perpetrated, caused or permitted
the commission of disruptive conduct, as defined herein. Provided, however,
that no disruptive conduct shall be deemed to have occurred unless a
codes compliance official or a police officer shall investigate and make a
determination that such did occur, and keep written records, including a
disruptive conduct report, of such occurrences. The occupant and the owner
and, if applicable, the manager shall be notified of any such occurrences, in
writing.
DISRUPTIVE CONDUCT REPORT — A written report of disruptive conduct
to be completed by a police officer or codes compliance official who actually
investigates an alleged incident of disruptive conduct and which shall be
maintained by the Codes Compliance Official.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for one
or more families, including industrialized housing and manufactured homes
which are supported either by a foundation or are otherwise permanently
attached to the land.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
FAMILY — A family as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or group of buildings where more than six
individual sleeping quarters that may have separate entrances are offered
for compensation, to transient occupants as defined in this Part, licensed
under applicable laws and regulations. Such a use may have ancillary
services such as recreational facilities, dining services, meeting rooms, and/
or fitness centers.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
INSTITUTION AND INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY — An organization founded
and united for a specific purpose (such as education or health care)
consisting of a building or complex of buildings where an organization for
the providing of a service or specific cause is situated.
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 302
FWD:126
INSTITUTIONAL FACILITY ROOM — A unit used as a residence and located
in a structure owned and operated by an institution for a common purpose
such as, without limitation, an educational facility or a nursing or
retirement care facility.
MANAGER — A person retained by an owner to be responsible for one or
more residential rental units within the Borough.
OCCUPANT — Any person living and sleeping in a residential rental unit or
having actual possession of said residential rental unit.
OCCUPANT LISTING — A list of tenants residing at the residential rental
unit. The list shall include the name, excluding minor children, and address
with unit number.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
OWNER — Any person as defined in this Part, agent, operator, firm or
corporation having a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded
in the official records of the state, county or Borough as holding title
to the property; or otherwise having control of the property, including
the guardian of the estate of any such person(s), and the executor or
administrator of the estate of any such person(s) if ordered to take
possession of real property by a court.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
OWNER'S FAMILY — The person who holds record title and/or equitable
owner to include his or her spouse, son, daughter, owner's parents or
owner's spouses' parents only.
PERSON — A natural individual, unincorporated association, partnership,
corporation, estate, trust or any other legally recognized entity, and the
members of such partnership and the officers of such entities.
PREMISES — Any parcel of real estate within the Borough, including the
land and all buildings and appurtenant structures, on which one or more
residential rental units are located.
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE — The existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Elizabethtown enacted as Chapter 5 of
the Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, as it may be amended from time to time.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — 1) A dwelling unit let for rent, or 2)
a rooming unit, or 3) a bed-and-breakfast establishment, or 4) a shortterm
lodging accommodation, or 5) an accessory dwelling unit, or 6) a
dwelling unit that is not occupied by the owner, is a residential rental
unit. Each individual townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment unit,
each individual unit in a multifamily building, each individual bed-andbreakfast
establishment, each individual rooming unit, and each individual
short-term lodging accommodation shall be considered a residential rental
unit whether or not the owner or a relative of the owner also resides in
the structure. A residential rental unit includes dwelling units under leasepurchase
agreements or long-term (greater than six months) agreements
for sale. A residential rental unit shall not include a hotel/motel as defined
herein or a hospital room utilized for medical services. It shall include
§ 302 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:127
an institutional facility room, but only as hereinafter set forth in
§ 309.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT LICENSE — A document issued by the
Borough to the owner of a residential rental unit.
ROOMING UNIT — A rooming unit as defined in Chapter 27,
Zoning.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
SHORT-TERM LODGING ACCOMMODATION — A short-term lodging
accommodation as defined in Chapter 27, Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/
16/2017]
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY — Transient occupancy as defined in Chapter 27,
Zoning.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
TRANSIENT OCCUPANT — A person, as defined in this Part, who uses,
possesses, or occupies a dwelling unit or portion thereof for a period of 30
consecutive calendar days or less.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
§ 303. Duties of Owners and Managers of Residential Rental Units.
[Ord. 864, 11/17/2005; as amended by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
1. It shall be the duty of every owner to:
A. Keep and maintain all residential rental units in compliance with all
applicable codes, ordinances and provisions of all applicable state
laws and regulations, including, but not limited to, the Borough
Zoning Ordinance and Existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code.
B. Keep and maintain all premises in good and safe condition.
C. Be aware of, and act to eliminate, disruptive conduct in all
residential rental units.
D. Employ policies to and actually manage the residential rental units
under his/her control in compliance with the provisions of this Part,
Borough Ordinances and applicable state laws.
E. Pay or ensure payment of all real estate taxes, sewer charges,
water charges, and trash collection fees to insure that such vital
utilities are provided.
F. Obtain and maintain a residential rental license for each residential
rental unit.
G. Provide the Borough within 10 days of occupancy with the names
(excluding minor children), physical address, and mailing address,
if different, of all tenants of the residential rental unit and notify the
Borough of changes in the occupancy of the residential unit within
10 days thereof. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
H. Provide trash and recyclable collection and disposal services
information and instruct tenants of the method of trash and
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:128
recyclable collection (e.g., curbside or dumpster and day of
pickup).
I. Take all actions necessary to ensure that each residential rental
unit is occupied by only one family. For the purposes of this
paragraph, a "family" is defined in the Borough Zoning Chapter.
J. Require a written rental license application for each residential
rental unit, as defined in this Part. The names of all permitted
occupants shall be listed on the license application, excluding
minor children, and excluding transient occupants of short-term
lodging accommodations and bed-and-breakfast establishments.
Each lease, excluding bed-and-breakfast establishments and shortterm
lodging accommodations, shall contain a provision and notice
to the tenant(s) that if the residential rental license for the leased
unit is revoked, the owner shall have the right to terminate the
lease and evict the tenant with 30 days' written notice and that
tenant agrees this procedure does not violate any part of the
Landlord and Tenant Act of Pennsylvania.17 Further, if the lease is
so terminated as a result of the landlord not complying with the
terms of this Part, the tenant may cure this matter by exhausting
available legal remedies provided for under federal and/or state
law. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
K. Retain a manager when this Part requires that a manager be
designated.
L. When required by the International Residential Code, in all
residential rental units, an approved carbon monoxide alarm shall
be installed outside of each separate sleeping area in the
immediate vicinity of the bedrooms. Carbon monoxide alarms shall
be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's installation
instructions.
M. It is the responsibility of the owner of a residential rental unit, as
defined herein, to be compliant with all applicable provisions of the
Elizabethtown Borough Code of Ordinances. [Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
2. If the owner has appointed a manager, the manager shall be jointly
responsible to fulfill all of the obligations set forth in § 303 hereof. No
owner may relieve himself of the responsibility to perform the duties set
forth in § 303 by appointing a manager.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to be
rented either as owner or manager any residential rental unit within the
Borough without having a residential rental license as required by this
Part.
17.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 250.101 et seq.
§ 303 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:129
§ 304. Duties of Occupants of Residential Rental Units. [Ord. 864,
11/17/2005]
It shall be the duty of each occupant of a residential rental unit to:
4. It shall be the responsibility of every owner and every manger to display
the residential rental license in the residential rental unit. The
residential rental license shall include the following information:
A. Address and telephone number of the owner or manager.
B. Of expiration of the residential rental license.
5. No residential rental license shall be issued to any owner residing more
than 20 miles from the municipal limits of the Borough unless the owner
provides the Borough with the name, mailing address and telephone
number of a manager residing within 20 miles of the municipal limits of
the Borough, authorized to accept service of process on behalf of the
owner. For the purpose of this Section, a post office box is not
acceptable for the manager's address. This designation shall not be
valid unless signed by the owner and the manager designated to act on
behalf of the owner. The owner shall notify the Borough within 10 days
of any change in manager.
A. Comply with all obligations of this Part and all applicable Codes and
Borough Ordinances, as well as all state laws and regulations.
B. Conduct himself/herself and require other persons, including, but not
limited to, guests on the premises and within their residential rental
unit with their consent to conduct themselves in a manner that will not
constitute disruptive conduct nor disturb the peaceful enjoyment of
adjacent or nearby dwellings by people occupying the same.
C. Not engage in, nor tolerate, nor permit others on the premises to cause
damage to the residential rental unit or engage in disruptive conduct,
or other violations of this Part, Codes, Borough Ordinances, or
applicable state laws.
D. Use the trash and recyclable collection provided by the owner to
include placing trash out for weekly pickup.
E. Use the residential rental unit for no purpose other than as a residence.
F. Allow the Codes Compliance Official to inspect the residential rental
unit in accordance with this Part at reasonable times.
G. Not allow persons other than those identified on the lease to reside in
the residential rental unit.
H. Not allow the possession of, serving to or consumption of alcohol by
underage persons, nor allow the possession of, providing to or use of
controlled substances by any person in an illegal fashion.
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 305
FWD:130
§ 305. Residential Rental Unit Licensing and Fees. [Ord. 864, 11/17/
2005]
§ 306. Inspection of Residential Rental Units. [Ord. 864, 11/17/
2005]
1. By December 31 of each calendar year, the owner and, if applicable, the
manager of each residential rental unit shall apply for a residential
rental license from the Borough, which shall be valid from January 1 to
December 31 of the following year.
2. The Codes Compliance Official shall issue a residential rental license if
the owner provides the name, address and phone number of a manager
(if applicable), pays the registration fee, submits a complete and
accurate occupant listing for the residential rental units by December
31 of each year and is current on real estate taxes, sewer fees, water
fees and trash collection fees for the residential rental unit.
3. The Codes Compliance Official shall deny and may revoke a residential
rental license if the owner does not provide the name, address and
phone number of a manager (if applicable), does not pay the annual
registration fee, is not current on real estate taxes, sewer fees, water
fees or trash collection fees for the residential rental unit, does not
correct a code violation within the time frame cited by the Codes
Compliance Official, and/or has not complied with any requirements of
this Part.
4. The Codes Compliance Official shall forward written notice to the
owner if the Codes Compliance Official will deny, refuse to renew or
revoke a residential rental license. The notification shall (1) identify the
residential rental unit (2) the grounds for the denial, nonrenewal or
revocation, including the factual circumstances and the Section of this
Part supporting such determination; and (3) inform the owner of the
right to appeal the denial, nonrenewal or revocation of the residential
rental license to Borough Council under this Part.
5. The Codes Compliance Official may reinstate a residential rental license
if the owner or manager corrects the reason for the revocation of the
residential rental license has paid the proper fees and is otherwise in
compliance with this Part and all other applicable rules, regulations,
ordinances and laws.
6. Elizabethtown Borough Council shall be authorized from time to time to
establish by resolution such fees as they determine are necessary to
administer all provisions of this Part.
1. Prior to initial occupancy of newly constructed residential rental units,
newly created residential rental units, or substantially rehabilitated
residential rental units, the owner or manager shall register with and
make written application to the Borough for a residential rental license
as herein provided. Such initial inspections will occur in accordance
§ 305 FOREWORD § 306
FWD:131
with a phased-in systematic inspection program to be prepared and
made available upon request by the Codes Compliance Official. A
minimum of 15 days' prior written notice shall be given for all initial
inspections. The penalty for not allowing an inspection shall be denial
of the residential rental license.
2. The Codes Compliance Official shall inspect all other residential rental
units in accordance with a systematic program. The Codes Compliance
Official may also inspect residential rental units upon a change in
occupancy of the residential rental unit, upon receipt of complaints and
for any other reasonable cause.
3. If the Codes Compliance Official, upon completion of the inspection,
finds that the residential rental unit(s) is/are not in compliance with all
applicable codes, the Codes Compliance Official shall issue notices and,
if appropriate, commence enforcement actions under the procedures
set forth in the Code which may include directing the landlord to begin
eviction proceedings against a tenant, but only at the expiration of any
designated time period set forth at § 305(3) with no cure being
accomplished. Notice provided to a manager shall be deemed notice
provided to the owner. The following notices shall be issued to the
owner of the residential rental unit or the manager:
A. If the Codes Compliance Official finds violations warranting
condemnation of the residential rental unit under the Property
Maintenance Code, in addition to the remedies under the Property
Maintenance Code, the Codes Compliance Official shall:
(1) Issue a ten-day notice of violation; and
(2) If after 10 days from the date of the ten-day notice of violation,
a reinspection reveals that the violations are not corrected and
arrangements satisfactory to the Codes Compliance Official
have not been made, the residential rental license for that unit
shall be revoked and if the unit is vacant, it shall remain
vacant.
B. If the Codes Compliance Official finds violations not warranting
condemnation of the residential rental unit under the Property
Maintenance Code, the Codes Compliance Official shall issue a
thirty-day notice of violation.
(1) If after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day notice of
violation, the first re-inspection reveals that all violations have
not been corrected, a thirty-day legal action warning shall be
issued.
(2) If after 30 days from the date of the thirty-day legal action
warning, the second re-inspection reveals that all violations
have not been corrected, the Codes Compliance Official shall
revoke the residential rental license for that residential rental
unit, and if the unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant.
§ 306 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:132
§ 307. Disruptive Conduct. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
(a) A fee will be charged for each re-inspection. The Codes
Compliance Official shall maintain a list of all residential
rental units and their ownership that have been the
subject of prosecutions during the previous five years.
1. Police officers or Codes Compliance Officials shall investigate alleged
incidents of disruptive conduct. The police officer or Codes Compliance
Official conducting the investigation shall complete a disruptive
conduct report upon a finding that the reported incident constitutes
disruptive conduct. The information filed in the disruptive conduct
report shall include, if possible, the identity of the alleged
perpetrator(s) of the disruptive conduct and the factual basis for the
disruptive conduct described in the disruptive conduct report. A copy of
the disruptive conduct report shall be given or mailed to the occupant
and mailed to the owner and, if applicable, the manager within 10
working days of the occurrence of the alleged disruptive conduct.
2. The occupant or the owner and, if applicable, the manager shall, if they
desire, have 10 working days from the date of a disruptive conduct
report to appeal the disruptive conduct report. The appeal shall be
made in writing and submitted to the Codes Compliance Official.
3. After three disruptive conduct incidents in any twelve-month period by
an occupant documented by disruptive conduct reports, the owner and,
if applicable, the manager shall have 10 working days from the date of
the third disruptive conduct report to begin eviction proceedings
against the occupants. Failure to take such action will result in the
immediate revocation of the residential rental license. The residential
rental unit involved shall not have its residential rental license
reinstated until the reinstatement fee is paid and the disruptive
occupants have been evicted, the district justice has ruled in the
occupant's favor, the district justice has ruled in the owner's favor, but
has not ordered the eviction of the occupant(s), or the occupants have
filed an appeal to a higher court or declared bankruptcy, thereby
preventing their eviction. The disruptive occupants, upon eviction, shall
not re-occupy any residential rental unit on the same premises involved
for a period of at least one year from date of eviction. This subsection is
not intended to limit or inhibit the owner and, if applicable, the
manager's right to initiate eviction actions prior to the issuance of the
third disruptive conduct report in a twelve-month period.
4. The disruptive conduct report shall count against all occupants of the
residential rental unit. More than one disruptive conduct report filed
against the occupants of a residential rental unit in a twenty-four-hour
period shall count as a single disruptive conduct report for the purpose
of § 306(3). The Codes Compliance Official shall maintain a list of the
names of all occupants evicted as a result of § 306(3). The names shall
remain on the list for a period of three years.
§ 306 FOREWORD § 308
FWD:133
§ 308. Sale or Transfer of Residential Rental Units. [Ord. 864, 11/
17/2005]
A residential rental license shall not be transferred. In the case of licensed
residential rental units that are sold or transferred, the new owner shall
seek a residential rental license for each residential rental unit and have
each residential rental unit inspected. Failure to seek a residential rental
unit license for each residential rental unit within 30 days of the date of
sale or transfer of ownership shall result in the revocation of the residential
rental license.
§ 309. Institutional Facilities. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
§ 310. Appeals. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
An appeal from any decision of the Codes Compliance Official shall be
taken to Borough Council. Such appeal shall be made in writing within 10
days after such decision has been made. The appeal shall be verified by an
affidavit, shall state the grounds therefor and shall be filed with the Borough
Secretary. The appeal shall be accompanied by the appeal fee which shall
be established from time to time by this Part or by resolution of Borough
Council. The appellant or his representative shall have the right to appear
and be heard, if such right is requested in the written appeal. Borough
1. Institutional facility rooms shall be subject to the provisions of this Part,
subject, however, to the provisions of this § 309.
2. If an institutional facility has in place a program of control and
inspection for all of its rooms and desires to be exempt from the
provisions of this Part, it may make application to Borough Council. In
doing so, a representative of the institution shall appear before
Borough Council at a meeting thereof and shall establish to Council's
satisfaction that it has in place an adequate program of control and
inspection so as to itself assure compliance with the provisions and
purposes of this Part. The exemption request application shall be
forwarded to Borough Council together with the application fee for this
purpose which shall be established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council.
3. Borough Council shall grant or deny such request for exemption based
on its sound discretion.
4. If an exemption is granted, Borough Council shall have the absolute
right to revoke same if information is received that the institution's
program of control and inspection is not satisfactory to assure
compliance with the provisions and purposes of this Part.
5. If an exemption is granted, Borough Council shall be forwarded copies
of the internal, or related third party, inspection reports from the
exempted institution in a timely manner as determined solely by
Borough Council.
§ 308 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 310
FWD:134
Council shall make a decision on such appeal within 10 days of the hearing.
Borough Council shall render a written decision, copies of which shall be
provided to the Codes Compliance Official and the appellant.
§ 311. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 864, 11/17/2005]
1. Violations. It shall be a violation of this Part to commit or to permit any
other person to commit any of the following acts:
A. To lease, let, or allow the occupancy of a residential rental unit
without obtaining a residential rental license where required by
this Part.
B. To refuse to permit inspections required under this Part for a
residential rental unit.
C. To fail to perform the duties established by § 303 of this Part if such
person is an owner or a manager of a residential rental unit.
D. To fail to perform the duties established by § 304 of this Part if such
person is an occupant of a residential rental unit.
E. To place false information on to or omit relevant information from
an application for a residential rental unit.
F. To fail to comply with any other provision of this Part.
2. Penalties and Remedies.
A. Allowing Occupancy of a Residential Rental Unit After the
Residential Rental License Has Been Revoked. A fine of not less
than $500 per residential rental unit for each month the violation
exists. Each month the violation exists constitutes a separate
violation.
B. Failure to Seek a Residential Rental License. The owner or
manager shall be sent a thirty-day notice of violation, warning them
of their failure to comply with the terms of this Part. If they do not
comply at the end of 30 days, there shall be a fine of not less than
$500 per residential rental unit for each month the violation exists.
Each month the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.
C. Whoever violates any other provision of this Part shall upon a first
offense be fined not more than $1,000 or be imprisoned not more
than 30 days, or both.
D. In addition to prosecution of persons violating this Part, the Codes
Compliance Official, or any duly authorized agent of the Borough,
may take such civil or equitable remedies in any court of record of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any person or
property, real or personal, to effect the provisions of this Part.
§ 310 FOREWORD § 311
FWD:135
E. The provisions of this Section and the provisions of this Part
governing revocation, suspension or nonrenewal of residential
rental licenses shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive,
separate remedies, all of which shall be available to the Borough as
may be deemed appropriate. The remedies and procedures in this
Part are not intended to supplant or replace, to any degree, the
remedies provided to the Borough in the Property Maintenance
Code, Zoning Ordinance or any other Code, law, rule or regulation.
§ 311 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 311
FWD:136
Part 4
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
§ 401. Definitions. [Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
BUSINESS HOURS — Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
business day.
CARTWAY — The portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — A natural person, partnership, corporation, association,
or any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — The portion of a street between the curblines, or the lateral
lines of a cartway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 402. Responsibility for Removal of Snow and Ice From Sidewalks.
[Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
Every property owner of a building or lot of land shall be responsible for
the removal of snow and/or ice from a public sidewalk (as defined in § 401),
clearing a path of at least 30 inches in width, including the access to a
public street or alley.
§ 403. Responsibility for Removal of Snow and Ice From Roofs.
[Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of
snow and ice on said building or other structure which presents a risk of
A. Except as provided in the immediately following Subsection, snow and
ice shall be removed from sidewalks within 12 hours after the cessation
of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
B. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in the
immediately preceding Subsection, cause enough sand, cat litter or
other abrasive material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel
reasonably safe and shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause
to be cleared a path in said sidewalk of at least 30 inches in width.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:137
danger of falling on any sidewalk, street or highway. Such work shall be
completed within a reasonable time, but not later than 12 hours after the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
§ 404. Depositing of Snow and Ice Restricted. [Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway or loading
and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow
and ice may be mounded by the Borough on public cartways incident to the
cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to the clearing of sidewalks
in business districts.
§ 405. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
Any person, firm, corporation or any legal entity who shall violate any
provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. The costs of prosecution shall include
without limitation any court filing fees and the expenses incurred by the
Borough for its employees to collect any such sums as well as attorney
fees incurred by the Borough. After 12 hours have elapsed following the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain and a violation has been
committed hereunder, each ensuing twenty-four-hour time period during
which a violation of the provisions of this Part continues shall be deemed a
separate offense and shall be prosecutable as such.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 405
FWD:138
Chapter 6
CONDUCT
§ 405 FOREWORD § 405
FWD:139

Part 1
LOITERING
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 789, 12/17/1998, § A]
ANTI-LOITERING HOURS —
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not
limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, an automobile accident or any situation
requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for a
profit to which the public is invited including, but not limited to, any place
of amusement or entertainment.
GUARDIAN —
MINOR — Any person under 18 years of age.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
operating, managing or conducting any establishment. The term includes
the members or partners of an association or partnership and the officers of
a corporation.
PARENT — A person who is:
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or substantial group of the
public has access and includes, but is not limited to, streets, highways and
the common area of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings,
transport facilities, shops, parks, recreation areas and sidewalks.
REMAIN — Means to:
11:00 p.m. on any Sunday, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday or Thursday
until 6:00 a.m. the following day.
A.
B. 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m. on any Friday or Saturday.
A person who, under court order, is the guardian of the person of a
minor.
A.
A public or private agency with whom a minor has been placed by a
court.
B.
A. A natural parent, adoptive parent or step-parent of another person.
At least 18 years of age and authorized by a parent or guardian to have
the care and custody of a minor.
B.
A. Linger or stay without constitutionally permissible purpose.
Fail to leave premises when requested to do so by a police officer or the
owner, operator or other person in control of the premises.
B.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:141
SERIOUS BODILY INJURY — Bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of
death or that causes death, serious permanent disfigurement or protracted
loss or impairment of the function of any bodily member or organ.
§ 102. Offenses. [Ord. 789, 12/17/1998, § B]
§ 103. Defenses. [Ord. 789, 12/17/1998, § C]
1. A minor or adult commits an offense if he remains in any public place or
on the premises of any establishment within the Borough during antiloitering
hours.
2. A parent or guardian of a minor commits an offense if he knowingly
permits, or by insufficient control allows, the minor to remain in any
public place or on the premises of any establishment within the
Borough during anti-loitering hours.
3. The owner, operator or any employee of an establishment commits an
offense if he knowing allows a minor to remain upon the premises of the
establishment during anti-loitering hours.
1. It is a defense to prosecution under § 602, above, that any person was at
the time of an alleged offense:
A. In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
B. Engaged in an employment activity or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop.
C. Involved in an emergency.
D. On the sidewalk abutting the accused person's residence or
abutting the residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did
not complain to the Police Department about the person's
presence.
E. A minor was attending an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the
Borough, a civic organization or other similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from,
without any detour or stop, an official school, religious or other
recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the
Borough, a civic organization or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor.
F. Exercising rights protected by the United States and Pennsylvania
Constitutions, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech and the right of lawful assembly.
2. It is a defense to prosecution under § 102(3) that the owner, operator or
employee of an establishment promptly notified the Police Department
that a minor was present on the premises of the establishment during
anti-loitering hours and refused to leave.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:142
§ 104. Enforcement. [Ord. 789, 12/17/1998, § D]
Before taking any enforcement action under this Section, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's reason for being in a public place. The
officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this Section unless
the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred and that, based
on any response and other circumstances, no defense in § 103 is present.
§ 105. Penalties. [Ord. 789, 12/17/1998, § E; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine in an amount not
to exceed $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation
of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 105
FWD:143

Part 2
(RESERVED)
§ 201. (Reserved)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:145

Part 3
BILLPOSTING AND ADVERTISING MATERIAL
§ 301. Restrictions. [Ord. 366, 8/19/1958]
No person or persons, firm or corporation, being the owner of or having
control over any pole, standard or tree located upon any sidewalk, street
or alley in the Borough of Elizabethtown, shall post or place upon such
pole, standard or tree any advertising matter, poster, card or anything of
like character, or grant permission for such posting or placement to any
other person or persons, organization, firm or corporation, provided nothing
herein shall apply to any sign or legal advertisement or notice that may
lawfully be posted or placed by the public officials for public purposes.
§ 302. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 366, 8/19/1958; as amended
by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $5 nor more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:147

Part 4
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
A.
Use of Alcoholic Beverages on Public Property.
§ 401. Possession, Consumption And Use Prohibited. [Ord. 591, 8/
17/1976, § 1; as amended by Ord. 640, 8/19/1982, § 1]
§ 402. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 591, 8/17/1976, § 2; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
All persons violating the provisions of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
1. The possession, consumption and use of malt and alcoholic beverages
in or on the premises owned, leased or occupied by the Borough of
Elizabethtown is hereby prohibited.
2. The consumption, use or the possession of an open bottle, can, flask or
other container containing malt or alcoholic beverages or a glass, cup,
paper or plastic cup or other open drinking device containing malt or
alcoholic beverages in or on a sidewalk located within the legal right-ofway
of any street, or in or on any street, alley or any public parking lot
adjacent to any said street or alley is hereby prohibited.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:149

B.
Prohibiting Alcohol in Systems of Persons Under 21 Years of Age.
§ 411. Alcohol Unlawful. [Ord. 769, 5/16/1996, § 1]
It shall be unlawful for any individual under the age of 21 to have any
alcohol, liquor, malt or brewed beverage in their system within the Borough
of Elizabethtown.
§ 412. Police Authority. [Ord. 769, 5/16/1996, § 2]
The police officers of the Elizabethtown Police Department have the
authority to use either PBT (preliminary breath test) or a breath test unit
or any other unit that has been approved by the Pennsylvania Department
of Health for use within this Commonwealth, or may be approved by that
agency in the future, to determine if any individual under 21 years of age
has alcohol within their system in violation of this Part.
§ 413. Tests. [Ord. 769, 5/16/1996, § 3]
A police officer who smells or detects the odor of an alcoholic beverage on
an individual's breath, under 21 years of age, shall offer either breath test
unit to check that person's BAC (blood alcohol content). In the event that
an individual under the age of 21 refuses an offer to take a breath test, the
police shall still have the authority to file a citation for a violation of this
Part.
§ 414. Violation. [Ord. 769, 5/16/1996, § 4]
The presence of an alcoholic beverage in the system of an individual under
21 years of age shall constitute a violation of this Part.
§ 415. Penalties. [Ord. 769, 5/16/1996, § 5; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
Any person who violates any provision of this Part shall be, upon conviction
thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 411 FOREWORD § 415
FWD:151

Part 5
USE OF FIREARMS AND WEAPONS RESTRICTED
§ 501. Use of Firearms, Weapons Restricted; Violations and
Penalties. [Ord. 688, 2/18/1988, § 1; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
1. Definitions.
CHAKO STICKS — An instrument consisting of two or more sticks,
clubs, bars or rods to be used as handles connected by rope, cord, wire
or chain.
FIREARM — Any device by whatever name known, which is designed to
expel a projectile or projectiles by the action of an explosion, expansion
of gas or escape of gas including pneumatic guns, spring guns or B-B
guns; excluding, however:
HANDGUN — Any firearm which:
THROWING STAR — An instrument consisting of a metal plate having
three or more radiating points with one or more sharp edges and
designed in the shape of a polygon, trefoil, cross, star, diamond or other
geometric shape for use as a weapon.
Any device used exclusively for the firing of stud cartridges,
explosive rivets or similar industrial ammunition.
(1)
Model rockets designed to propel a model vehicle in a vertical
direction.
(2)
Is designed or redesigned or made or remade and intended to be
fired while held in one hand;
(1)
(2) Having a barrel of less than 12 inches in length; or,
(3) A firearm of the size which may be concealed upon the person.
2. It is unlawful for any person on a public street, sidewalk or in a public
place to carry any bludgeon, black-jack, slug shot, sand club, sand bag,
metal knuckles or any knife, commonly referred to as a switch-blade
knife, which has a blade that opens automatically by hand pressure
applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle of the knife or
any bomb, bomb-shell, grenade, bottle or other container containing an
explosive substance or over 1/4 ounce for like purposes, such as, but
not limited to, black powder bombs, Molotov cocktails or artillery
projectiles; or any throwing stars and chako sticks.
3. No person shall, except in necessary defense of person or property or
on a rifle range under adult supervision approved by the Mayor or Chief
of Police of the Borough, fire or discharge or use any gun, firearm, air
rifle or bow and arrow within the Borough of Elizabethtown. The Mayor
may approve, under special circumstances, the discharge of firearms by
§ 501 FOREWORD § 501
FWD:153
approved persons for the purpose of exterminating pigeons and other
pests.
4. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
5. This Part shall not apply to peace officers or other persons permitted by
law to carry such weapons.
§ 501 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 501
FWD:154
Part 6
PROTECTION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ 601. Tampering with and Destruction of Public Property. [Ord.
365, 8/19/1958, § 1]
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface, any public property of the Borough of Elizabethtown,
or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight, fire
hydrant or water or gas stop box in any of the streets, alleys, parks or other
public grounds in the Borough of Elizabethtown.
§ 602. Interfering with Stakes, Monuments or Public Works. [Ord.
365, 8/19/1958, § 2]
No person or persons shall in any manner whatever interfere with or
meddle with or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post,
monument or other evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner
or angle in the Borough of Elizabethtown made, place or set, or hereafter
made, placed or set or caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough
in any survey of or in any street, alley or public ground in the Borough, to
evidence the elevation, line, grade, location, corner or angle of any public
street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer or other public works, matter or
thing.
§ 603. Barricades and Warning Signs. [Ord. 365, 8/19/1958, § 3]
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy or remove or deface or
obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the
authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or corporation doing work
by permission of the authorities of the Borough, on any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or bridges in the Borough, as a warning of danger.
§ 604. Removal of Earth, Stone or Other Material from Streets or
Public Grounds. [Ord. 365, 8/19/1958, § 4]
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any of the
streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough.
§ 605. Construction, Maintenance and Repair of Streets Excepted.
[Ord. 365, 8/19/1958, § 5]
This Part shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and structures and fixtures located thereon, or to incidental
results of work thereon or therein upon permit from or by authority of the
Borough.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 606
FWD:155
§ 606. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 365, 8/19/1958, § 6; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days; provided the fact that a violator has
been penalized, after hearing, as herein provided, shall not preclude the
Borough or other injured party from taking proper legal action to recover
damages resulting from such violation.
§ 606 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 606
FWD:156
Part 7
TRESPASSING UPON BOROUGH PROPERTY
§ 701. Refusal to Leave Borough Building or Adjacent Property.
[Ord. 495, 4/19/1966]
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to refuse to leave the Borough
Building or any room, office or other area contained therein which is used
for Borough purposes, as well as the land adjacent to said building, at the
close of the business day or at the close of any authorized meeting held in
said Borough Building or at the appointed time for the termination of the
use of said Borough Building for any authorized meeting.
§ 702. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 495, 4/19/1966; as amended
by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any such person or persons violating the provisions of this Part, who shall
have been ordered to leave the premises of the Borough Building by the
Borough Manager, Chief of Police or the Borough official or police officer
at such time in charge of the Borough Building or the room, office or area
involved, and who shall refuse so to do, shall, each and every one of them,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs,
to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
§ 701 FOREWORD § 702
FWD:157

Part 8
LASER BEAM POINTERS
§ 801. Use of Laser Beam Pointers. [Ord. 788, 12/17/1998, § 1]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to focus, point or shine a laser beam
directly or indirectly on another person or animal in such a manner as is
intended to harass or annoy said person or animal.
2. Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not less than $50 nor
more than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this Part continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 801
FWD:159
Chapter 7
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
§ 801 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 801
FWD:160
Part 1
OUTDOOR BURNING
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 1; as amended by Ord.
945, 2/21/2013]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
FIRE PIT — A completely open or semi-open containment constructed as
belowground pits, freestanding fireplaces and portable devices that are
built with steel, brick, masonry and/or metal for the purposes of building
and maintaining an open fire of no larger than two feet in height.
NATURAL WOOD — Wood that has been produced naturally from a tree
and not chemically treated with dye, paint or another form of artificial
modification beyond cutting and drying.
OPEN FIRE — A fire outside of any building in which any material is burned
in the open or in a receptacle other than in a grill used for the purposes of
outside barbecues.
OUTSIDE BARBECUES — Any fire maintained in a commercially
constructed grill or masonry constructed grill for the purposes of heating,
cooking and preparing food for the purpose of consumption.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
department, bureau, agency or other legal entity.
§ 102. Regulations. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 2]
Within the Borough limits, no person shall:
§ 103. Exceptions. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 3; as amended by Ord.
945, 2/21/2013]
The activities prohibited in this Part are subject to the following exceptions:
1. Ignite, feed, cause, allow, permit or maintain on any property any open
fire outside of any building for any purpose other than that specifically
allowed herein.
1. Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for:
A. The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by other
means.
B. The protection of public health.
2. Open fires shall be permitted at any time when the same is conducted
during an official act or exercise preapproved by the duly designated
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:161
§ 104. Authority to Extinguish. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 4]
Authority is hereby granted to the Elizabethtown Volunteer Fire Company
to extinguish any fire within the Borough of Elizabethtown when the Fire
Chief of said Company deems that conditions warrant such action.
§ 105. Prohibited Burning. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 5]
All other burning is strictly prohibited.
§ 106. Appeals. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 6]
Upon the denial of written approval as described in § 103B or C, an appeal
may be taken to the Borough Council at a regularly scheduled meeting and
such denial may be reversed upon a majority vote of the Borough Council.
Borough Council reserves the right to limit this approval to a specific time,
Borough enforcement officer by a volunteer fire department or a paid
fire department recognized by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
3. Open fires may be set with written approval of the enforcement officer
of the Borough provided:
A. No hazardous or other objection able condition will be created by
such burning.
B. No such burning is allowed on any street or sidewalk within the
Borough.
C. Said open fire is related to a public function including, but not
limited to, fire works or a bonfire in support of a local organization.
4. It shall be lawful at any time to burn charcoal or wood fires kindled for
the purpose of outside barbecues, provided that the fire is confined for
the purposes of outside barbecue, as defined in this Part, and used
solely for the heating, cooking and preparing of food. Grills must be
located 10 feet from any principal, combustible and/or accessory
structures. It shall be unlawful at any time to burn and/or incinerate
anything other than charcoal and natural wood as defined in this Part.
5. Fire pits are lawfully permitted. A fire pit shall include belowground
pits, freestanding fireplaces, and portable devices intended to control
and contain outdoor fires. Only natural firewood may be burned. All fire
pits must be located 10 feet away from any principal, combustible and/
or accessory structure. The pit shall be built with steel, brick, masonry,
and/or metal. The flames shall not be higher than two feet in height. A
portable fire extinguisher or garden hose shall be readily available.
6. All regulations of the International Fire Code shall be applicable, except
provisions concerning distances of open burning, recreational fires and
portable outdoor fireplaces.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 106
FWD:162
place and/or manner, and issue restrictions that may be placed on said open
fire.
§ 107. Enforcement. [Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, § 6]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown shall designate the
enforcement officer, in addition to the Elizabethtown Borough police
officers, who shall have the power to enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 108. (Reserved)18
18.Editor's Note: Former § 108, Penalties (Ord. 819, 11/16/2000, as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001), was repealed by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013.
§ 106 FOREWORD § 108
FWD:163

Part 2
FIRE LANES
§ 201. Fire Lanes. [Ord. 747, 12/16/1993, § 1]
There shall be maintained one or more unobstructed lanes on private
property, used by the public, including but not limited to shopping malls,
parks and restaurants, to provide for the ingress and egress of fire company
vehicles, equipment and personnel, said lanes to be at least 12 feet in
width and laid out for convenient access from the public thoroughfares
and water supply to the building or buildings. The marking of said lanes
shall be performed and maintained at the expense of the property owner
or operator. The Borough shall approve of official fire lane designation, the
length of the fire lane zone and the fire lane markings in cooperation with
the owner and the fire company.
§ 202. Obstructions. [Ord. 747, 12/16/1993, § 2]
Any police officer or fire company officer may remove or order the removal
of any obstruction in the fire lane(s) established pursuant to this Section and
have the cost of such removal borne by the owner of the vehicle, equipment
or other obstruction plus a cost not to exceed 10% for administrative
expenses.
§ 203. (Reserved)19
19.Editor's Note: Former § 203, Penalties (Ord. 747, 12/16/1993, as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001), was repealed by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:165

Part 3
FIRESAFETY STANDARDS
§ 301. International Fire Code. [Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
§ 302. Fire Prevention. [Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
1. General. The provisions of this Section shall govern the responsibilities
of persons for the safe maintenance of all structures.
A. Elizabethtown Borough hereby adopts, into the existing municipal
fire prevention ordinance, all provisions of the International Fire
Code of 2009, promulgated by the International Code Council, and
any amendments, supplements, revisions, additions or
replacements thereto, that pertain solely to existing buildings,
existing structures, existing uses and occupancies and existing
installations, including but not limited to, fire prevention, fire
suppression, smoke control, mechanical systems, and natural fuel
gas pipe systems, except that provisions therein concerning
distances of open burning, recreational fires and portable outdoor
fireplaces shall not apply.
B. All provisions of the International Fire Code that apply to new
buildings, new structures, changes of use or occupancy and new
installations that fall within the scope of and under the regulation
of the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code are not adopted by
this Part.
2. Borough Council shall appoint a Code Compliance Official to administer
and enforce the fire prevention ordinance, to include, but not limited to,
issuing permits, collecting fees, conducting inspections, taking
enforcement action(s) and interpreting provisions of the International
Fire Code.
1. Fire Prevention.
A. The owner of any structure shall provide and maintain firesafety
facilities and equipment in compliance with the latest edition of the
International Fire Code. A person shall not occupy as owneroccupant
or lease to another for occupancy or use any premises
that does not comply with the requirements of this Section and/or
the requirements specified in this Chapter.
B. Every residential building exceeding two stories in height above
grade, not including basements, shall be provided with not less
than two approved independent exits from each floor above the
second floor, fully accessible to each occupant on the floor. See
Section R311 of the International Residential Code for additional
requirements.
2. Fire Escapes.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:167
A. Existing fire escapes shall be accepted as a component in the
means of egress in existing buildings only, provided that they are
structurally sound and are in approved working condition.
B. Portable ladders and similar approved emergency escape devices
that are mounted to the inside wall are permitted. The approved
device shall allow the occupant to descend to a roof or ground
level, and if the room is used for sleeping, the individual occupying
the room must be able to use the escape device.
C. Where a new fire escape is proposed or is required by the Code
Official in accordance with this Chapter and all applicable Borough
Ordinances, the construction requirements must conform to the
specifications contained in the International Fire Code and the
International Residential Code.
D. Permanent fire escapes located on the street front portion of a
structure must conform to the setback requirements contained in
Chapter 27.
E. Emergency Escape. Requirements for sleeping rooms in the
basement shall meet the regulations listed within the International
Residential Code and the International Fire Code.
F. Smoke and carbon monoxide detectors shall meet the requirements
listed in the International Residential Code and the International
Fire Code.
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 302
FWD:168
Part 4
VIOLATION AND PENALTY
§ 401. Penalties. [Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
Any person, firm, corporation or any legal entity who shall violate any
provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine
of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 30 days. The costs of prosecution shall include, without
limitation, any court filing fees and the expenses incurred by the Borough
for its employees to collect any such sums as well as attorney fees incurred
by the Borough. Each day beyond the effective date of the notice that a
violation continues after due notice has been served, in accordance with the
terms and provisions hereof, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 401
FWD:169
Chapter 8
FLOODPLAINS
§ 401 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 401
FWD:170
Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101. Statutory Authorization and Purpose. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
1. The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the
passage of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,20
delegated the responsibility to local government units to adopt
floodplain management regulations to promote public health, safety,
and the general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Borough Council
of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, does
order the following.
2. The regulations contained in this chapter governing the development
and use of land subject to stormwater runoff are established for the
following purposes:
A. To avoid or lessen the hazards to persons or damage to property
resulting from the accumulation of or runoff of stormwater and
floodwaters.
B. To promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of the
community.
C. To protect stream channels from encroachment.
D. To maintain the existing capacity of the floodplain to pass
floodwaters.
E. To permit only uses and alterations to floodplain lands that are not
hazardous during flood periods.
F. To provide for public awareness of flooding potential in order to
discourage and protect unwary individuals from buying land and
structures which are unsuited for intended purposes because of
flood hazards.
G. To control development, which acting alone, or in combination with
other development, will create an additional demand for unjustified
public investment in flood control or infringe upon the freedom of
individual property owners to enjoy their property by causing
unacceptable increases in flood heights or velocities.
H. To regulate streets, sewers, public squares, common grounds,
sidewalks, curbs, gutters, culverts and drains, and the heights,
grades, widths, slopes and construction thereof, and to regulate the
erection or construction use of same, located in the floodplain as
delineated on the Elizabethtown Borough Floodplain Map.
20.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:171
§ 102. Applicability. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
These regulations shall apply to all lands within the Borough of
Elizabethtown affected by flooding, including but not limited to land shown
on the official Borough Floodplain Map as being located within the
boundaries of the five-hundred-year floodplain.
§ 103. Interpretation of District Boundaries. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
Where interpretation is needed concerning the exact location of any
boundary of the Floodway or Flood-Fringe District, Borough Council shall
make the necessary determination. The person questioning or contesting
the location of the district boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity
to present his case to Borough Council and to submit his own technical
evidence if he so desires. The Planning Commission shall review the
application and shall make a written recommendation prior to Borough
Council making such necessary determination.
§ 104. Compliance. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
No structure or land shall hereafter be used and no structure shall be
located, relocated, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged or structurally
altered except in full compliance with the terms and provisions of this
chapter and any other applicable ordinances and regulations.
I. To regulate building and housing constructions, alteration,
extension, repair and maintenance.
J. To maintain peace, good government, safety and welfare of the
Borough and its trade, commerce, business development,
manufacturers and approved land use.
K. To provide for erosion and sedimentation control.
L. To comply with federal and state floodplain management
requirements, rules and regulations.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:172
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
1. Words used in the present tense shall include the future, and words
used in the singular number shall include the plural number, and the
plural the singular, where the context requires.
2. The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary.
3. The word "may" is permissive.
4. The words not defined as follows shall be construed in their generally
accepted meanings as defined in the most recent publication of
Webster's Dictionary.
5. The words and terms set forth herein, wherever they occur in this
chapter, shall be interpreted as herein defined:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
AGRICULTURAL — Land, the principal use or uses of which are
growing farm or truck garden crops, pasturage, horticulture,
floriculture and forestry.
APPLICANT — Any legal or equitable landowner, holder of an option
to purchase land, lessee or authorized agent who submits plans and
data and/or an application to the Borough for the purpose of obtaining
approval thereof.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being
equaled or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundredyear
flood" or "one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground
level on all sides.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:173
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry
during flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent
the passage of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including, but not limited to, the construction,
reconstruction, renovation, repair, expansion or alteration of buildings
or other structures; the placement of manufactured homes; streets,
and other paving; utilities; filling, grading and excavation; mining;
dredging; drilling operations; storage of equipment or materials; and
the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage;
the structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that statistically has one
chance of occurring in 500 years (0.20% chance of occurring in one
year). For the purpose of this chapter, the five-hundred-year flood shall
be delineated and defined in the profiles where available in the flood
insurance study prepared by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency on April 5, 2016, or the most recent revision thereof, including
all digital data developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.[Ord.
974, 3/17/2016; as amended by Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the
areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to
the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles,
the Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map,
and the water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOOD-FRINGE — This area between the floodway and the boundary
of the five-hundred-year flood.
FLOODPLAIN — [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016; as amended by Ord. 976, 6/
16/2016]
A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to partial or
complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse.
A.
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff of
surface waters from any source. For the purpose of this chapter,
the floodplain includes areas within the five-hundred-year flood as
indicated and defined in the Flood Insurance Study on April 5,
2016, or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:174
FLOODPLAIN ELEVATION — The elevation of the five-hundred-year
flood.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
more than one foot.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — The floodplain area specifically
identified in this chapter as being inundated by the five-hundred-year
flood.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the United States Department of the Interior)
or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as
meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by
the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in
communities with historic preservation programs that have been
certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary
of the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without
approved programs.
(2)
D.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts,
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(1)
A.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:175
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed
area, used solely for the parking of vehicles, building access, and
incidental storage, in an area other than a basement area is not
considered the lowest floor of a building, provided that such space
is not designed and built so that the structure is in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational
and other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single
ownership, which has been planned and improved for the placement of
two or more manufactured homes for non transient use.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, oil, waste, vent, or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after April 17, 1978, and includes subsequent
improvements thereto.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years (i.e., that has one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year).
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law
as the subject of rights and duties.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(2)
B. A subdivision of land.
A. Built on a single chassis;
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:176
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure
on two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost
of repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or
exceeds 25% of the market value of the structure before the damages
occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
It is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails and new manufactured home parks and
subdivisions and substantial improvements to such existing parks,
when such development is located in all or a designated portion of the
identified floodplain area.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and
other proposed new development and means the date the permit was
issued, provided that the actual start of construction, repair,
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days after the date of the permit and
shall be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of the
permit unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The "actual start" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns,
or any work beyond the stage of excavation, or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or
the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation
on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not
occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the
first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
STREAM CHANNEL — That area which is inundated by water during
normal, nonflooding conditions.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or
attached to the ground, including, but not limited to, buildings, sheds,
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a lightduty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary
living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:177
manufactured homes, and other similar items. This term includes any
man-made object having an ascertainable stationary location on or in
land or water, whether or not affixed to land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for
distribution to heirs, or devisees, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision by lease
of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres,
not involving any new street or easement of access or any residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures that
have incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss, regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include
either:
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its beforedamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The current statewide
building code adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly
applicable to new construction in all municipalities, whether
administered by the municipality, a third party or the Department of
Labor and Industry. Applicable to residential and commercial buildings,
the Code adopted the International Residential Code (IRC) and the
International Building Code (IBC), by reference, as the construction
standard applicable with the commonwealth floodplain construction.
For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.[Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016; as amended by Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be
fully compliant with the community's floodplain management
regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation
certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified by the local code
enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure.
B.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:178
required in 44 CFR 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or
(e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:179

Part 3
ESTABLISHING FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
§ 301. Description of Districts. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016; as amended by
Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
1. The Floodway District shall be those areas identified in the April 5,
2016, or the most recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study and the Flood Insurance
Rate Map, as floodway and which represent the channel of a
watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order
to discharge the base flood without increasing the water surface
elevation by more than one foot at any point. This term shall also
include Floodway District which has been identified in other available
studies or sources of information for those special flood hazard areas
where no floodway has been identified in the FIS and FIRM.
A. Within the Floodway District, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
B. Within the Floodway District, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
2. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
A. The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevations have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
B. The AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an
AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for
which base flood elevations have been provided but no floodway
has been determined.
(1) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development,
use, or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway
unless it is demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the
proposed development would not, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 301
FWD:181
§ 302. District Boundary Changes. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
technical or scientific data.
§ 303. Floodway District. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within
the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of
any watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection Regional
Office.
3. A Area/District.
A. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
base flood elevations have been provided. For these areas,
elevation and floodway information from other federal, state, or
other acceptable sources shall be used when available. Where
other acceptable information is not available, the base flood
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
4. The Flood-Fringe District shall be the A District and those areas
identified on the FIRM as the area between the boundary of the
floodway and the 0.2% annual chance (or five-hundred-year) floodplain
boundary.
1. Permitted Uses. All structures are prohibited except for the following,
provided that they are not prohibited by any other ordinance and
provided that they do not require buildings, fill or storage of materials
and equipment and provided that the applicant proves that the use or
activity will not create any increase in the floodway elevation or
provides facilities acceptable to Borough Council which will offset any
§ 301 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:182
§ 304. Flood-Fringe District. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016; as amended by
Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
increase. The following uses must be so constructed that they will not
be damaged by flood or present a hazard at the time of flooding:
A. Flood retention dams.
B. Culverts.
C. Bridges.
D. Open space.
2. Special Use Permits. The following uses and activities may be permitted
by special use permits to be granted by Borough Council, provided that
the uses and activities are in compliance with the provisions of the
underlying zoning district, are not prohibited by any other ordinance
and provided that the applicant proves that the use or activity will not
create any increase in the floodway elevation or provides facilities
acceptable to Borough Council which will offset any increase:
A. Retaining Walls.
B. The Deepening of the Channel. When plans are presented for the
alteration or relocation of a watercourse, a permit must first be
secured from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, Dams and Encroachment Division. Also, the applicant
must notify adjacent communities, the Federal Emergency
Management Agency (FEMA), and the Pennsylvania Department of
Community and Economic Development prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
C. Private Utility Transmission and Pipelines. (This does not apply to
the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission.)
1. Permitted Uses. In the Flood-Fringe District, the following uses and
activities are permitted, provided that they are in compliance with the
provisions of the underlying zoning district and are not prohibited by
any other ordinance and provided that they do not require buildings,
fills or storage of materials and equipment; also provided that the
applicant proves that the use or activity will not create any increase in
the floodway elevation or provides facilities acceptable to Borough
Council which will offset any increase:
A. Agricultural uses, such as general farming, pasture, grazing,
outdoor plant nurseries, horticultural, truck farming, forestry,
farming and wild crop harvesting.
B. Arboretum.
C. Public and private recreational uses and activities, such as parks,
picnic grounds, golf courses, swimming areas, hiking and
§ 303 FOREWORD § 304
FWD:183
§ 305. Prohibited Activities. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
horseback riding trails, wildlife and nature preserves and fishing
areas.
D. Public open land, excluding cemeteries.
E. Public utility facilities, excluding structures.
2. Special Use Permits. The following uses and activities may be permitted
by special use permits to be granted by Borough Council after being
reviewed by the Planning Commission, provided that the uses and
activities are in compliance with the provisions of the underlying zoning
district and are not prohibited by any other ordinance and provided that
the applicant proves that the use or activity will not create an increase
in the floodplain elevation or provides facilities acceptable to Borough
Council which will offset any increase:
A. Streets.
B. Parking lots.
C. Front, side, and/or rear yards, and uses customarily incidental
thereto, with the exception that no structures shall be permitted.
D. Fences, wire or wood, one or two strands or rails only.
E. Utilities and public facilities and improvements such as railroads,
streets, bridges, transmission lines, pipelines, water and sewage
treatment plants, and other similar or related uses. Landfills are
prohibited.
F. Extraction of soils and other materials.
G. The placement of fills.
H. Temporary uses such as circuses, carnivals and similar activities.
I. Other similar uses and activities, provided that they cause no
increase in flood heights and/or velocities. All uses, activities and
structures shall be floodproofed.
3. Uses not listed as a permitted use or a special use are expressly not
permitted.
1. The following obstructions and activities are prohibited if located
partially or entirely within any floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
§ 304 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 305
FWD:184
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or
manufactured home subdivision.
C. Any new or substantially improved structure which:
(1) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
following dangerous materials or substances; or
(2) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume,
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances on
the premises; or
(3) Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances.
D. The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
§ 305 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:185
§ 306. Alteration or Relocation of Watercourse. [Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016]
§ 307. Additional FIS and FIRMs. [Added by Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
The referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions and
amendments, are hereby adopted by Elizabethtown Borough and declared
to be a part of this chapter.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and
rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
2. No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements of this
§ 305.
1. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which may be
affected by such action have been notified by the municipality and until
all required permits or approvals have first been obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection Regional Office.
2. No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be made
to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity will not
reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the watercourse in any
way.
3. In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community and
Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration or
relocation of any watercourse.
§ 305 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:186
Part 4
EXISTING STRUCTURES IN FLOODPLAIN DISTRICTS
§ 401. Structures or Uses in Floodway District. [Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016]
Existing structures and/or uses located in the Floodway District shall not
be expanded or enlarged unless the effect of the proposed expansion or
enlargement on the floodway elevation or velocities is fully offset by
accompanying stream improvements. A hydrology and hydraulic study is
also required to prove no rise in elevation. Said plans must be reviewed by
the Borough Engineer, and technical proof of such offsets must be supplied
by the applicant.
§ 402. Structures and Uses in Flood-Fringe District. [Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016]
§ 403. Modification. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016; as amended by Ord. 976,
6/16/2016]
Any modification, alteration, repair, reconstruction, or improvement which
would aggravate flooding or flood hazards or increase the floodplain
elevation or velocity to an existing structure located in the Flood-Fringe
District and is less than 50% of the market value shall be floodproofed
to the greatest extent possible. Any modification, alteration, repair,
reconstruction, or improvement which is more than 50% of the market value
must come into full compliance with the provisions of Chapter 8. An existing
structure, if damaged (including meeting the definition of "substantial
damage"), deteriorated, or destroyed by any means, including floods, may
be rebuilt in accordance to and in full compliance with the provisions of
Chapter 8. Residential structures must have all new, expanded, or enlarged
portions of the structure meet the provisions of this chapter. Elevation
requirements in Part 6 must be met. Nonresidential structures must have
all new, expanded, or enlarged portions meet the provisions of this chapter.
Elevation and dry floodproofing requirements in Part 6 must be met.
1. Existing structures and/or uses located in the Flood-Fringe District may
be expanded or enlarged as follows:
A. Single-family residential structures may be increased in size, but in
no event shall such expansion exceed 50% of the ground-level
square footage of the structure at the effective date of this chapter.
B. Other structures or uses may be expanded, provided that the
applicant provides sufficient data showing that the expansion will
not increase the floodplain elevation or flood velocities or that
accompanying improvements or facilities will offset any
hypothetical increase in elevation or velocity.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:187

Part 5
ADMINISTRATION AND APPEALS
§ 501. Application. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
1. The applicant shall apply to the Borough for a permit under this chapter
on forms supplied by the Borough for a use or structure which will be
located in or above the Floodplain District.
2. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the technical information
contained in § 501) as may be required by the Building Permit Officer to
make the above determination:
A. A completed building permit application form.
B. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale, and date;
(2) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(3) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing and proposing buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development;
(5) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(6) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
C. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(2) The elevation of the five-hundred-year flood;
(3) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a five-hundred-year flood;
(4) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage and conform with the requirements of this and
all other applicable codes and ordinances;
§ 501 FOREWORD § 501
FWD:189
§ 502. Issuance of Permit. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
(5) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been
used;
(6) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures; and
(7) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, and all
applicable provisions of the International Building Code and
International Residential Code.
3. If such application is filed less than 14 calendars days in advance of the
regular Planning Commission meeting, the application will not be
reviewed by the Commission until its next regular meeting. There will
be a ninety-day time period for Borough review and discussion
beginning 14 calendar days in advance of the Borough Planning
Commission meeting when the application is to be initially reviewed.
4. The Borough Council will make its decision at a public meeting.
1. The Building Permit Officer of the Borough shall issue a permit only if
the application meets all applicable requirements of this chapter and all
other ordinances of the Borough.
2. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Permit Officer
shall review the application for the permit to determine if all other
necessary government permits required by the state and federal laws
have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);21 the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);22 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);23 and the
United States Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No
permit shall be issued until this determination has been made.
3. Any applicant aggrieved by the decision or action of the Building Permit
Officer may appeal such decision or action to the Elizabethtown
Borough Council. Borough Council may schedule a public hearing and
may affirm the decision of the Building Permit Officer or may reverse or
alter the decision and order the Building Permit Officer to take other
appropriate action.
4. The procedures for the granting of a conditional use permit by the
Elizabethtown Borough Council as follows: [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016; as
amended by Ord. 976, 6/16/2016]
21.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
23.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 501 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 502
FWD:190
§ 503. Special Use Permits. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
§ 504. Penalties; Appeals. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
A. In granting any conditional use, the Borough of Elizabethtown shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
B. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of
Elizabethtown shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the conditional use would result in
exceptional hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the conditional use will neither:
(a) Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public
or conflict with any other applicable state statutes or local
ordinances, and/or regulations.
C. A complete record of all conditional use requests and related
actions shall be maintained by the Borough of Elizabethtown. In
addition, a report of all conditional uses granted during the year
shall be included in the annual report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency.
1. Uses or structures specifically listed in this chapter as being allowed by
special use permits shall only be permitted by action of Borough
Council taken at public meeting. Borough Council may also hold a
public hearing if desired, but such decision shall be within the
discretion of Borough Council.
2. The application for a special use permit shall be presented to the
Building Permit Officer, who shall immediately submit a copy thereof to
the Borough Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
3. Borough Council shall make a decision within 90 days of the receipt of a
completed application.
1. Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 plus
costs and, in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 502 FOREWORD § 504
FWD:191
§ 505. Other Remedies. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
In case any buildings, structures or land is, or is proposed to be, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or used in
violation of this chapter, the Borough, in addition to other remedies, may
institute, in the name of the Borough, any appropriate action or proceedings
to prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure or land or
to prevent, in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use
constituting a violation.
§ 506. Severability. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
The provisions of this chapter are severable, and if any section, clause,
sentence, part or provisions thereof shall be held illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional, the decision of the court shall not affect or impair any
of the remaining sections, clauses, sentences, parts or provisions of this
chapter. It is hereby declared to be the legislative intent of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
that this chapter would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid or
unconstitutional section, clause, sentence, part or provision had not been
included herein.
2. The granting of a municipal appeal will not relieve a landowner or a
municipality from the obligation to comply with the minimum
requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program. Landowners
and municipalities that fail to meet the program's minimum
requirements, notwithstanding any appellate decision to the contrary,
are in violation of the National Flood Insurance Program and remain
subject to the accompanying penalties. [Added by Ord. 976, 6/16/
2016]
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of
this chapter may appeal to the Elizabethtown Zoning Hearing
Board. Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after
the decision, determination or action of the Floodplain
Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Elizabethtown Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the appeal in accordance with the
Municipality Planning Code and any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Elizabethtown Zoning
Hearing Board may seek relief therefrom by appeal to the
appropriate court, as provided by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.24
24.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 504 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 507
FWD:192
§ 507. Abrogation and Greater Restrictions. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 508. Warning and Disclaimer of Liability. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
§ 509. Designation, Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain
Administrator. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
1. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
2. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, or any officer or
employee thereof, for any flood damages that result from reliance on
this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
1. The Zoning Officer is hereby appointed to administer and enforce this
chapter and is referred to herein as the "Floodplain Administrator". The
Floodplain Administrator may A) fulfill the duties and responsibilities
set forth in these regulations, B) delegate duties and responsibilities set
forth in these regulations to qualified technical personnel, plan
examiners, inspectors, and other employees, or C) enter into a written
agreement or written contract with another agency or private sector
entity to administer specific provisions of these regulations.
Administration of any part of these regulations by another entity shall
not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to the
participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance Program as
set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22. In the
absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Assistant Zoning Officer.
2. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
3. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
§ 507 FOREWORD § 509
FWD:193
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended); and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
4. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
5. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
6. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
7. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
8. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
9. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the Floodplain Ordinance as the Floodplain Administrator/
Manager.
10. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 509 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 509
FWD:194
Part 6
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
§ 601. Equipment Requirements. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
All electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air-conditioning equipment
and other service facilities in a permitted structure shall be designed and/
or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.
§ 602. New Construction. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
For all new construction and substantial improvements, fully enclosed areas
below the lowest floor that are subject to flooding shall be designed to
automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing
for the entry and exit of floodwaters. Designs for meeting this requirement
must either be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect
or must meet or exceed the following minimum criteria. A minimum of
two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for
every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding shall be provided.
The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade.
Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers or other coverings or
devices, provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of
floodwaters.
§ 603. Administration. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
In administering this Part, the Borough Manager and Borough Council
shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and
floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, as criteria for
administrative determinations in the administration and enforcement of this
Part.
§ 604. Elevation and Floodproofing Requirements. [Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016]
1. Residential Structures. Within any identified floodplain area, any new
construction or substantial improvement of a residential structure shall
have the lowest-floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the
five-hundred-year-flood elevation. The design and construction
standards and specifications contained in the most current edition of
the International Building Code, International Residential Code, ASCE
24 (§§ 2.4 and 2.5, Chapter 5) and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through
405, as amended, shall be utilized.
2. Nonresidential Structures.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or
substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to or above the
five-hundred-year-flood elevation or be designed and constructed
§ 601 FOREWORD § 604
FWD:195
so that the space enclosed by such structure shall remain either
completely or essentially dry during any flood up to that height.
B. Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, having a lowest floor
which is not elevated up to or above the five-hundred-year-flood
elevation shall be floodproofed in a completely or essentially dry
manner in accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification
standards contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing
Regulations" published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
C. The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the current edition of the International Building Code,
ASCE 24 (§ 2.4 and Chapter 7) and 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended, shall be utilized.
3. Space Below the Lowest Floor.
A. Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (including basement) is
prohibited.
B. Partially enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding
basement) which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle,
building access, or incidental storage in an area other than a
basement shall be designed and constructed to allow for the
automatic entry and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of
equalizing hydrostatic forces on exterior walls. The term "partially
enclosed space" also includes crawl spaces. Designs for meeting
this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(1) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(2) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(3) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
C. Consideration may be given to the requirements of 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, and the current edition of
the International Residential Code and the International Building
Code.
§ 604 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 605
FWD:196
§ 605. Design and Construction Standards. [Ord. 974, 3/17/2016]
1. The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. Permitted only in the Flood-Fringe District by special use
permit approved by Borough Council. Fill shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to,
and approved by, the Building/Development Permit Officer; and
(5) Be used to extend to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage Facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner.
The system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide
positive drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be
designed to prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and Sanitary Sewer Facilities and Systems.
(1) All new or replacement water and sanitary sewer facilities and
systems shall be located, designed and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of
floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to
prevent the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with
all state and local regulations for such systems. If any such
system is permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid
impairment to it or contamination from it during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the Uniform
Commercial Code, 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended and contained in the current editions of the
International Building Code and International Residential
Code, and FEMA No. 348, Protecting Bldg. Utilities From
Flood Damages, shall be utilized.
§ 605 FOREWORD § 605
FWD:197
D. Other Utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the five-hundred-year-floodplain elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable or explosive or,
in times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant
life, and not listed in § 305, Subsection 1D, shall be stored at or
above the five-hundred-year-floodplain elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of Buildings and Structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the
minimum obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to
have a minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in
accordance with accepted engineering practices to prevent
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar
objects or components located below the five-hundred-yearfloodplain
elevation shall be securely anchored or affixed to
prevent flotation.
(3) The design and construction requirements of the Uniform
Commercial Code pertaining to this subsection as referred in
34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and
contained in the International Building Code, International
Residential Code and ASCE 24-98 (§ 5.6) shall be utilized.
I. Floors, Walls and Ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the five-hundred-year
floodplain elevation shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without causing structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the five-hundred-year floodplain
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the five-hundred-year-floodplain
elevation shall be designed and constructed of materials that
are water resistant and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the fivehundred-
year-floodplain elevation shall be made of metal or
other water-resistant material.
§ 605 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 605
FWD:198
(5) The provisions of the Uniform Commercial Code pertaining to
this subsection and referenced in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401
through 405, as amended and contained in the International
Building Code, International Residential Code and ASCE 24-98
(Chapter 6).
J. Paints and Adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the five-hundredyear-
floodplain elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant
quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the five-hundred-year-floodplain
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other
finishing material.
(4) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended, current editions of the
International Building Code and the International Residential
Code.
K. Electrical Components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least four feet above
the five-hundred-year-floodplain elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
(3) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and
referenced in the Uniform Commercial Code and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in the
most current edition of the International Building Code,
International Residential Code and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall
be utilized.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and
ventilating units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility
equipment or apparatus shall not be located below the fivehundred-
year-floodplain elevation.
(1) The provisions pertaining to the above provisions and
referenced in the Uniform Commercial Code and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405, as amended and contained in the
most current edition of the International Building Code,
International Residential Code and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) shall
be utilized.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
§ 605 FOREWORD § 605
FWD:199
§ 606. Uniform Construction Code Coordination. [Ord. 974, 3/17/
2016]
and discharges from the system into floodwaters. Additional
provisions shall be made for the drainage of these systems in the
event that floodwater infiltration occurs.
1. The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters
401 through 405, as amended and not limited to the following
provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections and subsections
of this chapter, to the extent that they are more restrictive and/or
supplement the requirements of this chapter.
A. Current and latest edition of the International Building Code.
B. Current and latest edition of the International Residential Code.
§ 605 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 606
FWD:200
Chapter 9
GRADING AND EXCAVATING
Chapter 10
HEALTH AND SAFETY
§ 606 FOREWORD § 606
FWD:201

Part 1
ENFORCEMENT OF HEALTH LAWS
§ 101. Abolition of the Board of Health and Position of Health
Officer; Future Enforcement of Health Laws. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001,
as amended by Ord. 914, 1/21/2010]
1. Findings. The Borough Council, after due deliberation and discussion,
has determined that it is no longer economically feasible to continue in
existence the Elizabethtown Board of Health and the position of Health
Officer most recently created by Ordinance 829 on November 15, 2001.
The Borough Council has determined that the functions of the Board of
Health and Health Officer may be undertaken by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania through the Pennsylvania State Department of Health. As
such, specific expenditures related to a Board of Health and Health
Officer have been found to be unnecessary at this time. Further, the
Borough Council notes that 53 P.S. § 48110 of the Borough Code
provides "any Borough may cooperate with the county or counties in
which it is located, or with any city, borough or township as well as with
the State Department of Health in the administration and enforcement
of health laws."
2. Abolishment of Elizabethtown Board of Health and Health Officer
Position. Based upon the foregoing findings, it is herewith resolved that
immediately upon the effective date of this Part the Board of Health of
the Borough of Elizabethtown and the position of Health Officer are
abolished and each and every of its members and Health Officer are
discharged and relieved of any further duty or responsibility.
3. Future Enforcement of Health Laws, Ordinances, Rules and
Regulations. The Borough Council herewith resolves that the Borough
staff shall forthwith contact appropriate persons at the State
Department of Health of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in order to
coordinate the taking over of all functions previously engaged in by the
Board of Health of the Borough of Elizabethtown and its Health Officer
as soon as is reasonably practical.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:203

Part 2
NOISE NUISANCE
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 813, 6/15/2000, § A]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
NOISE DISTURBANCE — Any sound which (1) endangers or injures the
safety or health of humans or animals, or (2) annoys or disturbs a
reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or (3) endangers or injures
personal or real property.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, corporation, or other
legally recognized entity. Whenever used in any subsection prescribing and
imposing a penalty, "person" includes any individual members, partners,
officers and managers, or any of them, of partnerships and associations, and
as to corporations, the officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PLAINLY AUDIBLE — Any sound (including, but not limited to, bass
reverberations) produced by a sound-amplification system, musical
instrument, similar device or any other method or way which clearly can be
heard at a distance of 50 feet or more from its source. Words or phrases
need not be clearly discernible and/or understood for a sound to be plainly
audible.
PROPERTY LINE (BOUNDARY) — An imaginary line drawn through the
points of contact of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums,
townhouses and duplexes owned, rented or leased by different persons; a
demarcation or a line of separation of properties; and also, for any two or
more buildings sharing common grounds, the line drawn midway between
any two said buildings. All areas devoted to public right-of-way shall be
deemed to be across the property line. For the purposes of this regulation,
the property line includes all points on a plane formed by projecting the
property line in a manner deemed appropriate by the enforcing Borough
official or employee.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is owned or controlled by a
governmental entity.
PUBLIC SPACE — Any real property or structures thereon which are owned
or controlled by a governmental entity.
REAL PROPERTY — All land, whether publicly or privately owned, whether
improved or not improved, with or without structures, exclusive of any
areas devoted to the public right-of-way.
SOUND — An oscillation in pressure, particle displacement, particle
velocity, or other physical parameter, in a medium with internal forces that
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:205
causes compression and rarefaction of that medium, or the superposition
of such propagated oscillation which evokes an auditory sensation. The
description of sound may include any characteristics of such sound,
including duration, intensity and frequency.
SOUND-AMPLIFICATION SYSTEM — Any radio, tape player, compact disc
player, loudspeaker, or other device, electronic or otherwise, used for the
amplification or production of sound.
§ 202. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 813, 6/15/2000, § B]
§ 203. Exceptions. [Ord. 813, 6/15/2000, § C; as amended by Ord.
973, 2/18/2016]
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the operation of a sound amplification
system within a vehicle operated by police, fire or emergency medical
service agency or within a vehicle responding to an emergency or by
a person participating in a public activity such as a parade, festival or
1. Noise Disturbance Prohibited. No person shall make, continue or cause
to be made or continued any noise disturbance, nor shall any person
suffer, allow or permit any noise disturbance to be made or continued
from or at any property, whether real or personal, that is subject to such
person's right to control.
2. Specific Prohibitions. The following acts, without limitation, and the
causing thereof, are declared to be noise disturbances and therefore in
violation of this Part:
A. Use or operation of, or permitting the use or operation of, any
sound-amplification system or other device designed or intended to
produce or reproduce sound in such a manner as to disturb the
peace, quiet and comfort of residential inhabitants or at any time
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing by the
person or persons who are in a motor vehicle in which such soundamplification
system or other device is operating and who are
voluntary listeners thereto. The operating of any such soundamplification
system or other device in a motor vehicle, at any time,
in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet
from the source shall be evidence of a violation of this Part.
B. Any sound at any time in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary) between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. so as to be plainly audible across a
property line (boundary).
C. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, singing or creating any other
noise disturbance on the public streets, public spaces, or public
rights-of-way at any time in such a manner as to cause a noise
disturbance across a property line (boundary) between the hours of
9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. as to be plainly audible across a property
line (boundary).
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 203
FWD:206
fair, customarily regulated and/or sanctioned sporting event or a civic
celebration, which produces plainly audible sounds shall not be in violation
of this Part. The aforementioned public activities shall include any
municipal, school or college sanctioned event held within the real property
controlled by the person or entity. Voices or other noises, originating in
the public space of a designated public park, as outlined in Chapter 16,
during the park's authorized hours of operation, which are reasonable and
related to the purpose of the park, shall not be in violation of this Part.
The repair, construction or excavation of any utility such as sewer, water,
natural gas, electric or other public utility during prohibited hours shall not
be in violation of this Part. The provisions of this Part do not apply to a
legal use classified by the Borough Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 27) within
the Office-Industrial,25 General Industrial or General Commercial Zoning
Districts. The collection of municipal waste and/or trash shall be regulated
by other governing ordinances.
§ 204. Penalties. [Ord. 813, 6/15/2000, § D; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to a fine of not less than $50 nor more then $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day in which a violation of this
Part shall take place shall be deemed a separate offense.
25.Editor's Note: Now titled the Light Industrial District, pursuant to Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 203 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:207

Part 3
ENGINE BRAKES
§ 301. Title. [Ord. 969, 6/18/2015]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Elizabethtown Borough
Engine Brake Ordinance."
§ 302. Findings. [Ord. 969, 6/18/2015]
The Elizabethtown Borough Council, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, finds,
as a fact, that the operation of an engine brake on a gasoline-powered or
diesel-powered motor vehicle not equipped with exhaust mufflers for the
engine brake, or equipped with defective or modified engine brake exhaust
mufflers, so as to create excessive noise through the use of said engine
brake adversely affects the public health, safety and welfare of the residents
of Elizabethtown Borough and, therefore, is a nuisance in fact.
§ 303. Use Without Mufflers Prohibited on Certain Streets. [Ord.
969, 6/18/2015]
No gasoline-powered or diesel-powered motor vehicle shall be operated on
the streets, roads, alleys or highways within the Borough of Elizabethtown
listed below, utilizing, in said operation, an engine brake, without engine
brake exhaust mufflers, permitting excessive noise to be created by said
motor vehicle using the engine brake. The streets subject to this prohibition
shall be as follows:
East High Street, between the Borough line and Center Square
Masonic Drive, between West Bainbridge Street and West High Street
Maytown Avenue, between the Borough line and South Market Street
North Market Street, between the Borough line and Center Square
South Market Street, between the Square and College Avenue
West Bainbridge Street, between the Borough line and Masonic Drive
West High Street, between Masonic Drive and Center Square
§ 304. Exceptions. [Ord. 969, 6/18/2015]
1. Emergency Situations. This Part shall not apply to emergency driving
situations requiring the utilization of an engine brake to protect the
safety and property of the residents of Elizabethtown Borough, other
motor vehicle operators, pedestrians and the operator and passengers
of the motor vehicle involved in said emergency situation.
2. Emergency Vehicles. This Part shall not apply to emergency response
vehicles when said emergency vehicle is actually responding to an
emergency situation. The term "emergency vehicle" shall include, but is
not limited to, fire trucks.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:209
§ 305. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 969, 6/18/2015]
For each violation of the provisions of this Part, any person who commits,
takes part in or assists in any such violation shall be liable, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
Each day or portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be considered a
separate violation of this Part, and each section of this Part which is violated
shall be considered a separate violation. In default of payment of such fine,
such person shall be liable to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30
days.
§ 305 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 305
FWD:210
Chapter 11
HOUSING
Chapter 12
LIBRARIES
Chapter 13
LICENSES, PERMITS AND GENERAL BUSINESS
REGULATIONS
§ 305 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:211

Part 1
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Martin Luther King's Birthday,
Presidents Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus
Day, Veterans Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
§ 102. Permit Required; Conditions of Issuance; Fee. [Ord. 7/25/
1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Borough
of Elizabethtown without first having obtained from the Police Department
a permit, for which a fee, which shall be for the use of the Borough
of Elizabethtown, shall be charged, said fee to be in such amount as
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 103. Exceptions. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
No permit fee shall be charged:
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares, or merchandise upon any street, alley,
sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house, within the Borough
of Elizabethtown.
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or merchandise
from a fixed location within the Borough of Elizabethtown, on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but not be limited to, such
activities conducted at the time of special occasions or celebrations, for
seasonal purposes, or for yearly holidays.
(2)
Engaging in selling or providing services from house to house within
the Borough of Elizabethtown.
The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
(3)
A. To farmers selling their own produce.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:213
§ 104. Permit Application. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Every person desiring a permit under this Part shall first make application
to the Police Department for such permit. He shall, when making such
application, exhibit a valid permit from any state or county officer, if such
permit is also required. The applicant shall state:
B. For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, donated by the owners
thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any charitable or
philanthropic purpose.
C. To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products, or milk and milk products.
D. To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and deliver
newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the like, or
who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar organizations.
E. To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
F. To a person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation of
Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General
Assembly of Pennsylvania.
G. For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or business
privilege tax at their chief place of business.
But all persons exempted hereby from the payment of the permit
fee shall be required to register with the Borough Secretary and
obtain a permit without fee; provided, any person dealing in one
or more of the above-mentioned exempted categories, and dealing
with other goods, wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be
subject to the payment of the permit fee fixed by this section for his
activities in connection with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
not in such exempted categories; and provided, further, the Borough
Secretary may similarly exempt from payment of the permit fee, but
not from registering with him, persons working without compensation
and selling goods, wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of a
nonprofit corporation; and provided, further, every permit issued
under the provisions of this Part shall be issued on an individual basis
to any person or persons engaging in such business; every individual
shall obtain a separate permit, issued to him in his name, and the
permit fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such individual
permit, except that a representative of a charitable organization may
obtain permits for the applicants.
A. His criminal record, if any.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:214
§ 105. Issuance of Permit; Custody, Display and Exhibit. [Ord. 7/25/
1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Police
Department, if it shall find such application in order, shall issue the permit
required under this Part. Such permit shall contain the information required
to be given on the application therefor. Every permit holder shall carry such
permit upon his person if engaged in transient retail business from house
to house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or public grounds,
or shall display such permit at the location where he shall engage in such
business if doing so at a fixed location. He shall exhibit such permit, upon
request, to all police officers, Borough officials, and citizens or residents of
the Borough of Elizabethtown.
§ 106. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
No person in any transient retail business shall:
B. Name and address of the person by whom he is employed.
C. Type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business.
D. Length of time for which the permit is to be issued.
E. Type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his permit.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Borough of Elizabethtown.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate
vicinity.
D. Park a vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Borough for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or stock,
wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through handling,
age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or
after 6:00 p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal
holiday.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:215
§ 107. Supervision; Records and Reports. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Police Department shall supervise the activities of all persons holding
permits under this Part. The Police Department shall keep a record of all
permits issued hereunder.
§ 108. Denial, Suspension and Revocation of Permit; Appeal. [Ord.
7/25/1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Police Chief is hereby authorized to deny, suspend or revoke any permit
issued under this Part when he deems such denial, suspension or revocation
to be beneficial to the public health, safety, or morals, or for violation of any
provision of this Part, or for giving false information upon any application
for a permit hereunder. Appeals from any suspension, revocation or denial
of a permit may be made to the Borough Council at any time within 10
days after such suspension, revocation or denial, and a hearing shall be
held within 30 days of the petition for appeal. No part of a permit fee shall
be refunded to any person whose permit shall have been suspended or
revoked.
§ 109. Penalties. [Ord. 7/25/1928; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 107 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 109
FWD:216
Part 2
BURGLAR, EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AND FIRE ALARMS
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 1]
This Part shall be known as and may be cited as the "Burglar, Emergency
Medical Services and Fire Alarm Ordinance."
§ 202. Purpose. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 2]
Whereas the Council for the Borough of Elizabethtown has determined
that the receipt of false burglary, false emergency medical services and
false fire alarms indicating that emergencies exist is detrimental to the
health, welfare and safety of the citizens of the Borough of Elizabethtown,
the Police Department, emergency medical services and Volunteer Fire
Department, it is hereby declared to be the purpose of the Borough of
Elizabethtown to safeguard and protect the residents of the Borough and
the personnel of the Police Department and Volunteer Fire Department from
such hazards and risks.
§ 203. Definitions. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 3]
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them:
ALARM/ALARM DEVICE — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical,
electrical or battery-operated, arranged to signal the occurrence of a police,
fire, hazard or medical emergency requiring urgent attention and to which
police, emergency medical services (EMS) or fire units could be or are
expected to respond.
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any device, including, but not limited to, a bell, horn or
siren, which is attached to the interior or exterior of a building, structure or
facility and emits a warning signal audible outside the building, structure,
or facility and is designed to attract attention when activated by a criminal
act or other emergency requiring police, emergency medical services (EMS)
or Fire Department response.
EMERGENCY — A sudden, unexpected happening, occurrence or condition
requiring immediate action by police, fire, hazard or medical services
personnel to protect the health, safety and welfare of those affected by the
happening, occurrence or condition.
FALSE ALARM/FALSE ALARM SIGNAL —
An alarm activated in the absence of an emergency, whether willfully
or by inadvertence, negligence or unintentional act, including the
malfunction of the alarm system, to which the Elizabethtown Borough
Police Department, any fire department and/or any ambulance or
emergency medical service responds. The definition excludes alarms
caused by malfunctions of the Lancaster County-wide communications
receiving equipment if such alarm is directly connected to the alarm
(1)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:217
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Friendship Fire & Hose Co. No. 1 of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania, or any other fire company or department
operating within the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
FIRE EMERGENCY — A fire.
HAZARD EMERGENCY — An explosion, leak of toxic gas, liquid or solid or
a potential explosion.
MEDICAL EMERGENCY — An emergency involving the health of a person
requiring prompt response by emergency medical services personnel.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Elizabethtown Borough Police Department.
POLICE EMERGENCY — An incident requiring prompt response by the
Police Department.
§ 204. Enforcement. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 4]
The Elizabethtown Borough Police Department shall have the power and
duty to enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 205. Prohibitions. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 5]
After the effective date of this Part, it shall be unlawful for any person to:
board; testing or repairing of telephone or electrical lines or equipment
outside the premises; acts of God, such as earthquake, flood,
windstorm, thunder or lightening; an attempted illegal entry of which
there is visible evidence; a crime in progress; or, in the case of an
emergency medical alarm, an actual medical emergency requiring
police, fire and/or medical personnel.
Multiple alarms received by the Police Department or any fire
department before the system can be deactivated within a reasonable
period of time shall be considered a single alarm, unless such multiple
alarms are caused by the act of any person.
(2)
The definition of a false alarm also includes the intentional activation
of a holdup alarm for other than a holdup in progress, the intentional
activation of a burglar alarm for other than a burglary, the intentional
activation of a medical alarm for other than a medical emergency or the
intentional activation of a fire alarm for other than a fire or hazard.
(3)
A. Cause, suffer, allow or permit the accidental or purposeful transmission
of a false alarm signal from any public or private place in the Borough of
Elizabeth.
B. Cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made any report or request for
police, medical or fire services or assistance by any means of
§ 203 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 205
FWD:218
§ 206. System Request to Limit Sounding of Signal. [Ord. 753, 6/16/
1994, § 6]
No person shall install or maintain in any building, structure or
establishment in Elizabethtown Borough an external audible alarm of any
type which does not also contain an automatic cutoff system or feature
automatically cutting off the source of power to the alarm after it has
sounded for a period of no longer than 15 minutes.
§ 207. Service Charge for False Alarms. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 7; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 208. Fire Department's Authority to Enter. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994,
§ 8]
When the Volunteer Fire Department responds to an alarm transmitted by
an automatic protection device, which alarm indicates a fire in a building or
premises where no one is available to provide access, the Fire Department
is hereby authorized to enter said building or premises by any means
reasonably necessary to conduct an investigation as to the cause of the
alarm.
§ 209. Alarm Device Operation. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 9]
§ 210. Testing Alarm Devices. [Ord. 753, 6/16/1994, § 10; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
communication wherein the situation, condition or incident which is the
subject of the report or request for police, medical or fire services or
assistance does not constitute an emergency.
1. The person in possession of the premises where an alarm device is in
use shall be assessed and shall pay a service charge for each false alarm
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of Borough
Council.
2. Manner of Payment.
A. Payment for false fire alarms shall be made to the Elizabethtown
Volunteer Fire Department for the use of the Fire Department or
ambulance division.
B. Payment for all other false alarms shall be made to Elizabethtown
Borough.
1. The sensory mechanism of an alarm device shall be equipped and
adjusted so as to suppress false indications of fire and so that the device
will not be activated by impulses due to normal pressure changes in
water pipes, variations in voltage due to electrical storms and power
failures or any other forces not related to actual fire conditions.
2. False alarms transmitted from alarm devices are unlawful.
§ 205 FOREWORD § 210
FWD:219
1. No person shall conduct any test or demonstration of an alarm device
without first notifying the Fire Department or Police Department and
obtaining the Department's permission.
2. If any test or demonstration of an alarm device results in a false alarm
due to the failure of the person conducting such test or demonstration
to notify and obtain proper permission from the appropriate
department, a service charge in an amount as established from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council, payable to the Volunteer Fire
Department or Borough, will be assessed against the person
responsible for the test or demonstration, regardless of whether such
false alarm is the first or second false alarm originating from the
building or premises.
§ 210 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 210
FWD:220
Part 3
SPECIAL EVENTS
§ 301. Purpose. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
The purpose of this Part 3 is to provide for the permitting of special events,
including public facility use/rental and the temporary closure or redirection
of pedestrian and/or vehicular traffic on Borough streets and alleys in a safe
manner to allow for such activities.
§ 302. Definitions. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
As used in this Part 3, certain terms are defined as follows:
APPLICANT — The person/group sponsoring, organizing, and responsible
for an event and applying for the permit.
BLOCK PARTY — A one-day outdoor public event organized by residents of a
neighborhood and held upon a Borough street and/or right-of-way for social/
entertainment purposes. A block party can only be held between the hours
of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
COMMUNITY EVENT — A community or neighborhood event organized
for the purpose of celebrating community arts, recreation, or culture or to
commemorate a holiday, seasonal, or special day to the community.
FIRST AMENDMENT ACTIVITY — Includes all expressive and associative
activity protected by the United States and Pennsylvania Constitutions,
including speech, press, assembly, and/or the right to petition. Commercial
advertising regulated by the Zoning Ordinance or elsewhere in the
Elizabethtown Borough Code of Ordinances is excluded from this definition.
PARADE — A march, procession, organized movement, or motorcade,
consisting of persons, vehicles, or a combination thereof, that:
SPECIAL EVENT — A parade, public assembly, performance, meeting,
contest, exhibit, athletic competition or presentation, community event,
block party, or ceremony, which event is to be held wholly or partially
on property owned or maintained by the Borough which is designated
by the Borough for First Amendment activity or is in a traditional public
forum; on a street/alley/sidewalk within the Borough and will likely result
in obstruction of such streets/alleys/sidewalks or will likely compromise the
ability of the Borough to respond to a public safety emergency; or on any
other property, but requires for its successful execution the provision and
coordination of Borough services to a degree over and above that which the
Borough routinely provides. A special event is not intended to include:
A. Is held with an intent to attract attention;
B. Takes place upon streets or public property within the Borough; and
Interferes or has a tendency to interfere with the normal flow or
regulation of pedestrian or vehicular traffic or does not comply with
normal and usual traffic regulations or controls.
C.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:221
SPONSORING ORGANIZATION — An individual or group applying for the
special event permit.
STATE HIGHWAY — A highway or bridge on the system of highways and
bridges over which the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation has
assumed or has been legislatively given jurisdiction.
§ 303. Application. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
A. An activity held solely on private property;
Programmed activities provided/managed by the Borough and/or
GEARS;
B.
Any event which falls within the definition of a special event held in a
Borough park but which does not interfere with regular use of the park
by the general public; and
C.
First Amendment activity on Borough streets/alleys/sidewalks,
including within the park, which will not result in obstruction of streets/
alleys/sidewalks nor compromise the ability of the Borough to respond
to a public safety emergency.
D.
1. Written applications for public gatherings shall be submitted to the
Elizabethtown Police Department 60 days prior to the first day of public
promotion/advertisement or commencement of the event, whichever
occurs first. The application shall be submitted 90 days prior if the
event includes a proposal to close a state highway.
2. No applicant shall be less than 21 years of age. If an applicant is other
than an individual, it shall be a legally constituted and created entity.
3. Applications shall be submitted on the forms specified by the Borough
and shall include the following, when applicable:
A. Full legal names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail
addresses of all sponsors and, if an organization, proof of its legal
existence.
B. Full legal names, addresses, telephone numbers, and e-mail
addresses of all persons in charge.
C. The location and address of the property to be utilized for the
event.
D. The program for the event or, if no program is prepared, a narrative
statement as to the purpose for which the event is to be conducted.
E. A diagrammatic plan of the proposed site for the event showing
locations and dimensions of the area where the programmed
entertainment, amusement, or recreation is to be conducted; areas
for spectators or persons attending the event; all structures
existing and to be constructed; proposed parking area; electricity
source; potable water facilities; sanitary facilities; sewage disposal
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:222
facilities; medical service facilities; facilities for and distribution
of security personnel; facilities for food and beverage storage,
preparation, and service; camping facilities; and projected plans
for enclosure, if necessary, of the proposed site.
F. Evidence that all permits and licenses as required by state and
local statutes, ordinances and regulations enacted thereunder have
been obtained or will be obtained. Such permits/licenses include
but are not limited to the following:
(1) Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form TE-300.
(2) Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture (retail food license)
(3) Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.
(4) Elizabethtown Borough transient retail business permit.
G. Evidence that approvals have been secured from emergency
responders as appropriate.
H. A statement of the number of persons expected to attend said event
and the duration of the event.
I. A statement regarding the first day upon which public
announcement, promotion, or advertising is to be made.
J. Specific details relating to:
(1) Sanitary and waste disposal facilities and providers thereof.
(2) Food and drink facilities and providers thereof.
(3) Transportation and parking facilities.
(4) Security and protection relating to the event, with specific
reference to the number of security personnel assisting in the
control of traffic and supervision of those attending, and
providers thereof.
(5) Traffic control, to include a map of detour routes and proposed
signage, staffing, and required traffic control equipment; i.e.,
barricades and cones.
(6) On-site medical facilities and providers thereof.
(7) Janitorial services and post-gathering trash and recycling
removal and site restoration and providers thereof.
K. Certificates of insurance issued by an insurance company licensed
to do business in Pennsylvania, evidencing comprehensive general
liability, or special event public liability, in an amount of at least
$1,000,000 for each occurrence and $2,000,000 aggregate for
property damage, which policies shall name the Borough as an
additional insured specifically for purposes of the event.
§ 303 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:223
§ 304. Conditions of Approval. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
L. Examples of proposed advertising of the event, if any.
M. The applicant's statement that he/she/it shall abide by the terms
and provisions of this Part 3 and all laws, rules and regulations of
the United States, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, County of
Lancaster, and Borough of Elizabethtown.
N. An application fee may be charged, said fee to be in such amount as
established, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough
Council.
1. The Chief of Police and Borough Manager shall either grant or deny the
application for a permit. In case of denial, the applicant has the right of
appeal to the Borough Council. Appeals must be filed within 10 days of
the date of denial for consideration.
2. Failure to satisfy the following conditions no later than seven days prior
to the event shall constitute grounds for the immediate revocation of
the permit by the Borough and cancellation of the event:
A. Food preparation: a permit from the appropriate agency of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania indicating the applicant's plan for
food preparation conforms with applicable rules, regulations, and
laws relating to public health.
B. Security: Applicants must provide a plan and means to implement
the plan to provide for traffic control and crowd control.
Identification of the security personnel or company or persons
supplying this service must be provided, and proof of traffic control
training and safety certification shall be submitted with each
application.
C. Medical services: The applicant must provide a plan and means to
implement the plan to provide sufficient medical services to the
event. Identification of the company or person supplying this
service must be provided.
D. Parking facilities: The applicant must provide a plan for parking
facilities appropriate to the anticipated number of persons in
attendance. Adequate ingress and egress to and from parking areas
must be maintained to facilitate the movement of any vehicle at any
time to or from the parking area and to permit access by
emergency vehicles.
E. Barricades and obstacles: Any area blocked off with barricades and
obstacles for a special event shall not obstruct emergency and
hazard vehicles responding to an emergency.
F. Structures: All facilities, including temporary and semipermanent
structures, stages, lighting facilities, sanitary facilities and other
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 304
FWD:224
§ 305. Conduct of Public Assembly. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
utilities to be specially assembled, constructed, installed or erected
for the public gathering must be in place and be approved by
appropriate state and federal regulatory agencies, if such
regulations apply, and by the Borough or its duly appointed agent.
G. Cleanup after the event: The applicant shall be responsible for
removal of all litter, debris, and other material from the areas or
portions thereof used for the event which is attributable to or
caused by the event.
1. The event permittee must maintain the sanitary and sewage facilities,
parking facilities, security and traffic control personnel, and medical
service facilities, and other facilities and utilities provided, in
accordance with the plans submitted and approved and in a safe and
healthful manner.
2. No permittee or person having control of the event shall condone any
illegal conduct on the premises, including but not limited to disorderly
conduct or illegal possession, sale or use of intoxicating beverages or
drugs. Open alcoholic containers are not permitted on public property
as per Elizabethtown Borough Code, Chapter 6, Part 4.
3. The burden of event security is solely upon the permittee. Any
violations of the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or its rules
and regulations, or of the terms and conditions of this Part 3, or other
Borough ordinances, or of the conditions of the permit granted
hereunder may be cause for immediate revocation of the permit, upon
notification to the person in charge that a violation exists and the
failure of the person in charge to take immediate action to correct the
violation. Upon revocation of any permit, the permittee of the event
shall immediately terminate the assembly and provide for the orderly
disbursal of those in attendance.
4. Elizabethtown Borough, its authorized agents, representatives, and the
Elizabethtown Borough Police Department shall be granted access to
the public gathering at all times for the purpose of inspection and
enforcement of the terms and conditions imposed herein.
5. No programmed entertainment, amusement, or recreation or use of
sound-amplification equipment shall be provided or permitted between
the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in accordance with Elizabethtown
Borough Code, Chapter 10, Part 2.
6. At the conclusion of the event, the permittee shall terminate the
assembly or gathering and shall supervise the orderly dispersal of those
in attendance. No one shall be permitted to remain overnight on the
event site, with the exception of permanent residents, unless overnight
camping or other facilities were approved by the Borough pursuant to
the application process and this Part 3.
§ 304 FOREWORD § 306
FWD:225
§ 306. Conformance with Other Requirements. [Ord. 950, 8/15/
2013]
This Part 3 shall in no way be a substitute for, nor eliminate the necessity
of, complying with any and all federal and state laws, rules and regulations,
and county and Borough ordinances, which are now, or may be in the future,
in effect which pertain to the conduct of special events.
§ 307. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 950, 8/15/2013]
Any person who initiates, organizes, promotes, permits, conducts or causes
to be advertised a special event without obtaining the permit provided in
this Part 3, or who knowingly conducts, permits or allows a special event
with a permit but in violation of the terms and provisions of this Part 3 and
of the permit granted, or who shall counsel, aid or abet such violation or
failure to comply, shall be subject to a fee of $300 and all Borough-related
expenses to support the event. Should the applicant fail to pay said fee
within 30 days, the matter will be remanded to the District Justice, and the
applicant shall be subject to a fine of not more than $600, plus court costs,
and all Borough-related expenses to support the event.
§ 306 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:226
Chapter 14
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
Chapter 15
MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:227

Part 1
GENERAL REGULATIONS
§ 101. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 102. Manner of Adopting Permanent Traffic and Parking
Regulations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 103. Provisions to be Continuation of Existing Regulations. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations, and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred, or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 104. Temporary and Emergency Regulations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
The Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
1. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
Parts to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code (the Act of June 17,
1976, P.L. 162, No. 81), as amended, except that, in this chapter, the
word "street" may be used interchangeably with the word "highway,"
and shall have the same meaning as the word "highway" as defined in
the Vehicle Code.
2. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
3. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
4. Although the streets in the Borough of Elizabethtown run generally in a
northeast-southwest and a northwest-southeast direction, for the
purpose of this chapter, Market Street and the street running parallel
or generally parallel to Market Street shall be deemed to run in a northsouth
direction, and High Street and the streets parallel or generally
parallel to High Street shall be deemed to run in an east-west direction.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 104
FWD:229
§ 105. Experimental Regulations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Borough Council may, from time to time by resolution, designate places
upon and along the highways in the Borough of Elizabethtown where, for a
period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate
such locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this
chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of
any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move,
remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by
authority of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth
in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and
in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with
costs of prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for
the test and experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability
of permanent changes in the ordinances of the Borough of Elizabethtown
relative to traffic and parking.
§ 106. Traffic on, Temporary Parking and Establishing Detours on/
for Streets Closed or Restricted for Construction, Maintenance or
Special Events. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 885, 7/
19/2007]
1. In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations; and
2. In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the conduct
of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or prohibit traffic
and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not more than 72 hours.
Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
1. Borough Council shall have authority, by resolution, to create
temporary parking and no-parking zones, to establish detours, and/or to
close any street or specific part of a street to vehicular traffic and to
place barriers, erect traffic control signs and/or to station police
officers at each end of the closed portion and on streets used for
detouring, while construction or maintenance work is under way or a
§ 104 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 106
FWD:230
§ 107. Use of Streets by Processions and Assemblages. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
special event is being conducted on the closed portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such closed portion
and/or to disobey any traffic control sign erected during such periods of
time.
2. Borough Council shall have authority, by resolution, to establish a
restricted traffic area upon any street where construction or
maintenance work is under way and to station flagmen at each end of
the restricted portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a
vehicle upon any such restricted traffic area at any time when the
flagman is displaying a sign directing that vehicle to stop, or is
signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device, not to proceed.
3. Any person who violates any provision of this section, shall upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles, which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one week
in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be held,
but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to be
used, application shall be made at least two months in advance of the
proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted, or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Chief of Police, which shall be issued
without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two
months in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least two months in advance of the
§ 106 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:231
§ 108. Authority of Police Officers. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The police officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct
traffic on the highways of the Borough of Elizabethtown and at intersections
thereof.
§ 109. Authorization for Use of Speed Timing Devices. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have reached the end of the route
of the procession and the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall
be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted, or under any conditions as
to time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus
costs.
1. The Borough of Elizabethtown Police Department is hereby authorized
to use all speed timing devices for the determination of speed of a
motor vehicle as are approved or will be approved by the Department of
Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance
with 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3368.
2. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough of Elizabethtown, be they the Borough of Elizabethtown,
county or state highways, and does also hereby elect to exercise all
powers granted to "local authorities" under the Vehicle Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6101 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 107 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 109
FWD:232
Part 2
TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
§ 201. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Streets. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 840, 9/18/2003, §§ 1 and 2; by
Ord. 859, 5/14/2005, § 2; by Ord. 865, 11/17/2005; by Ord. 878, 11/
16/2006, § 2; by Ord. 890, 9/20/2007, § 1; by Ord. 908, 12/17/2009;
by Ord. 936, 1/19/2012; and by Ord. 977, 7/21/2016]
1. Maximum speed limits are established on portions of specified streets,
as follows, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle, on
any part of a street where maximum speed limit applies, at a higher
speed than the maximum prescribed for that part of the street:
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
All alleys Entire length 15
All streets 35 unless otherwise
posted
West Bainbridge
Street
South Market Street
to Masonic Drive
25
Beech Lane Entire length 25
South Chestnut Street High Street to College
Avenue
25
Hampden Road Entire length 25
East High Street Market Street to
Beechwood Lane
25
West High Street Entire length 25
North Hanover Street East Hummelstown
Street to Linden
Avenue
25
North Hanover Street Linden Avenue to
Borough line
30
Kenbridge Lane Entire length 25
Linden Avenue North Market Street
to Hanover Street
30
North Market Street High Street to
Hummelstown Street
25
South Market Street High Street to College
Avenue
25
Masonic Drive Entire length 25
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:233
§ 202. Maximum Speed Limits Established on Certain Bridges and
Elevated Structures. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Street Between
Maximum Speed
Limit
(mph)
North Mount Joy
Street
High Street to Willow
Street
25
South Mount Joy
Street
High Street to College
Avenue
25
East Park Street Entire length 25
North Poplar Street Entire length 25
South Poplar Street Entire length 25
Radio Road Entire length 25
North Spruce Street High Street to Willow
Street
25
South Spruce Street High Street to College
Avenue
25
Union Street Entire length 25
East Washington
Street
South Market Street
to Spruce Street
25
West Washington
Street
Entire length 25
Yorkshire Court Entire length 25
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $45. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure, at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 203
FWD:234
§ 203. Maximum Speed Limits Established For Certain Vehicles on
Hazardous Grades. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 204. Maximum Speed Limits Established in Parks. [Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001; as amended by Ord. No. 977, 7/21/2016]
§ 205. Traffic Signals at Certain Locations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001;
as amended by Ord. 936, 1/19/2012]
1. The following are declared to be hazardous grades, and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle, having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and, if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Limit
Maximum
Speed
Required
to Stop
Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per hour over
the maximum speed limit.
1. A speed limit of 25 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough
of Elizabethtown, except in the following locations, where the lower
maximums, as specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum Speed
Limit
Ken Lane Entire length 15 mph
E. Washington
Street
Spruce Street to
Mount Joy Street
15 mph
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35. Any person exceeding the
maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour shall pay an
additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
1. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
§ 203 FOREWORD § 205
FWD:235
§ 206. Intersections Where Turn Prohibited on Red Signal. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 940, 9/20/2012]
§ 207. One-way Streets Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as
amended by Ord. 855, 3/17/2005; and by Ord. 929, 9/1/2011]
Location Type of Signal
Arch Street at Market Street Traffic signal
East High Street at Spruce Street Traffic signal
High Street at Market Street Traffic signal
Linden Avenue at Market Street Traffic signal
Maytown Avenue at Market Street Traffic signal
Union Street at Market Street Traffic signal
W. Bainbridge at Market Street Traffic signal
Willow Street at Market Street Traffic signal
2. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection Vehicles Traveling on Facing
High Street at Market
Street
Any approach
Market Street at High
Street
Any approach
Market Street at Union
Street
Market Street South
Maytown Avenue at Market
Street
Maytown Avenue East
Union Street at Market
Street
Union Street East
2. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following are established as one-way streets, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
§ 205 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 207
FWD:236
§ 208. Rotary Traffic Islands Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Aspen Alley Peach Alley Poplar Street Eastbound
Aspen Alley S. Mt. Joy
Street
S. Spruce Street Eastbound
Center Alley Peace Alley Poplar Street Eastbound
Cherry Alley East High
Street
East Park Street Southbound
Church Alley Peach Alley S. Poplar Street Eastbound
Cottage Avenue Market Street Poplar Street Westbound
E. Park Street S. Mt. Joy
Street
S. Market Street Westbound
E. Washington
Street
S. Market
Street
S. Mt. Joy Street Eastbound
N. Hanover
Street
E.
Hummelstown
Linden Avenue Northbound
Oak Alley N. Market
Street
N. Hanover
Street
Eastbound
Orange Street S. Market
Street
75 feet east of S.
Market Street
Eastbound
Peach Alley Mill Alley Stone Alley Northbound
Peach Alley Stone Street W. Bainbridge
Street
Northbound
Peach Alley W. High Street Rose Alley Southbound
Peach Alley Winnemore
Alley
W. High Street Northbound
Rose Alley A point
approximately
45 feet
westbound from
the intersection
of Rose Alley
and Peach Alley
South Poplar
Street
Westbound
Verdant Alley Cherry Alley Market Street Westbound
Vine Alley Peace Alley Poplar Street Eastbound
W. Park Alley Market Street Peach Alley Westbound
W. Park Street S. Poplar Street Peace Alley Westbound
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 207 FOREWORD § 208
FWD:237
§ 209. Turning at Certain Intersections Prohibited or Restricted.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 838, 10/17/2002, § 1]
1. The following are designated as rotary traffic islands, and every vehicle
passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only to the right of
the island:
(Reserved)
2. Any person who drives a vehicle otherwise than to the right of any
rotary traffic island shall be guilty of a violation of this section and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, of the type indicated,
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
E. High
Street
Eastward Left turn
or right
turn
Cherry
Alley
Entire
day
All
E. High
Street
Westward Left turn
or right
turn
Cherry
Alley
Entire
day
All
East High
Street
[Added by
Ord. 978,
11/17/
2016]
Westward Left turn Westmost
driveway
to East
High
Elementary
School
Between
the hours
of 8:20
a.m. to
8:50 a.m.
and 3:25
p.m. and
3:55 p.m.
(school
days
only)
All, school
buses
exempted
Ridge Road Westward Left turn S. Market
Street
Entire
day
—
§ 208 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 209
FWD:238
§ 210. Right Turns only Permitted at Certain Intersections. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
§ 211. U-Turns Prohibited at Certain Locations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
Not to
Make Into When
Type of
Vehicle
Applicable
To
West most
driveway to
East High
Elementary
School
[Added by
Ord. 978,
11/17/
2016]
Northward Left turn East High
Street
Between
the hours
of 8:20
a.m. to
8:50 a.m.
and 3:25
p.m. and
3:55 p.m.
(school
days
only)
All, school
buses
exempted
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a right turn, at
any time stated, both left turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling on
Direction of
Travel Times
Not to make left
turn into or
travel straight
across
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle, traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Portion Direction of Travel
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 209 FOREWORD § 212
FWD:239
§ 212. No-Passing Zones Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 213. Through Highways Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 214. Stop Intersections Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as
amended by Ord. 870, 4/21/2006, § 2; and by Ord. 942, 10/18/2012]
1. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone:
Street Direction of Travel Between
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway except for those
intersections with traffic signals, or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by § 3323(b) or 3323(c) of the Vehicle Code, as the case
may be, and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until
he has followed all applicable requirements of that section of the law:
Highway Between
Market Street Entire length
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 213) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting of through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(b) of the
Vehicle Code, and shall not proceed into or across the second-named or
intersecting or through street until he has followed all applicable
requirements of that section of the law.
A. Stop Streets.
§ 212 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 214
FWD:240
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Acorn Lane Mount Joy Street East
Apple Alley Cherry Alley East and West
Arch Street Hanover Street East and West
Arch Street Market Street West
Arch Street Mount Joy Street East
Arch Street Spruce Street East and West
Aspen Circle Mulberry Street South
Bainbridge Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Bainbridge Street Spruce Street East and West
Baugher Avenue College Avenue South
Beech Lane Bainbridge Street North
Beechwood Lane High Street South
Briarcliff Road Mount Joy Street West
Brookview Circle Northfield Drive South
Brown Street High Street North
Brown Street W. Bainbridge Street South
Cedar Street Hanover Street East and West
Cedar Street Locust Street East and West
Cedar Street Market Street West
Cedar Street Mount Joy Street 4-way
Cedar Street Spruce Street East and West
Cedar Street Spruce Street East and West
Cherry Alley Arch Street North and South
Cherry Alley Crestlawn Alley North and South
Cherry Alley E. Willow Street North and South
Cherry Alley Mechanics Alley North and South
Cherry Alley Oak Alley North and South
Cherry Alley Verdant Alley North and South
Cherry Alley Vine Alley North and South
Cherry Street Market Street West
Cherry Street S. Mount Joy Street East and West
Cherry Street Spruce Street East and West
Cherry Street
(4-way)
S. Locust Street East and West
Chestnut Street College Avenue South
§ 214 FOREWORD § 214
FWD:241
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Chestnut Street E. Park Street (4-way)
Chestnut Street High Street North and South
Chestnut Street Ridge Road North
Chestnut Street Ridgeview Road South
Church Alley Peach Alley East
Cliff Lane Gerald Drive South
College Avenue
[Added by Ord.
949, 7/18/2013]
Campus Road East, except for
right-hand turns
College Avenue Market Street East and West
College Avenue S. Mount Joy (4-way) North and South
College Avenue
(4-way)
S. Spruce Street East and West
Conoy Avenue Radio Road East and West
Continental Drive Chestnut Street West
Cottage Avenue N. Poplar Street West
Cranfield Court Foxbury Drive East
Dogwood Circle Conoy Avenue South
E. Bainbridge
Street
Chestnut Street East
E. Mechanic Alley N. Spruce Street East and West
E. Snyder Avenue N. Chestnut Street East and West
Fieldstone Lane Northfield Drive North and South
Fieldstone Lane Radio Road East
Foxbury Drive Cliff Lane East
Foxbury Drive High Street South
Foxchase Lane Foxfield Lane East
Foxchase Lane Gerald Drive West
Gerald Drive Foxbury Drive West
Gladys Alley Vine Alley, Lot C to
Spruce
North and South
Greenleaf Lane Mount Joy Street West
Groff Avenue Market Street West
Hampden Road Woodland Avenue West
Hanover Street Plum Street South
Hanover Street Willow Street North
§ 214 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 214
FWD:242
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Heather Circle Conoy Avenue South
Hedgewyck Lane
(approximately 230
feet west of the
Radio Road/Hillside
Avenue
intersection)
Hillside Avenue South
Hedgewyck Lane
(approximately 420
feet east of the
Sunrise
Blvd./Hillside
Avenue
intersection.)
Hillside Avenue South
Hemlock Circle Conoy Avenue South
Hess Avenue W. High Street South
Hickory Lane E. Willow Street North and South
Hickory Lane High Street South
Highlawn Avenue Hanover Street North
Highlawn Avenue Spring Garden Street 4-way
Highlawn Avenue Willow Street South
Hillside Avenue Highlawn Avenue West
Hillside Avenue Holly Street East and West
Hillside Avenue Mount Joy Street East and West
Hillside Avenue Sunrise Blvd. East, West and
South (3-way)
Hillside Avenue Sunrise Blvd. east of
Southview Circle
East and West
Hillside Avenue Watercress Lane East and West
Holly Street Oak Street North and South
Holly Street Spring Garden Street North and South
Holly Street Summit Street South
Hummelstown
Street
Beechwood Lane East
Hummelstown
Street
Chestnut Street West
Hummelstown
Street
Hickory Lane East and West
§ 214 FOREWORD § 214
FWD:243
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Hummelstown
Street
Market Street East and West
Hummelstown
Street
N. Poplar Street 4-way
Hummelstown
Street
Spruce Street East
Huntington Lane Hedgewyck Lane East and West
Iris Circle Conoy Avenue South
Ken Lane S. Mount Joy Street East
Kenbridge Lane Beech Lane West
Kiwanis Blvd. College Avenue South
Lemon Street Locust Street East and West
Lemon Street Market Street West
Lemon Street S. Mount Joy Street East and West
Lemon Street Spruce Street East and West
Lime Street E. Hummelstown Street South
Lime Street East Willow Street North and South
Lime Street Hillside Avenue North
Lime Street Spring Garden Street North and South
Locust Lane E. Hummelstown Street North and South
Locust Street Arch Street North and South
Locust Street Cherry Street North and South
Locust Street High Street North and South
Locust Street Hillside Avenue North
Locust Street Orange Street North
Locust Street Park Street South
Locust Street Ridge Road South
Locust Street Snyder Avenue North
Locust Street Summit Street North and South
Locust Street Willow Street South
Masonic Drive W. Bainbridge Street North
Masonic Drive W. High Street North
Mechanic Street Cherry Alley East
Mechanic Street Chestnut Street East and West
Mechanic Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Mount Joy Street High Street North and South
§ 214 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 214
FWD:244
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Mount Joy Street Oak Street North and South
Mount Joy Street Spring Garden Street North and South
Mulberry Street Beechwood Lane East
Mulberry Street Hickory Lane 3-way
Mulberry Street Lime Street East and West
N. Chestnut Street E. Willow Street North and South
N. Mount Joy Snyder Avenue 4-way
N. Mount Joy Street E. Willow Street 4-way
Northfield Drive Radio Road East
Oak Street Hanover Street West
Oak Street Highlawn Avenue 4-way
Oak Street Holly Street East and West
Oak Street Lime Street East
Oak Street Locust Street East and West
Oak Street Market Street East and West
Oak Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Oak Street Spruce Street East and West
Orange Street Market Street West
Orange Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Orange Street Spruce Street East and West
Overlook Circle Sunrise Blvd. West
Park Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Park Street Spruce Street West
Plum Street Locust Street 4-way
Plum Street Market Street West
Plum Street Mount Joy Street East
Plum Street Spruce Street East and West
Poplar Street Bainbridge Street South
Poplar Street High Street North and South
Radio Road Foxbury Drive East
Radio Road Hillside Avenue North
Radio Road Northfield Drive South
Radio Road Willow Street North, South and
East (3-way)
Raymond City Foxbury Drive West
§ 214 FOREWORD § 214
FWD:245
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Ridge Road Market Street West
Ridge Road Mount Joy Street East and West
Ridge Road Woodland Avenue East, except for
right-hand turns
Ridgeview Avenue S. Mount Joy Street West
Ridgeview Avenue Woodland Avenue East
Ridgeview Road Mount Joy Street West
S. Chestnut Street Groff Avenue North and South
S. Hanover Street College Avenue North
S. Hanover Street Orange Street North and South
S. Mount Joy Street Groff Avenue North and South
S. Mount Joy Street Ken Lane North and South
School Lane E. High Street South
Sherfield Drive Cliff Lane West
Sherfield Drive Sherfield Lane East
Snyder Avenue Chestnut Street East and West
Snyder Avenue Spruce Street West
Southview Circle Hillside Avenue South
Spring Garden
Street
Conoy Avenue South
Spring Garden
Street
Hanover Street East and West
Spring Garden
Street
Hanover Street East and West
Spring Garden
Street
Market Street West
Spring Garden
Street
Mill Road West
Spring Garden
Street
N. Locust Street East and West
Spring Garden
Street
Skyline 4-way
Spring Garden
Street
Sunset Drive East and West
Spring Garden
Street
Watercress Lane East and West
Spruce Street High Street North and South
§ 214 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 214
FWD:246
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street Direction of Travel
Spruce Street Hillside Avenue North
Spruce Street Market Street South
Spruce Street Oak Street North and South
Spruce Street Spring Garden Street North and South
Spruce Street Summit Street North and South
Spruce Street Willow Street North and South
Summit Street Hanover Street East and West
Summit Street Highlawn Avenue East and West
Summit Street Market Street East and West
Summit Street Mount Joy Street East and West
Summit Street Poplar Street East and West
Sunrise Blvd. Conoy Avenue South
Sunrise Blvd. Spring Garden Street North and South
Teakwood Circle Mulberry Street South
Turnpike Road W. High Street East
Verdant Alley Cherry Alley West
Vine Alley Cherry Alley East and West
Vine Alley Locust Street East and West
Vine Alley Peach Alley East and West
W. Summit W. Poplar Street East and West
W. Winnemore Alley N. Poplar Street East and West
Walnut Street E. High Street North
Washington Street Market Street East
Washington Street Mount Joy Street West
Washington Street Poplar Street West
Washington Street Poplar Street West
Washington Street Spruce Street East
Watercress Lane Oak Street North and South
Westbury City Radio Road North
Willow Street Poplar Street East and West
Wilson Avenue High Street South
Wilson Avenue W. High Street North
Woodland Avenue Groff Avenue North and South
Yorkshire City Kenbridge Lane North
B. Four-Way Stop Intersections.
§ 214 FOREWORD § 214
FWD:247
§ 215. Yield Intersections Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 216. Operation of Motor Vehicles Restricted on Public Lands.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
No motor vehicle or motorcycle or minibike shall be operated on any lands
owned by the Borough of Elizabethtown or any other public body or agency
(1) Cherry Alley and Rose Alley.
(2) Cherry Alley and Verdant Alley.
NOTE: Verdant is one-way — Cherry to Market.
(3) East Park Street and S. Spruce Street.
(4) East Willow Street and Lime Street.
(5) Spring Garden Street and Skyline Drive.
(6) West Hummelstown Street and N. Poplar Street.
(7) East Willow Street and N. Mount Joy Street.
(8) N. Mount Joy Street and Snyder Avenue.
(9) Peach Alley and West Park Street.
(10) Highlawn Avenue and Oak Street.
(11) Beechwood Lane and Willow Street.
(12) Spruce Street and College Avenue.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
1. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 213) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by § 3323(c) of the
Vehicle Code, and then yield the right-of-way as required by that
subsection of the Vehicle Code.
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Synder Avenue E. Hummelstown Street —
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 214 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 216
FWD:248
within the Borough of Elizabethtown, except on those lands specifically
designated for the operation of motor vehicles, motorcycles or minibikes by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 217. Restrictions on use of Pushcarts. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 218. Regulating the use of Skateboards, Street Skates, Roller
Skates and Scooters. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle, other
than a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from Borough Council as provided in Subsection 3 of this
section.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from Borough
Council. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough of Elizabethtown, of $100 for any calendar year, $50
for any six-month period, or $25 for any three-month period. The permit
shall be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon his
signing an agreement with Borough Council that he shall be bound by
the conditions imposed by Borough Council and made a part of the
permit, dealing with the following matters:
A. Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location;
B. Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on;
C. Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
4. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, shall be guilty of a summary
offense, and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
and costs.
1. Roller Skates, Street Skates, Skateboards and Scooters Regulated. No
person shall roller skate, ride a skateboard or ride a scooter anywhere
§ 216 FOREWORD § 218
FWD:249
in the Borough without complying with the terms of this section. As
used herein, "to roller skate" shall mean to skate on any type of roller
skates or street skates.
2. Central Business District. No person shall roller skate, ride a
skateboard or scooter on the sidewalk or street in the Central Business
District (CBD) as defined on the official Zoning Map of the Borough
[Chapter 27].
3. Streets. No person shall roller skate, ride a skateboard or a scooter on
any street except for the purpose of crossing the street. The rules
pertaining to pedestrians crossing streets shall apply to persons
crossing a street on roller skates or a skateboard or scooter. No person
crossing a street on roller skates, a skateboard or scooter shall travel
too fast for safety under the conditions existing.
4. Sidewalks. No person shall roller skate or ride a skateboard or scooter
on any public sidewalk in a reckless manner. No person shall ride a
skateboard or roller skate on a sidewalk without exercising due care for
the safety of other persons using the sidewalk and shall always give way
to pedestrian traffic. It shall be unlawful for any person to leave a
skateboard, roller skates or scooter upon a sidewalk in such manner as
to obstruct pedestrian traffic.
5. Parental Responsibility. The parent of any child and the guardian of any
ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any such child or ward to
violate any of the provisions of this section.
6. Violations and Penalties. Any person who shall violate any of the
provisions of this section shall be subject to the following penalties:
A. First Offense. The street skates, roller skates, skateboard or
scooter shall be impounded by the Police Department of the
Borough for a period not exceeding 15 days.
B. Second Offense. The street skates, roller skates or skateboard shall
be impounded by the Police Department of the Borough for a period
not exceeding 30 days and/or be sentenced to a fine but not less
than $25 plus costs.
§ 218 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 218
FWD:250
Part 3
RESTRICTIONS ON SIZE, WEIGHT AND TYPE OF VEHICLE AND
LOAD
§ 301. Vehicle Weight Limits Established on Certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 302. Restrictions on Size of Vehicles on certain Streets and
Bridges. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 303. Restrictions as to Weight and Size of Vehicles on Certain
Streets and Bridges. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons to drive any vehicle or combination having a gross
weight in excess of the maximum prescribed below for that bridge or
street or part of street, as the case may be:
Street or Bridge Between Maximum Gross Weight
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under §§ 4902(a) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for
each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight, and costs.
1. On the following bridges and streets or parts of streets, by authority
granted by § 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful for any
person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the size
restrictions prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street:
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(a) and § 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 and costs.
1. By reason of hazardous traffic conditions and other safety factors, by
authority granted by § 4902(b) of the Vehicle Code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to drive any vehicle or combination in violation of the
restriction prescribed below for that bridge or street or part of street.
Street or Bridge Between Restriction
(Reserved)
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
prosecuted under § 4902(b) and 4902(g-1) of the Vehicle Code, and,
§ 301 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:251
§ 304. Truck Traffic Restricted on Certain Streets. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001; as amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25
and not more than $100 and costs.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle other than a
passenger car on any of the following streets or parts of streets:
Street Between
East Hummelstown Street N. Market Street and N. Hanover
Street
Hillside Avenue Holly Street and Buckingham Blvd.
N. Poplar Street W. Hummelstown Street and Oak
Street
Ridge Road S. Market Street and S. Mount Joy
Street
Spring Garden Street N. Hanover Street and Mill Road
Provided: nothing in this section shall prohibit any person from driving
an emergency vehicle on any of those streets or parts of streets, or
from driving on any of those streets or parts of streets a truck or
other commercial vehicle making local deliveries to or pickups from
premises located along that street or part of a street.
2. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 304
FWD:252
Part 4
GENERAL PARKING REGULATIONS
§ 401. Vehicles to be Parked Within Marked Spaces. [Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this Part for any person to
park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 402. Angle Parking Required on Portions of Certain Streets. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at the
angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
§ 403. Parking Prohibited at All Times in Certain Locations. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 846, 6/17/2004, § 3; by Ord.
859, 5/19/2005, § 1; by Ord. 865, 11/17/2005; by Ord. 870, 4/21/
2006, § 1; by Ord. 873, 6/15/2006; by Ord. 878, 11/16/2006, § 1; by
Ord. 880, 2/15/2007; by Ord. 884, 7/19/2007, § 1; by Ord. 901, 11/20/
2008; by Ord. 908, 12/17/2009; by Ord. 923, 9/16/2010; by Ord. 925,
11/18/2010; by Ord. 928, 7/7/2011; by Ord. 929, 9/1/2011; by Ord.
936, 1/19/2012; by Ord. 958, 8/21/2014; and by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/
2019]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Arch Street Both Market Street and Cherry Alley
Beechwood Lane Both E. High Street and E. Willow Street
Beechwood Lane East E. High Street and Willow Street
Cedar Street South Baugher Avenue and 480 feet west of
Baugher Avenue
E. Hummelstown
Street
South Corner of factory property and 20 feet
east
E. College Avenue Both South Market Street to Cherry Alley
E. College Avenue North S. Chestnut Street and a point 56 feet
westward
E. College Avenue South 96 feet west of the driveway entrance to
the Hoover Center parking lot
§ 401 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:253
Street Side Between
E. High Street Both S. Chestnut Street and 25 feet west of
Chestnut Street
E. High Street North East of Beechwood Lane for a distance of
30 feet from the corner
E. High Street North Walnut Street and Market Street
E. High Street North West of Beechwood Lane for a distance
of 30 feet from crosswalk area
E. High Street South 152 feet west of Mount Joy Street and
100 feet east of Mount Joy Street
E. High Street South School Lane and a point 700 feet
eastward
E. Hummelstown
Street
North N. Hanover Street and Frey Alley
E. Summit Street South N. Market Street and the west side of the
private parking lot entrance/exit located
56 feet east of N. Market Street
E. Washington
Street
South S. Market Street and Cherry Alley
E. Willow Street North Highlawn Avenue and a point 110 feet
westward and Highlawn Avenue and a
point 169 feet eastward
E. Willow Street North 100 feet east of N. Spruce Street and 75
feet west of N. Spruce Street
E. Willow Street South 45 feet east of N. Spruce Street and 98
feet west of N. Spruce Street
Hess Avenue West West High Street to a point 126 feet
north
High Street North From Market Street to a point 202 feet
to Peach Alley and another 64 feet
beginning a Peach Alley to a point
westbound on West High Street
High Street South From Market Street to a point 215 feet
to Cherry Alley and another 15 feet
beginning at Cherry Alley to a point
eastbound on East High Street
Jackson Alley Both W. Bainbridge Street and Jefferson Alley
Market Street East From High Street to a point 75 feet
northbound on North Market Street
Market Street West From High Street to a point 83 feet
southbound on South Market Street
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:254
Street Side Between
Masonic Drive Both W. Bainbridge Street southbound for the
entire length
Mechanics Alley North Entire length
Mechanics Alley South N. Market Street and Cherry Alley
N. Chestnut Street East 50 feet south of Mechanics Alley
N. Chestnut Street East 96 feet north of E. High Street
N. Chestnut Street West E. High Street and Mechanics Alley
N. Hanover Street East 38 feet north of E. Oak Street and 55
feet south of E. Oak Street
N. Hanover Street East Spring Garden Street and 192 feet
N. Hanover Street West E. Hummelstown Street and Mount
Calvary Church
N. Hanover Street West Spring Garden Street and Linden Street
N. Holly Street East 120 feet south of Hillside Avenue
N. Holly Street East Hillside Avenue and the Borough line
(approx. 530 feet)
N. Holly Street West 127 feet north of Hillside Avenue and
120 feet south of Hillside Avenue
N. Market Street East Mechanics Alley and 180 feet north of E.
Hummelstown Street
N. Market Street West W. Summit Street and 100 feet north and
south of Summit Street
N. Mount Joy Street East E. High Street and Mechanics Alley
N. Poplar Street East W. High Street and W. Hummelstown
Street
N. Poplar Street West W. Hummelstown Street and a point 34
feet southward;
Winnemore Alley and a point 47 feet
northward;
Winnemore Alley and a point 12 feet
southward; and
W. High Street and a point 144 feet
northward
Rose Alley North Peach Alley and S. Poplar Street
Rose Alley South Peach Alley and S. Poplar Street
S. Chestnut Street East College Avenue and E. Bainbridge Street
S. Chestnut Street West E. Bainbridge Street and E. High Street
S. Locust Street Both Arch Street and Orange Street
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:255
Street Side Between
S. Market Street East Aspen Alley and 50 feet south of Aspen
Alley
S. Market Street East Aspen Alley and E. Washington Street
S. Market Street East College Ave and 142 feet north of Tulip
Alley
S. Market Street East E. Park Street and 65 feet south of E.
Park Street
S. Market Street East Plum Street and the Borough boundary
line
S. Market Street East Plum Street and Union Street
S. Market Street West 196 feet south of Union Street to a point
269 feet south of Union Street
S. Market Street West Church Alley and W. Washington Street
S. Market Street West College Avenue and Orange Street
S. Market Street West Mill Alley and 110 feet north of
Washington Street
S. Market Street West Plum Street and Orange Street
S. Market Street West Plum Street and the Borough boundary
line
S. Market Street West W. Bainbridge Street to a point 125 feet
northward
S. Mount Joy Street East College Avenue and E. Bainbridge Street
S. Mount Joy Street East E. Bainbridge Street and E. Washington
Street
S. Mount Joy Street East Groff Avenue and Ridge Road
S. Mount Joy Street West 166 feet north of Arch Street and 158
feet south of Arch Street
S. Mount Joy Street West E. Washington Street and E. Bainbridge
Street
S. Mount Joy Street West E. Washington Street and E. Park Street
S. Poplar Street West Union Street and W. High Street
School Lane East E. Park Street and E. High Street
Spruce Street Both College Ave and Willow Street
Spruce Street, South East A point 84 feet northward from Arch
Street and a point 104 feet southward
from Arch Street
Spruce Street, South West A point 124 feet northward from Arch
Street to a point 120 feet southward
from Arch Street
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:256
Street Side Between
Spruce Street, South West Plum Street and Cherry Street
Union Street North S. Market Street to Poplar Street
Union Street South S. Market Street to Peach Alley
Vine Alley South Peach Alley and Poplar Street
W. Bainbridge Street Both S. Market Street and Masonic Drive
W. High Street Both Peach Alley and Market Street
W. High Street North 113 feet and 376 feet east of Hess
Avenue
W. High Street North 107 feet east of N. Poplar Street and 73
feet west of N. Poplar Street
W. High Street North Wilson Avenue and the R.R. right-of-way
W. High Street South Entire length
W. Oak Street North N. Market Street and 271 feet
W. Oak Street South N. Market Street and 117 feet
W. Washington
Street
North Peach Alley and S. Poplar Street
W. Washington
Street
North S. Poplar Street to Peace Alley from the
right-of-way of S. Poplar Street to Peace
Alley
W. Washington
Street
South S. Poplar Street to Peace Alley
Walnut Street East Market Street to Mechanics Alley
Winnemore Street North N. Market Street and N. Poplar Street
§ 404. Parking Prohibited in Specific Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 908, 12/17/2009;
by Ord. 952, 12/19/2013; by Ord. 958, 8/21/2014]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the days
and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Bainbridge Street Both Peach Alley to
Market Street
— All times
College Avenue North S. Mount Joy
Street east to
Borough boundary
line
Mon.-Sun. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:257
Street Side Between Days Hours
E. High Street North Property
boundaries of 571
E. High Street
All days Doctor
patients'
parking only
7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
E. High Street North Hickory Lane and
Walnut Street
Mon.-Fri. 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
E. High Street South The starting point
at the SW corner
of the high school
private entrance/
exit and E. High
Street, directly
across from
Hickory Lane,
from a westward
point 95 feet to a
westward point
176 feet from the
starting point
Mon.-Fri. 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
E. High Street South The starting point
at the SW corner
of the high school
private entrance/
exit and E. High
Street, directly
across from
Hickory Lane,
from a westward
point 320 feet to a
westward point
414 feet from the
starting point
Mon.-Fri. 7:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Municipal
Parking Lot
— As located at the
Community Park
at the corner of S.
Spruce Street and
E. Washington
Street
All days 7:00 a.m. to
10:30 p.m.
Municipal
Parking Lot
(Stone Lot)
— As located in
Poplar Street Park
adjacent to West
High School
All days 7:00 a.m. to
10:30 p.m.
N. Poplar Street West W. High Street to
W. Hummelstown
Street
Mon.-Sun. All times
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:258
Street Side Between Days Hours
Peace Alley West Vine Street and W.
High Street
Mon.-Sun. 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
S. Locust Street Both Arch Street and
Cedar Street
Mon.-Sun. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
under § 409
S. Mount Joy
Street
East Cedar Street and
526 ft. southward
Mon.-Sun. 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
S. Mount Joy
Street
West Cedar Street and
Plum Street
Mon.-Sun. 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
S. Mount Joy
Street
West W. Bainbridge
Street and College
Avenue
Mon.-Sun. 2:00 a.m. to
6:00 a.m.
S. Poplar Street East W. High Street to
Bainbridge Street
— —
School Lane West E. Park Street and
E. High Street
7:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.
§ 405. Parking of Trucks, Buses and Certain Other Vehicles
Prohibited in Certain Locations. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park, or to allow to remain parked,
on any of the following streets or parts of streets, any vehicle other than a
passenger car (which shall not include any bus, motor home or passenger
car attached to a trailer of any kind):
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 406. Parking Time Limited in Certain Locations Certain Days and
Hours. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 911, 1/21/2010;
and by Ord. 927, 1/20/2011]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow it to remain parked, for longer than
the time indicated, in any of the following locations, at any time on the days
and between the hours indicated:
§ 404 FOREWORD § 406
FWD:259
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
E. High
Street
North Spruce Street
and Cherry Alley
Mon.-
Sun.
All times
East High
Street
[Added by
Ord. 978,
11/17/
2016]
South From the west
driveway of East
High Elementary
School
westbound to a
point 612 feet
School
days only
7:00 a.m.
to 4:00
p.m.
—
E. High
Street
Municipal
Lot between
25 and 33 E.
High Street
North Space(s) as
designated by
signage in the
southern portion
of the municipal
lot
All All 10
minutes
E.
Washington
Street
Both — Mon.-Fri. — 30
minutes
Masonic
Drive
East West Bainbridge
Street,
northbound on
Masonic Drive,
from a point 390
feet to a point
452 feet and
another point 508
feet to a point
648 feet
All All 2 hours
Masonic
Drive
West West Bainbridge
Street,
northbound on
Masonic Drive,
from a point 275
feet to a point
388 feet
All All 2 hours
S. Market
Street
Both College to
Borough line
Mon.-
Sun.
All times
S. Market
Street
East U.S. Post Office
entrance to 46
feet north of
entrance
Mon.-
Sun.
At all
times
10
minutes
§ 406 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 406
FWD:260
Street Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
S. Market
Street
West Aspen Alley to
100 feet north of
Washington
Street
Mon.-
Sun.
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
30
minutes
S. Market
Street
West College Avenue
and 108 feet
Mon.-
Sun.
At all
times
30
minutes
Washington
Street
Both Cherry Alley to
Market Street
Mon.-
Sun.
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
W. High
Street
Municipal
Lot between
35 and 45
W. High
Street
North Space(s) as
designated by
signage in the
southern portion
of the municipal
lot
All All 10
minutes
free
parking
§ 407. Parking, Stopping or Standing Prohibited. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001; as amended by Ord. 928, 7/7/2011; and by Ord. 940, 9/20/
2012]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle on the
highway, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a
police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct,
control or regulate traffic or in compliance with a traffic control sign or
signal:
Street Side Between Days Hours
E. High Street North From Market Street, east
on E. High Street, to a
point 290 feet eastbound
All All
E. High Street South From Market Street, east
on E. High Street, to a
point 290 feet eastbound
All All
E. High Street
[Amended by
Ord. 978, 11/
17/2016]
South Beginning at the west
driveway of East High
Elementary and ending at
a point 200 feet
eastbound of the east
driveway to East High
Elementary
All All
§ 406 FOREWORD § 407
FWD:261
§ 408. Authorization to Issue Certain Permits. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001; as amended by Ord. 869, 2/16/2006; by Ord. 890, 9/20/2007,
§ 2; by Ord. 901, 11/20/2008; and by Ord. 908, 12/17/2009]
Street Side Between Days Hours
E. High Street South From School Lane to a
point 385 feet east to the
driveway of the
Elizabethtown Area High
School
All All
W. High Street North From Market Street, west
on W. High Street, to N.
Poplar Street
All All
W. High Street South From Market Street, west
on W. High Street, to S.
Poplar Street
All All
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle on the
highway, except that standing or parking for the purpose of loading or
unloading persons or property shall be permitted on the following
named streets on Monday through Saturday, between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 11:30 a.m. and between the hours of 1:30 p.m. and 4:00 p.m.,
and for no longer than necessary for the loading or unloading:
Street Side Between Days Hours
(Reserved)
1. Parking without a permit shall be prohibited between 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m. daily in certain locations. No person shall park a vehicle or
allow the same to remain parked at any time between the hours of 8:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m. without a permit on any day at any of the following
locations:
Street Side Between
Arch Street Both Mount Joy Street to S. Locust Street
Arch Street Both S. Locust Street and S. Spruce Street
College Avenue Both S. Mount Joy Street and S. Spruce
Street
College Avenue South S. Mount Joy Street to 175 westward
E. Bainbridge Street Both S. Mount Joy Street and S. Chestnut
Street
Orange Street Both S. Locust Street and Spruce Street
Orange Street North S. Mount Joy Street to S. Locust
Street
Orange Street South S. Mount Joy Street to a point
approximately 305 feet westward
§ 407 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 408
FWD:262
Street Side Between
Plum Street Both S. Mount Joy Street and S. Locust
Street
S. Locust Street Both Cedar Street and Plum Street
S. Mount Joy Street West College Avenue to Cedar Street
2. Parking without a permit shall be prohibited between 2:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m. on any day in certain locations. No person shall park a vehicle
or allow the same to remain parked at any time between the hours of
2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. without a permit on any day at any of the
following locations:
Street Side Between
Chestnut Street Both College Avenue to Park Street
College Avenue North S. Mount Joy Street to Chestnut
Street
S. Mount Joy Street Both College Avenue to Park Street
S. Mount Joy Street West Plum Street to Cherry Street
3. The Chief of Police and the Mayor are hereby authorized to issue
permanent and temporary parking permits permitting persons to park
in parking zones listed in Subsection 1 under the following guidelines:
A. Any person living in a residence located in the parking zones set
forth in Subsection 1 if the applicant presents both proof of
residency in the parking zone and also proof of ownership (joint
owners shall be treated as one) of a motor vehicle. The Police Chief
or the Mayor shall grant a permit only in cases where a hardship
exists by reason of the inability of the applicant to be able to park
his or her vehicle at one of the above locations during the
prohibited period.
B. Owners and employees of businesses located in a parking zone may
apply for a permanent parking permit if the applicant presents both
proof of ownership or of employment by a business located in the
zone and proof of ownership (joint owners shall be treated as one)
of a motor vehicle. The Police Chief or the Mayor shall grant a
permit only in cases where a hardship exists by reason of the
inability of the applicant to be able to park his or her vehicle at one
of the above locations during the prohibited period.
C. No more two than permanent parking permits may be granted for
the use of the occupants of any residential structure located in a
parking zone described in Subsection 1 of this section regardless of
the number of dwelling units contained therein or the number of
persons residing therein.
D. Parking permits shall be placed on the vehicle in a visible location.
§ 408 FOREWORD § 408
FWD:263
E. If the Chief of Police or the Mayor refuses to issue a permit, the
applicant may request Borough Council to review the decision. The
decision of the Borough Council upon review shall be final.
F. The Chief of Police or the Mayor may issue up to two temporary
permits for each residential structure located in a parking zone
described in Subsection 1 of this section, regardless of the number
of dwelling units contained therein or the number of persons
residing therein. Such temporary permits are for the use of guests
and shall be subject to revocation if used for any other purpose and
shall have the street address of the residential structure for which
issued written, typewritten or imprinted thereon.
G. The following persons shall be exempt from the restrictions relative
to parking without a permit during the restricted hours:
(1) Owners and operators of emergency vehicles.
(2) Medical doctors on house calls.
(3) Service vehicles clearly labeled as such during the time that
persons from such service vehicles are performing a service at
a residence, business or professional use within the restricted
parking zone.
4. The penalties for violation of the above parking regulations shall be
those set forth in § 412.
5. Additional Permit Parking Restrictions.
A. Parking without a permit shall be prohibited at certain times in
certain locations. No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same
to remain parked at any time between the hours specified without a
permit on any day at any of the following locations:
Street Side
Hours
Prohibited Between
Cedar Street Both Any time S. Mount Joy Street
to College Hill Lane
College
Avenue
South 2:00 a.m. to
4:00 a.m.
Alpha Drive to
Borough boundary
line
College
Avenue
South Any time S. Mount Joy Street
to Alpha Drive
Mount Joy
Street, S.
East 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From 110 feet
southward of Arch
Street to Cedar
Street
§ 408 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 408
FWD:264
§ 409. Continuous Parking, Parking of Commercial and
Nonmotorized Vehicles, Work on Such Vehicles. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
Street Side
Hours
Prohibited Between
Mount Joy
Street, S.
East Any time College Avenue to a
point 110 feet
southward from Arch
Street
Mount Joy
Street, S.
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Pearl Alley to Cedar
Street
Mount Joy
Street, S.
West 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
Sand Alley to Orange
Street
Mount Joy
Street, S.
West Any time Orange Street to
Pearl Alley
Mount Joy
Street, S.
West Any time College Avenue to
Sand Alley
Wilson Avenue,
S.
East Any time 173 feet southward
from W. High Street
to a point 343 feet
southward from W.
High Street
B. Permanent parking stickers issued pertaining to these regulations
shall be affixed to a motor vehicle on the left rear bumper so that it
is visible to law enforcement personnel. If issued, temporary
parking placards must be displayed on the front dashboard or visor
of the motor vehicle.
C. The Borough reserves the right to designate each prohibited
parking zone with a numerical or alphabetical identification. If
authorized, appropriate signs shall be placed on the street to
designate which parking zone is valid on any given street. Parking
in a zone without a valid identification sticker, or placard, for that
zone shall be a violation of this section.
D. The parking restrictions listed in Subsection 5A above may be
enforced by Elizabethtown College security department personnel
as directed by the Chief of Police of Elizabethtown Borough.
1. The parking of any vehicle on any parking lot owned, operated or
managed by the Borough, or on any Borough street, for a continuous
period of time greater than 72 hours is hereby prohibited.
2. No repairing, washing, oiling or other work shall be performed on any
vehicle, commercial vehicle or nonmotorized vehicle at any time on any
§ 408 FOREWORD § 409
FWD:265
§ 410. Privileges and Responsibilities of Using Borough Owned
Parking Lot Facilities. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
street, highway or alley in the Borough of Elizabethtown except in the
case of emergency repairs.
3. No commercial vehicle as defined by this section shall park on any
street, highway or alley of the Borough of Elizabethtown between the
hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time. The term
"commercial vehicle" is defined as any self-propelled or drawn vehicle
which has a gross registered weight in excess of 17,000 pounds or any
self-propelled or drawn vehicle that is used for commercial, nonprofit or
industrial purposes.
4. No recreational vehicle as defined in this section shall park on any
street, highway or alley of the Borough of Elizabethtown between the
hours of 12:01 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time. The term
"recreational vehicle" is defined as a camper, boat and trailer, house
trailer, motor home, recreational trailer or any device used for the
transportation of recreational vehicles.
5. No house trailer, camper trailer, boat trailer, boat, trailer or any other
nonmotorized vehicle shall be allowed to remain parked unattached to a
vehicle for more than two hours on any street, highway or alley in the
Borough of Elizabethtown. Further, no such house trailer, camper
trailer, boat trailer, boat, trailer or any other nonmotorized vehicle,
whether attached or not, shall be parked on any parking lot owned,
operated or managed by the Borough or on any Borough street,
highway or alley for a continuous period of time greater than 72 hours.
6. Each additional 24 hour time period during which any such vehicle
remains parked in violation of this section beyond the 72 hours shall
constitute a separate offense for which the owner shall be liable to
penalties as herein set forth.
7. No vehicle shall be parked on any street, highway or alley in the
Borough of Elizabethtown at any time which does not have current
registration tags and a current inspection sticker.
8. The penalties for any violation of the provisions of this section shall be
as set forth in § 412 of this Part.
1. All persons using any Borough parking lot shall adhere to all Borough
ordinances, rules and regulations. Use of any Borough parking facility
for any reason other than legitimate public or private purposes shall not
be permitted.
2. No parking lot may be used as a temporary or permanent storage site
for vehicles, boats, tractors, trailers, recreational vehicles, buses or any
other privately owned item without the express written consent of the
Borough.
§ 409 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 410
FWD:266
§ 411. Immobilization of Vehicles. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as
amended by Ord. 939, 7/19/2012, § 1]
3. Parking at any Borough parking lot shall be permitted solely for its
intended purpose of providing reasonable accommodations for the use
of commerce, shopping, visiting residents or use of park facilities.
Parking lots are not to be used for vehicle repairs, cleaning or washing
or storage of any unregistered vehicle.
4. The Borough Council may, at its discretion, establish any lot or space(s)
as metered parking. The duration of time allocated and the cost of a
metered parking space shall be determined by Borough Council.
5. The Borough Council may, at its discretion, establish fees for the longterm
reservation of any parking space for either residential or
commercial purposes.
6. Any space specifically designated and marked as a handicapped
parking space shall be used only by persons and vehicles authorized by
the Borough, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or other state.
7. The Borough Police Department is hereby empowered to issue citations
for the violation of any parking restriction mentioned herein. The fines
and penalties for such violations shall comply with applicable sections
of the Borough Code. Vehicles may also be towed, at the owner's
expense, if found in violation of any section of this chapter at the
discretion of the Police Department.
8. Borough owned vehicles, equipment or materials are exempted from
the restrictions herein mentioned.
9. The Borough parking lots located at South Spruce Street and East
Washington Street, known as the Community Parking Lot and at South
Market Street and Vine Alley, known as Lot C, are a part of the Borough
park system and, as such are to be closed during the hours of 10:30
p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
1. Boot Installation.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have
the following meanings:
BOOT, BOOTING or BOOTED — The act of immobilizing a motor
vehicle in such manner as to prevent its operation with a device or
by means which will cause no damage to such vehicle unless it is
moved while such device is in place or such means are employed.
UNSETTLED PARKING VIOLATIONS — Outstanding violations of
parking, standing or stopping regulations of the Borough of
Elizabethtown Code or the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code for which
citation(s) have been filed with a District Justice and a summons
has been issued to which either no response has been made or for
§ 410 FOREWORD § 411
FWD:267
which a warrant has been issued including adjudicated citations
where the fine and costs imposed are unpaid.
B. Boot Installation. Any motor vehicle found parked within the
Borough of Elizabethtown upon any public route at any time may,
by or under the direction of an officer or member of the Police
Department of the Borough, be booted if there are three or more
unsettled parking violations pending against the owner of the
motor vehicle.
C. Notice of Booting. Upon booting of such motor vehicle, the officer
or employee shall cause to be placed on the vehicle, in a
conspicuous manner, notice sufficient to warn any individual that
the vehicle has been immobilized and that any attempt to move the
vehicle might result in damage to the vehicle. The notice shall also
outline the procedure for obtaining removal of the boot. As soon as
practicable, the officer or employee shall provide the owner of the
booted vehicle, at his request, with a list of the prior unsettled
parking violations for which, or on account of which, such vehicle
was booted.
D. Boot Removal; Hearing.
(1) The owner of a booted vehicle, or other authorized person,
shall be permitted to secure release of the vehicle upon:
(a) Deposition of the collateral required for his appearance
before a District Justice to answer for each unsettled
parking violation.
(b) Paying the amount of the fine, penalty and court costs, if
any, for each unsettled parking violation.
(2) The payment of the fees as required by Subsection E.
(3) The owner of a booted vehicle or other authorized person shall
have the right to a post-immobilization hearing limited to the
determination of the validity of the booting. Such hearing must
be requested within 15 days after the vehicle is booted and
shall be conducted by a hearing officer appointed by the
Mayor. The hearing shall be held during normal business hours
within one business day of the demand therefor. The postimmobilization
hearing will not be determinative of or
adjudicate the merits of any citation issued relative to any
immobilized vehicle but will be limited solely to whether the
vehicle was properly subject to booting under the provisions of
this section.
E. Booting Fee. The owner of a booted vehicle shall be subject to a fee
in an amount as established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council for such immobilization.
§ 411 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 411
FWD:268
§ 412. The Ticketing of Vehicles and the Penalty for Violations.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 939, 7/19/2012, § 2]
F. Tampering With Boot Prohibited. Any person who shall tamper
with, remove or attempt to remove any device used to immobilize a
motor vehicle that has been booted pursuant to this section, or who
shall move or attempt to move the vehicle booted before release of
the vehicle has been officially secured, shall be, upon conviction
thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
G. Implementation and Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by
the Police Department of the Borough of Elizabethtown, and the
Chief of Police shall have authority for implementing the parking
enforcement provisions thereof and to promulgate such rules and
regulations as necessary therefor, which regulations shall be
effective upon approval by Council.
H. Right to Hearing Not Waived. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to deprive any person of the constitutional right to a
hearing or trial as to the violation for which citations have been
issued.
1. Parking Penalties.
A. Specific Fines for Certain Violations. Any person, firm, or
corporation violating any of the following described parking
violations shall pay a fine in the amount hereinafter set forth for
such violations and necessary costs of prosecution:
Violation Fee
Meter violation/overtime parking $10
Parking outside stall lines $10
Temporary parking restriction $10
Within 10 feet of driveway $15
Yellow curb $15
Unattached trailer $15
Parking on private property $20
Against traffic or 12 inches from curb $20
Prohibited parking signs posted $20
Within 20 feet of crosswalk/intersection $20
Within 30 feet of stop sign $20
Within 15 feet of fire hydrant $20
Parking on/over sidewalk $20
Parking on roadway within a cul-de-sac $20
§ 411 FOREWORD § 412
FWD:269
Violation Fee
Commercial vehicle parked between 12:01
a.m. and 6:00 a.m.
$20
Continuous parking over 72 hours $25
Parking within fire lane $25
Handicapped parking zone $50
B. Fines for Repeated Violations. Any person who had more than five
parking violations in any period of six consecutive months may be
fined twice the amount prescribed in Subsection 1 for the sixth
violation and three times the amount prescribed for the seventh
and any subsequent violation.
C. Cost for Failure to Pay Fine After Notice. Whenever an alleged
violator of the parking regulation set forth in Subsection 1 has not
paid the prescribed fine within 15 days after a parking ticket has
been issued and the Police Department has sent notice thereof to
such person by first-class mail, such person shall pay additional
amount of $2 or an amount as determined from time to time by
resolution for the cost of processing and mailing such notice.
D. Duty of Partnership, Associations and Corporations. It shall be the
duty of every partnership, association or corporation, who having
been served with a citation or summons charging a violation of this
Part, to appear before the issuing magistrate and to enter a plea to
the charge within time prescribed by law. The violation of this
provision shall be deemed a violation of this Part and shall be
enforceable against, as to partnerships and association, the
partners, members, officers or managers thereof and, as to
corporations, the officers or managers thereof, who shall upon
conviction in a summary proceeding be subject to the fine and
penalty set forth in Subsection 1F.
E. Responsibility of Registered Owner. Whenever any vehicle has
been parked in violation of any provision of this Part prohibiting or
restricting parking, the person in whose name such vehicle is
registered shall be responsible for such violation and subject to the
penalty therefor.
F. Penalty. Any person, partnership, association and corporation who
violates any provisions of this Part or any regulation of the Mayor
and Borough Council issued in conformity with this Part shall be,
upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25.
G. Implementation and Enforcement. This Section shall be enforced
by the Police Department of the Borough of Elizabethtown, and the
Chief of Police shall have authority for implementing the parking
enforcement provisions thereof and to promulgate such rules and
§ 412 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 412
FWD:270
regulations as necessary therefor, which regulations shall be
effective upon approval by Council.
H. Right to Hearing Not Waived. Nothing in this section shall be
construed to deprive any person of the constitutional right to a
hearing or trial as to the violation for which citations have been
issued.
2. Ticketing of Vehicles Parked Unlawfully; Effect Payment Within 72
Hours.
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough of Elizabethtown, acting in accordance
with the direction of the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked
in violation of any provision of related ordinances.
(2) The date and hour of the violation.
(3) The license number of the vehicle.
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation.
B. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
place on or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of
the vehicle that the vehicle was parked in violation of this chapter
and instructing the owner or driver that if he will report to the
office of the Chief of Police and pay the fine, as predescribed,
within 72 hours after the time of the notice, or will place the
parking fine enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the
special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the
Borough of Elizabethtown, within that time limit, that act will save
the violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
prescribed in § 412.1A of this chapter.
C. Unlawful to Tamper with Meter.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to deface, tamper with, open
or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter,
provided that nothing in this section shall apply to the
servicing or opening of parking meters by police officers or
employees of the Borough of Elizabethtown under the direction
of the Borough Secretary, Chief of Police or Borough Council.
D. Penalty for Violation.
(1) Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, with the
exception Subsection 2C (relating to tampering with meters),
§ 412 FOREWORD § 412
FWD:271
and who fails to pay the fine set forth in Subsection 1A, shall be
cited within 30 days of the receipt of the vehicle's ownership
information from PennDOT or from the date of the violation,
whichever is greater and, upon conviction, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $15 or the amount specified in the
appropriate Section, whichever is greater, plus costs.
(2) Any person who violates any provision of Subsection 2C
(relating to tampering with meters) of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not to exceed 30 days.
3. Penalty for Violation.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this part and who fails to
pay the fine set forth in this chapter shall be cited within 30 days of
the receipt of the ownership information from PennDOT or from the
date of the violation, whichever is greater, and upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15 or the amount specified
in the appropriate section, whichever is greater, plus costs.
§ 412 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 412
FWD:272
Part 5
ON-STREET METERED PARKING
§ 501. Parking Meter Zones Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Borough Council will establish parking meter zones upon and along certain
streets in the Borough of Elizabethtown from time to time by resolution.
§ 502. Days And Hours Parking Meters in Operation And Parking
Time Limits Apply. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by Ord. 846,
6/17/2004, § 2]
Parking meters shall be operated, by the deposit of a coin in the meter, as
prescribed by § 505, and the parking rates for specified lengths of time,
as well as the maximum parking times prescribed in § 501, shall apply at
all times between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through
Saturday, in the parking meter zones listed in § 501; provided, however: the
requirements of this chapter as to parking time limit and as to deposit of
coins in meters shall not apply on Borough holidays.
§ 503. Placement And Characteristics of Parking Meters. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established by § 501
of this chapter shall be placed upon the curb or sidewalk, and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces described in § 504 of this chapter.
Each parking meter shall be placed or set so as to show that the parking
space adjacent to that meter is or is not legally occupied. Each parking
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Borough of Elizabethtown, and when the adjacent space
is occupied by a vehicle, the parking meter shall indicate on and by its
dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking, and, on the
expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or overparking.
§ 504. Parked Vehicles to be Wholly Within Marked Spaces. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
or roadway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of delineating
the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every vehicle parked
at any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or markings
so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be unlawful and a violation
of this chapter for any person to park a vehicle across any such line or
marking, or to park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle is not wholly
within the area designated by those lines or markings.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 505
FWD:273
§ 505. Coin Deposit in Meter; Overtime Parking Unlawful. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to a parking meter,
at any time in the period of limited parking as prescribed by § 502 of this
chapter, the driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall
immediately deposit, or cause to be deposited, in that parking meter, one or
more proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle shall remain in
any such parking space for such length of time that the meter shall indicate
by proper signal that the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall
be considered as having been parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle
overtime shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 506. Unlawful to Deposit Substitute For Coin in Meter. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this chapter any slug or other substitute for a coin
of the United States of America.
§ 507. Unlawful to Deposit Coin in Meter to Extend Parking Time
Beyond Legal Limit. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person to deposit
or cause to be deposited, in any parking meter installed under the
provisions of this chapter, any coin for the purpose of increasing or
extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the legal parking time of
15 minutes in any fifteen-minute parking meter zone, 1/2 hour in any onehalf-
hour parking meter zone, one hour in any one-hour parking meter zone,
or two hours in any two-hour parking meter zone.
§ 508. Unlawful to Remain Parked at Meter Showing Violation.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this chapter, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
§ 509. Unlawful to Tamper With Meter. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter; provided,
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough of
§ 505 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 509
FWD:274
Elizabethtown under the direction of the Borough Secretary or Borough
Council.
§ 510. Ticketing of Vehicles Parked Unlawfully; Effect of Payment of
The Fine Within 48 Hours. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 511. Penalty For Violation. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 512. Exceptions. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough of Elizabethtown, acting in accordance with
the directions of the Chief of Police, to report:
A. The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. The date and hour of the violation.
C. The license number of the vehicle.
D. Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
2. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this chapter, and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough of Elizabethtown, the sum of
the fine within 48 hours after the time of the notice, or will place the
sum of the fine enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the
special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the
Borough of Elizabethtown within that time limit, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in
§ 511, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, with the
exception of § 509, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 510, shall
be cited within 30 days of the police obtaining official notification of
owner information and upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $50 and costs.
2. Any person who violates any provision of § 509 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for not to exceed 30 days.
1. By resolution, the Borough Council may temporarily suspend the
provisions of this chapter by requiring coin deposit in meters and
establishing a maximum parking time at meters.
§ 509 FOREWORD § 512
FWD:275
2. The Borough of Elizabethtown shall have authority to establish noparking
or special-purpose parking zones within any parking meter
zone, and to remove parking meters from those areas as previously
installed there, and the provisions of this chapter shall not apply in
those areas where no-parking or special-purpose parking is in effect.
§ 512 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 512
FWD:276
Part 6
OFF-STREET METERED PARKING
§ 601. Metered Parking Lots Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Borough Council will establish the meter fee and location of metered
parking lots within the Borough limits, from time to time by resolution.
§ 602. Placement And Characteristics of Parking Meters. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
Parking meters installed in the parking lots shall be placed immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces that shall be marked off and
maintained in the lots. For each parking meter there shall be a clear
indication, through use of a directional arrow, or an identification as to
number with the parking space, to show which individual parking space it
serves. Each parking meter shall indicate by a proper legend the parking
rate and the maximum parking time established by § 601 of this chapter,
and, when the parking space is occupied and the parking meter put into
operation by the insertion of one or more coins, the parking meter shall
indicate on and by its dial and pointer the duration of legal parking, and,
upon the expiration of that period, shall indicate illegal parking or
overparking.
§ 603. Reserved Parking Spaces For Handicapped May be Provided.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in any one or more of the metered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person
to park in any such reserved parking space, any vehicle unless that vehicle
bears or displays either: a "handicapped registration plate," a "handicapped
parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate," or a "disabled
veteran placard".
§ 604. Parked Vehicles to be Wholly Within Marked Spaces. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the surface of the
metered parking lots, adjacent to each parking meter, for the purpose of
delineating the parking space for which that meter shall be used. Every
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to that meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person:
A. To park a vehicle across any such line or marking.
B. To park a vehicle in such a position that the vehicle shall not be within
the area so delineated by the lines or markings.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 604
FWD:277
§ 605. Manner of Parking at Meters. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle in any metered parking
lot:
§ 606. Coin Deposit in Meter; Overtime Parking Unlawful. [Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Whenever a vehicle is to be parked in any metered parking lot, at any time
when the lot is open for use and the meters are to be in operation, the
driver of the vehicle, upon entering the parking space, shall immediately
deposit, or cause to be deposited, in the proper parking meter, one or more
proper coins of the United States of America as specified in the legend
on the parking meter. Upon the deposit of the coin or coins, and placing
the meter in operation, the parking space may be lawfully occupied by the
vehicle for the time indicated on the meter. If any vehicle remains in any
such parking space for such length of time that the meter indicates that
the lawful parking time has expired, that vehicle shall be considered as
being parked overtime, and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a
violation of this chapter; provided, every hour that a vehicle remains parked
at a meter showing a violation shall constitute a separate violation of this
chapter.
§ 607. Unlawful to Deposit Substitute For Coin in Meter. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit in any parking meter installed
under the provisions of this chapter any slug or other substitute for a coin
of the United States of America.
§ 608. Unlawful to Remain Parked at a Meter Showing Violation.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in a parking space adjacent to a parking meter installed
under this chapter, when that meter displays a signal indicating that the
vehicle has already been parked there beyond the period of time prescribed
for that parking space, or the time for which a coin or coins was deposited
in that meter for the parking of that vehicle.
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere in any such lot than in an individual parking
space adjacent to a parking meter.
A. Otherwise than with the front of the parked vehicle nearest to the
parking meter applicable to that vehicle.
B. With any part of the vehicle touching the meter post or head or the
raised base or barrier on which meters are erected.
§ 604 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 609
FWD:278
§ 609. Unlawful to Tamper With Meter. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this chapter, for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of
any parking meter installed under the provisions of this chapter; provided
nothing in this section shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking
meters by officers, employees or police officers of the Borough of
Elizabethtown under the direction of the Borough Secretary or Borough
Council.
§ 610. Metered Parking Lots For Certain Types of Vehicles Only.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The metered parking lots established by this Part shall be for the use of
passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to park any other type of vehicle in any of those
lots.
§ 611. Ticketing of Vehicles Parked Unlawfully; Effect Payment
Within 72 Hours. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 612. Penalty For Violation. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. It shall be the duty of the police officers and parking enforcement
personnel of the Borough of Elizabethtown, acting in accordance with
the direction of the Chief of Police, to report:
A. The number of each parking meter that indicates that a vehicle
occupying the adjacent parking space is, or has been, parked in
violation of any provision of this chapter.
B. The date and hour of the violation.
C. The license number of the vehicle.
D. Any other facts, the knowledge of which is necessary for a thorough
understanding of the circumstances attending the violation.
2. The police officer or other person making the report shall also place on
or attach to the vehicle a notice to the owner or driver of the vehicle
that the vehicle was parked in violation of this chapter, and instructing
the owner or driver that if he will report to the office of the Chief of
Police and pay, for the use of the Borough of Elizabethtown, within 72
hours after the time of the notice, or will place the amount provided on
the vehicle notice enclosed within the envelope provided, in any of the
special parking fine boxes installed at various locations within the
Borough of Elizabethtown, within that time limit, that act will save the
violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine prescribed in
§ 612, Subsection 1, of this chapter.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, with the
exception of § 609, and who fails to pay the fine set forth in § 611, shall
§ 609 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:279
§ 613. Days And Hours Parking Meters in Operation And Parking
Time Limits Apply. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as added by Ord. 846, 6/
17/2004, § 1]
Parking meters in off-street metered parking lots shall be operated, by
the deposit of a coin in the meter, as prescribed herein, and the parking
rates for specified lengths of time, as well as the maximum parking times
prescribed in § 701, shall apply at all times between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday, in all municipally owned offstreet
parking lots; provided, however, the requirements of this chapter as
to parking time limit and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply
on Borough holidays; and provided further, however, that the municipally
owned and metered parking lot located off of West High Street, at the
corner of Rose Alley and Peach Alley, shall have parking meters operated
by the deposit of a coin in the meter, as prescribed herein, which shall
apply between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 12:00 midnight, Monday through
Saturday, Borough holidays excepted.
be cited within 30 days of the police obtaining official notification of
owner information and upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $50 and costs.
2. Any person who violates any provision of § 609 of this chapter shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600 plus
costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to imprisonment
for not to exceed 30 days.
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 613
FWD:280
Part 7
OFF-STREET UNMETERED PARKING
§ 701. Unmetered Parking Lots Established. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Unmetered parking lots operated by the Borough of Elizabethtown may be
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 702. Reserved Parking Spaces For Handicapped May Be Provided.
[Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Borough Council, at its discretion, may provide, at convenient and suitable
locations in one or both of the unmetered parking lots, reserved parking
spaces for handicapped, and shall designate those spaces by appropriate
signs. It shall be unlawful, and a violation of this Part, for any person to park
in any such reserved parking space, any vehicle unless that vehicle bears or
displays either: a "handicapped registration plate," a "handicapped parking
placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate," or a "disabled veteran
placard"; provided, all provisions, requirements and restrictions contained
in the other sections of this chapter shall apply to vehicles lawfully parked
in reserved parking spaces for handicapped.
§ 703. Unlawful to Park Overtime or When Lot Closed. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle, or to allow a vehicle to
remain parked in any unmetered parking lot:
§ 704. Unmetered Lots For Certain Types of Vehicles. [Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
The unmetered parking lots established by § 701 of this chapter shall be for
the use of passenger cars, passenger vans and pickup trucks only, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park any other kind or class of vehicle in
any such lot.
§ 705. Manner of Parking. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Every vehicle parked in an unmetered parking lot shall be parked wholly
within the lines bounding or marking the individual parking space assigned
to that vehicle, and shall be parked headed into the parking space. It shall
be unlawful for any person:
A. For longer than the maximum parking time prescribed by § 701 of this
chapter; or
B. At any time when the lot is not in operation and is closed to public use.
A. To park a vehicle in a space not rented by him.
B. To park a vehicle otherwise than as required by this section.
§ 701 FOREWORD § 705
FWD:281
§ 706. Parking on Rental Basis Only. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The parking spaces in the unmetered parking lots shall be available for
parking on a monthly rental basis only. The rental fee shall be fixed by
Borough Council from time to time and shall be for a calendar month or
the part of a calendar month remaining after the rental arrangements are
made. The rental fee shall be paid in advance to the Borough Secretary,
for the use of the Borough of Elizabethtown, and after the first month
shall be automatically renewable until the renter notifies the Borough of
Elizabethtown that he wishes to terminate the rental arrangements. At any
time, however, the Borough of Elizabethtown may, by amending § 701 of
this chapter, discontinue provision of a specific unmetered parking lot or a
portion of the parking spaces in any such lot, or may change any unmetered
parking lot, or part of an unmetered parking lot, to a metered parking lot
or to metered parking spaces. The rental parking spaces shall be assigned
by the Borough Secretary. The name of the renter of a parking space and/
or the numbers and/or letters on the registration tag of the vehicle entitled
to be parked there shall be posted by the Borough of Elizabethtown at the
rental space or shall be painted on the surface of that parking space.
§ 707. Penalty For Violation. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
C. To park a vehicle elsewhere than in an individual parking space, the
prohibited areas including, but not limited to, the access and exit
driveways and turning and maneuvering spaces.
1. Any person who violates any provision of this Part and who fails to pay
the fine set forth in this Part, shall be cited within 30 days of the receipt
of the information from PennDOT of the violation and upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $15 or the amount specified
in the appropriate section, whichever is greater, plus costs.
§ 705 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 707
FWD:282
Part 8
REMOVAL AND IMPOUNDMENT OF ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLES
§ 801. Applicability. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), the Borough of Elizabethtown has authority to
remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow away zone
and in violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have
been abandoned, as defined by the Vehicle Code, or which are parked in a
manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others, may also be
towed under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 802. Authority to Remove And Impound. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally; provided, that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 807 herein. No such vehicle shall be removed or
impounded except in strict adherence to the provisions of this Part or, where
applicable, the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 803. Tow Away Zones Designated. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The Borough streets, portions of streets or parking lots that are designated
as tow away zones shall be properly posted with signs to place the public on
notice that their vehicles may be towed for violation of the Borough parking
regulations.
§ 804. Designation of Approved Storage Garages; Towing And
Storage. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this Part shall be done only
by "approved storage garages" that shall be designated from time to time
by Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in
custody of the garage keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approved storage garage shall submit to Borough Council its schedule of
charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this Part, and, when the
schedule is approved by Borough Council, those charges shall be adhered
to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of charges shall
be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no different schedule of
charges shall be demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is
removed or impounded under this chapter by any approved storage garage.
Borough Council shall delete from its list of approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this Part.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 805
FWD:283
§ 805. Payment of Towing And Storage Charges. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of
the provision of this Part for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 806. Reclamation Costs. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
In order to reclaim a vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage costs,
plus a fee in the amount as established from time to time by resolution
of Borough Council of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 807. Records of Vehicles Removed And Impounded. [Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this Part and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with the information as to the
place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 808. Restrictions Upon Removal of Vehicles. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Part if, at the time
of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 809. Reports And Disposition of Unclaimed Vehicles. [Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation in
accordance with § 7311 of the Vehicle Code, by the person having legal
custody of the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days,
the vehicle may be transferred to a licensed salvor who will be then be
responsible for filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in
accordance with the provisions of Chapter 73 of the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code (75 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended).
§ 810. Penalty. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person or persons or business entity who shall violate any provision of
this Part shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $25 and no more than $300 together with all costs of disposing
of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, as may be hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 805 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 810
FWD:284
Part 9
SNOW AND ICE EMERGENCY
§ 901. Declaration of Snow and Ice Emergency. [Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 903 of this
Part, the Borough Secretary, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice
emergency (designated in this Part as a "snow emergency"). Information
on the existence of a snow emergency may be given by the Borough of
Elizabethtown through radio, newspaper or other available media, and
information on the termination of the emergency may be given by use of the
same media.
§ 902. Parking Prohibited, Driving Motor Vehicles Restricted on
Snow Emergency Routes During Emergency. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001;
as amended by Ord. 920, 5/20/2010, § 1]
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful, at any time
during the continuance of the emergency, for any person:
§ 903. Snow Emergency Routes Designated. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001;
as amended by Ord. 841, 11/20/2003, § 1]
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
College Avenue Market Street to Spruce Street
High Street Entire length
Market Street Entire length
Spruce Street College Avenue to Willow Street
Willow Street Spruce Street to Market Street
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 903 of this
Part; or
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with all-season radial tires, snow tires, chains
or other traction enhancement devices; and
C. The Elizabethtown Borough Police Department is hereby authorized to
remove any vehicle and/or trailer which is parked along the snow
emergency route designated in § 903 of this Part during a declared
show emergency and to transport the same to an impound facility
designated by the Borough. Towing, storage, and impound fees shall be
charged to the owner of the vehicle and/or trailer impounded.
§ 901 FOREWORD § 904
FWD:285
§ 904. Penalty for Violation. [Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by
Ord. 920, 5/20/2010, § 2]
1. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 901
of this Part, a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with all-season
radial tires, snow tires, chains or other traction enhancement devices,
that person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor
more than $150, plus costs.
2. If, at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under § 901
of this Part, a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a motor vehicle
to remained parked anywhere upon a snow emergency route, that
person shall be guilty of a violation of this Part and, upon conviction,
shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than
$150, plus costs.
3. In any proceeding for a violation of this Part, proof that the motor
vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of this Part,
together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at
the time of such violation the registered owner of said motor vehicle,
shall constitute a presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle
was the person who parked such vehicle at the point where, and for the
time during which, such violation occurred.
§ 904 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 904
FWD:286
Chapter 16
PARKS AND RECREATION
§ 904 FOREWORD § 904
FWD:287

Part 1
PARK REGULATIONS
§ 101. Hours of Operation. [Ord. 779, 7/17/1997, § 2; as amended by
Ord. 955, 3/20/2014]
Parks, playgrounds, and recreation areas of the Borough shall be open
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 10:30 p.m., prevailing time, unless
otherwise posted or unless written permission is granted by the Borough.
§ 102. Prohibited Acts. [Ord. 779, 7/17/1997, § 3; as amended by
Ord. 922, 9/16/2010; by Ord. 955, 3/20/2014]
The following acts, uses, and conduct in parks, playgrounds, recreation
areas, and municipal parking lots of the Borough are prohibited:
A. Possession or use of alcoholic beverages and/or illegal drugs.
B. Possession of or allowing animals onto the parks, playgrounds or
recreation areas, except for service animals or other special exceptions
approved by the Borough in writing in advance.
C. The construction or use of fire except in a barbecue grill or other
equipment designed for that purpose.
D. Vehicle parking is permitted only in areas designated for that purpose.
E. Motorized recreational vehicles, including motorcycles, minibikes, and
snowmobiles, except for those motorized vehicles permitted to be used
by authorized Borough employees and municipal police officers for
safety and/or maintenance in the parks. Permitted motorized vehicles
must yield to pedestrians.
F. Nonmotorized vehicles, including bikes and scooters, are allowed if
used in a safe, responsible manner. Nonmotorized vehicles must obey
traffic signs/directions of traffic or police officers and must be used on
trails marked/designated for that purpose.
G. Skateboards and in-line/roller skates anywhere except on macadam
paths. Persons skateboarding or in-line skating or roller-skating must
yield to pedestrians.
H. No persons shall use profane language or conduct themselves in any
lewd, immoral or commonly objectionable manner within the parks.
I. Water guns or similar devices within the Fun Fort playground area: The
flow of a water gun or similar device shall not be directed at another
person or animal.
J. Setting up any booth, table or stand, mobile or otherwise, for the sale of
any articles, whatsoever, without the written permission of the
Borough.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 102
FWD:289
§ 103. Penalties. [Ord. 779, 7/17/1997, § 4; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not less than
$25 nor more $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
K. The public shall not post or erect any bills, notices, or advertising within
the parks.
L. Driving golf balls or practicing golf.
M. Vandalism, including damage to trees, plants, turf, buildings,
structures, fixtures, or Borough property within the parks. Gathering or
removing wood, turf, soil, rock, sand, gravel, or other materials stored
at the parks is prohibited without written Borough permission.
N. Discharge of firearms is prohibited except for a justifiable use as per
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code. Bows and arrows, slingshots, air rifles
or other devices capable of throwing projectiles, and hand-throwing
rocks and/or stones intended for use as weapons are prohibited. This
Section shall not be operative in any specific area now designated or to
be designed in the future by the Borough as a rifle range, archery
range, or any other specific area whose purpose is to allow the activities
otherwise prohibited by this Section.
§ 102 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:290
Chapter 17
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
§ 103 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:291

Part 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of
Elizabethtown Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 102. Statement of Findings. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Elizabethtown Borough Council finds that:
§ 103. Purpose. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety and welfare by
minimizing the harms and maximizing the benefits described in § 102 of this
chapter through provisions designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood-control efforts in
downstream communities, reduces groundwater recharge, threatens
public health and safety and increases non-point-source pollution of
water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of SWM, including reasonable regulation of
development and activities causing accelerated runoff, is fundamental
to the public health, safety, welfare and the protection of the people of
the Borough of Elizabethtown and all the people of the commonwealth,
their resources, and the environment.
C. Stormwater is an important water resource, which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
D. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
municipal separate storm sewer systems (MS4s) under the National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES).
E. Riparian forest buffers enhance water quality by filtering pollutants in
runoff, providing light control and temperature moderation, processing
pollutants, increasing infiltration and providing channel and shoreline
stability, thus decreasing erosion.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:293
§ 104. Statutory Authority. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of this
commonwealth.
B. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as practicable.
C. Manage stormwater runoff close to the source.
D. Provide procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
E. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
F. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and stream beds.
G. Provide proper operation and maintenance of all stormwater
management best management practices (SWM BMPs) that are
implemented within the Borough of Elizabethtown.
H. Provide standards to meet NPDES permit requirements.
I. Promote stormwater runoff prevention through the use of nonstructural
best management practices (BMPs).
J. Provide a regulatory environment that supports the proportion, density
and intensity of development called for in the Comprehensive Plan;
allow for creative methods of improving water quality and managing
stormwater runoff; and promote a regional approach to water resource
management.
K. Help preserve and protect exceptional natural resources and conserve
and restore natural resource systems.
L. Promote stormwater management practices that emphasize infiltration,
evaporation and transpiration.
1. Primary Authority. The Borough of Elizabethtown is empowered to
regulate these activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978,
P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Storm Water
Management Act," and Act 394 of 1937, as amended, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et
seq., the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law. The Borough of
Elizabethtown also is empowered to regulate land use activities that
affect stormwater impacts by the authority of the Act of February 1,
1966, P.L. (1965) 1656, No. 581, as reenacted and amended by the Act
of May 17, 2012, P.L. 262, No. 43, as amended, the Borough Code.26
2. Secondary Authority. The Borough of Elizabethtown also is empowered
to regulate land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:294
§ 105. Applicability. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The provisions, regulations, limitations and restrictions of this chapter shall
apply to regulated activities, as defined in this chapter.
§ 106. Repealer and Continuation of Prior Regulations. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
§ 107. Severability. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Should any section, provision or part thereof of this chapter be declared
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended.27
1. Except as otherwise required by law, this chapter is intended as a
continuation of, and not a repeal of, existing regulations governing the
subject matter. To the extent that this chapter restates regulations
contained in ordinances previously enacted by the Elizabethtown
Borough Council, this chapter shall be considered a restatement and
not a repeal of such regulations. It is the specific intent of the
Elizabethtown Borough Council that all provisions of this chapter shall
be considered in full force and effect as of the date such regulations
were initially enacted. All ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter are hereby repealed. It
is expressly provided that the provisions of this chapter shall not affect
any act done, contract executed or liability incurred prior to its effective
date, or affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to
enforce any rights, rule, regulation or ordinance, or part thereof, or to
punish any violation which occurred under any prior stormwater
regulation or ordinance. In the event any violation has occurred under
any prior stormwater regulation or ordinance of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, prosecution may be initiated against the alleged
offender pursuant to the provisions of said prior stormwater regulation
or ordinance, and the provisions and penalties provided in said prior
stormwater regulation or ordinance shall remain effective as to said
violation.
2. Any plan (hereinafter defined) pending at the time of the effective date
of this chapter shall be allowed to proceed with revisions, finalization
and implementation in accordance with any ordinance in effect prior
hereto.
27.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 108
FWD:295
§ 108. Compatibility with Other Requirements. [Ord. 954, 12/19/
2013]
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
§ 109. Erroneous Permits. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Any permit or authorization issued or approved, based on false, misleading
or erroneous information provided by an applicant, is void without the
necessity of any proceedings for revocation. Any work undertaken or use
established pursuant to such permit or other authorization is unlawful. No
action may be taken by a board, agency or employee of the Borough of
Elizabethtown purporting to validate such a violation.
§ 110. Municipal Liability. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Except as specifically provided by the Pennsylvania Storm Water
Management Act, Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, No. 167, as amended,
32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the making of any administrative decision by the
Borough of Elizabethtown or any of its officials or employees shall not
constitute a representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind by the
Borough of Elizabethtown of the practicability or safety of any proposed
structure or use with respect to damage from erosion, sedimentation,
stormwater runoff, flood, or any other matter and shall create no liability
upon or give rise to any cause of action against the Borough of
Elizabethtown and its officials and employees. The Borough of
Elizabethtown, by enacting and amending this chapter, does not waive or
limit any immunity granted to the Borough of Elizabethtown and its officials
and employees by the Governmental Immunity Act, 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 8541 et
seq., and does not assume any liabilities or obligations.
§ 111. Duty of Persons Engaged in the Development of Land. [Ord.
954, 12/19/2013]
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property
and water quality.
§ 108 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 111
FWD:296
Part 2
DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
§ 201. Interpretation and Word Usage. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The language set forth in the text of this chapter shall be interpreted in
accordance with the following rules of construction:
§ 202. Definitions of Terms. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
A. Words used or defined in one tense or form shall include other tenses or
derivative forms.
B. Words in the singular number shall include the plural number, and
words in the plural number shall include the singular number.
C. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. The
feminine gender shall include the masculine and neuter. The neuter
gender shall include the masculine and feminine.
D. The word "person" includes individuals, firms, partnerships, joint
ventures, trusts, trustees, estates, corporations, associations and any
other similar entities.
E. The word "lot" includes the words "plot," "tract" and "parcel."
F. The words "shall," "must" and "will" are mandatory in nature and
establish an obligation or duty to comply with the particular provision.
The words "may" and "should" are permissive.
G. The time within which any act required by this chapter is to be
performed shall be computed by excluding the first day and including
the last day. However, if the last day is a Saturday or Sunday or a
holiday declared by the United States Congress or the Pennsylvania
General Assembly, it shall also be excluded. The word "day" shall mean
a calendar day, unless otherwise indicated.
H. Any words not defined in this chapter or in Section 107 of the MPC28
shall be construed as defined in standard dictionary usage.
I. References to officially adopted regulations, standards or publications
of the DEP or other governmental agencies shall include the regulation,
publication or standard in effect on the date when an SWM site plan is
first filed. It is the intent of the Elizabethtown Borough Council in
enacting this section to incorporate such changes to statutes,
regulations and publications to the extent authorized by 1 Pa. C.S.A.
§ 1937.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10107.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:297
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
ACCESS EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing entry for the purpose of inspecting, maintaining and repairing
SWM facilities.
ACT 167 PLAN — A plan prepared under the authority of the Stormwater
Management Act.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITY — Activities associated with agriculture, such as
agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation and animal heavy-use areas.
This includes the work of producing crops and raising livestock, including
tillage, land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting
crops or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
practices. Construction of new buildings or impervious areas is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; earth disturbance activity.
ANIMAL HEAVY-USE AREAS — A barnyard, feedlot, loafing area, exercise
lot or other similar area on an agricultural operation where, due to the
concentration of animals, it is not possible to establish and maintain
vegetative cover of a density capable of minimizing accelerated erosion
and sedimentation by usual planting methods. The term does not include
entrances, pathways and walkways between areas where animals are
housed or kept in concentration.
APPLICANT — A landowner and/or developer, as hereinafter defined,
including his heirs, successors and assigns, who has filed an application
to the Borough of Elizabethtown for approval to engage in any regulated
activity at a development site located within the Borough.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Activities, facilities, control
measures, planning or procedures used to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation and manage stormwater to protect, maintain, reclaim and
restore the quality of waters and the existing and designated uses of waters
within this commonwealth before, during and after earth disturbance
activities.1 See also "nonstructural BMPs" and "structural BMPs."
BMP MANUAL — The Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management
Practices Manual of December 2006.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough.
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall
or fence, occupying more than four square feet of area and/or having a roof
supported by columns, piers or walls.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:298
CARBONATE GEOLOGY — Limestone or dolomite bedrock. Carbonate
geology is often associated with karst topography.
CERTIFICATE OF COMPLETION — Documentation verifying that all
permanent SWM facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
CHAPTER 102 — 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
CHAPTER 105 — 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105, Dam Safety and Waterway
Management.
CHAPTER 106 — 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 106, Floodplain Management.
CISTERN — A reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLEAN WATER ACT — The 1972 amendments to the Federal Water
Pollution Control Act, P.L. 92-500 of 1972, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Lancaster County Conservation District
or any agency successor thereto which shall administer and enforce
Chapter 102.
CONSERVATION PLAN — A plan written by an NRCS-certified planner
that identifies conservation practices and includes site-specific BMPs for
agricultural plowing or tilling activities and animal heavy-use areas.
CONSERVATION PRACTICES — Practices installed on agricultural lands to
improve farmland, soil and/or water quality, which have been identified in a
conservation plan.
CONVEYANCE — (n) Any structure that carries a flow. (v) The ability of a
pipe, culvert, swale or similar facility to carry the peak flow from the design
storm.
CULVERT — A structure, with appurtenant works, which can convey a
stream under or through an embankment or fill.
DCNR — The Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural
Resources.
DEP also PA DEP or PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection or any agency successor thereto.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of SWM systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person who undertakes any regulated activity of this
chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific area of land where regulated
activities in the Borough are planned, conducted or maintained.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:299
DISAPPEARING STREAM — A stream in an area underlain by limestone or
dolomite that flows underground for a portion of its length.
DISCONNECTED IMPERVIOUS AREA (DIA) — An impervious or
impermeable surface that is disconnected from any stormwater drainage or
conveyance system and is redirected or directed to a pervious area, which
allows for infiltration, filtration and increased time of concentration. For use
in small project plans only.
DISTURBED AREA — A land area where an earth disturbance activity is
occurring or has occurred.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — Rights to occupy and use another person's real
property for the installation and operation of stormwater management
facilities, or for the maintenance of natural drainage ways to preserve and
maintain a channel for the flow of stormwater therein, or to safeguard
health, safety, property and facilities.
E&S — Erosion and sediment.
E&S MANUAL — The DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control Manual,
No. 363-2134-008.
E&S PLAN (also EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN) — A sitespecific
plan consisting of both drawings and a narrative that identifies
BMPs to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation before, during
and after earth disturbance activities.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to: clearing
and grubbing; grading; excavations; embankments; land development;
agricultural plowing or tilling; operation of animal heavy-use areas; timber
harvesting activities; road maintenance activities; oil and gas activities;
well drilling; mineral extraction; building construction; and the moving,
depositing, stockpiling or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.1
ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREA — Slopes greater than 15%,
shallow bedrock (located within six feet of ground surface2), wetlands,
natural heritage areas and other areas designated as "conservation" or
"preservation" in Greenscapes, the Green Infrastructure Element of the
County Comprehensive Plan, where encroachment by land development or
land disturbance results in degradation of the natural resource.
EROSION — The natural process by which the surface of the land is worn
away by water, wind, or chemical action. See also "accelerated erosion," as
defined above.
EXEMPTION — Released from meeting ordinance requirements when
project conditions meet the criteria listed in § 401, Subsection 1.
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The dominant land cover during the five-year
period immediately preceding a proposed regulated activity.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency or any agency
successor thereto.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:300
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers
and other waters of this commonwealth.
FLOOD FRINGE — The portion of the floodplain outside of the floodway.3
FLOODPLAIN — — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration, Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area; also, the area of
inundation that functions as a storage or holding area for floodwater to
a width required to contain a base flood of which there is a one-percent
chance of occurrence in any given year. The floodplain contains both the
floodway and the flood fringe.
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 851,
No. 166, as amended, 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year (1%) frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies have
defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year (1%) frequency floodway, it is
assumed - absent evidence to the contrary - that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.4
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and activities
necessary for the management of forest land. These include conducting a
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans, silvicultural
treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and construction, timber
harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREQUENCY — The probability or chance that a given storm event/flood
will be equaled or exceeded in a given year.
GRADE — (n) A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground, specified
in percent and shown on plans as specified herein. (v) To finish the surface
of a roadbed, top of embankment or bottom of excavation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — The process by which water from above the
ground surface is added to the saturated zone of an aquifer, either directly
or indirectly.
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Refers to soils grouped according
to their runoff-producing characteristics by NRCS. There are four runoff
potential groups ranging from A to D.
(Low runoff potential) Soils having high infiltration rates even when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of deep, well to excessively
drained sands or gravels. These soils have a high rate of water
transmission (greater than 0.30 inch per hour).
A.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:301
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — Surfaces which prevent
the infiltration of water into the ground. All structures, buildings, parking
areas, driveways, roads, streets, sidewalks, decks and any areas of
concrete, asphalt, packed stone and compacted soil shall be considered
impervious surface if they prevent infiltration. In addition, other areas
determined by the Borough to be impervious within the meaning of this
definition will also be classified as impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention facility designed to retain
stormwater runoff and infiltrate it into the ground (in the case of a retention
basin) or release it at a controlled rate (in the case of a detention basin).
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trenches, rain
gardens, vegetated swales, pervious paving, infiltration basins, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; the upstream end of any
structure through which water may flow.
INTERMITTENT — A natural, transient body or conveyance of water that
exists for a relatively long time, but for weeks or months of the year is
below the local water table and obtains its flow from both surface runoff and
groundwater discharges.
INVASIVE VEGETATION (INVASIVES) — Plants which grow quickly and
aggressively, spreading and displacing other plants. Invasives typically are
introduced into a region far from their native habitat. See Invasive Plants in
Pennsylvania by the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources at
www.dcnr.state.pa.us/forestry/plants/invasiveplants/index.htm.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by features
including, but not limited to, surface depressions, sinkholes, rock pinnacles/
uneven bedrock surface, underground drainage and caves. Karst is formed
on carbonate rocks, such as limestone or dolomite.
Soils having moderate infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of moderately deep to deep, moderately well to well
drained soils with moderately fine to moderately coarse textures. These
soils have a moderate rate of water transmission (from 0.15 to 0.30 inch
per hour).
B.
Soils having slow infiltration rates when thoroughly wetted and
consisting chiefly of soils with a layer that impedes downward
movement of water, or soils with moderately fine to fine texture. These
soils have a slow rate of water transmission (from 0.05 to 0.15 inch per
hour).
C.
(High runoff potential) Soils having very slow infiltration rates when
thoroughly wetted and consisting chiefly of clay soils with a high
swelling potential, soils with a permanent high water table, soils with
a clay pan or clay layer at or near the surface, and shallow soils over
nearly impervious material. These soils have a very slow rate of water
transmission (from zero to 0.05 inch per hour).
D.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:302
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LIMITING ZONE — A rock formation, other stratum or soil condition which
is so slowly permeable that it effectively limits downward passage of
effluent.12 Seasonal high-water tables, whether perched or regional, also
constitute a limiting zone.
LINEAMENT — A linear feature in a landscape which is an expression of an
underlying geological structure such as a fault.
MANNING'S EQUATION — An equation for calculation of velocity of flow
(e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per second) in open
channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of flow and slope.
Manning's Equation assumes steady, gradually varied flow.
MAXIMUM EXTENT PRACTICABLE (MEP) — Applies when the applicant
demonstrates to the Borough's satisfaction that the performance standard
is not achievable. The applicant shall take into account the best available
technology, cost-effectiveness, geographic features and other competing
interests, such as protection of human safety and welfare, protection of
endangered and threatened resources and preservation of historic
properties, in making the assertion that the performance standard cannot
be met and that a different means of control is appropriate.5
MEADOW — A limited, relatively flat area of low vegetation dominated by
grasses, either in its natural state or used as pasture or for growing hay.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.29
C.
29.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:303
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act of 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as reenacted and amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains),
which is all of the following:
MUNICIPAL SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM (MS4) — All separate
storm sewers that are defined as "large" or "medium" or "small" municipal
separate storm sewer systems pursuant to 40 CFR 122.26(b)(18), or
designated as regulated under 40 CFR 122.26(a)(1)(v).
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM (NPDES) —
A permit issued under 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 92a (relating to National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permitting, monitoring and
compliance), for the discharge or potential discharge of pollutants from a
point source to surface waters.
NATIVE VEGETATION — Plant species that have evolved or are indigenous
to a specific geographical area. These plants are adapted to local soil and
weather conditions as well as pests and diseases.
NATURAL DRAINAGEWAY — An existing channel for water runoff that was
formed by natural processes.
NATURAL GROUND COVER — Ground cover which mimics the infiltration
characteristics of the predominant hydrologic soil group found at the site.
NON-POINT-SOURCE POLLUTION — Any source of water pollution that
does not meet the legal definition of "point source" in Section 502(14) of the
Clean Water Act.
NONSTRUCTURAL BMPs — Planning and design approaches, operational
and/or behavior-related practices which minimize stormwater runoff
generation resulting from an alteration of the land surface or limit contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff.
NRCS — The Natural Resources Conservation Service (previously Soil
Conservation Service, or SCS).
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural and
man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals and pipes flowing
Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, township, county,
district, association or other public body (created under state law)
having jurisdiction over disposal of sewage, industrial wastes,
stormwater or other wastes;
A.
B. Designed or used for collecting or conveying stormwater;
C. Not a combined sewer; and
Not part of a publicly owned treatment works as defined at 40 CFR
122.2.
D.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:304
partly full. Open channels may include closed conduits so long as the flow is
not under pressure.
OUTFALL — A point where water flows from a conduit, stream, pipe or
drain.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
agency successor thereto.
PERMIT — A certificate issued to the applicant by the Borough or Boroughdesignated
agent acknowledging receipt and satisfactory review of the
submitted application in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any material/surface that allows water to pass through
at a rate equal to or greater than natural ground cover.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough.
PLANS — The SWM and erosion and sediment control plans and narratives.
PROCESS WASTEWATER — Water that comes in contact with any raw
material, product, by-product or waste during any production or industrial
process.
QUALIFIED PERSON — Any person licensed by the Pennsylvania
Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to perform the work
required by this chapter.
RATE CONTROL — SWM controls used to manage the peak flows for the
purposes of channel protection and flood mitigation.
RATIONAL FORMULA (RATIONAL METHOD) — A rainfall-runoff relation
used to estimate peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Any physical improvement to a previously developed
lot that involves earthmoving, removal or addition of impervious surfaces.
REGIONAL STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — A plan to manage
stormwater runoff from an area larger than a single development site. A
regional stormwater management plan could include two adjacent parcels,
an entire watershed or some defined area in between. Regional stormwater
management plans can be prepared for new development or as a retrofit to
manage runoff from already developed areas.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Activities, including earth disturbance
activities, that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities shall include, but not
be limited to:
Land development subject to the requirements of Chapter 22,
Subdivision and Land Development;
A.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:305
RELEASE RATE — For a specific design storm or list of design storms,
the percentage of peak flow rate for existing conditions which may not be
exceeded for the proposed conditions.
RETENTION BASIN — A stormwater management facility that includes a
permanent pool for water quality treatment and additional capacity above
the permanent pool for temporary runoff storage.
RIPARIAN — Pertaining to a stream, river or other watercourse; also, plant
communities occurring in association with any spring, lake, river, stream or
creek through which waters flow at least periodically.6
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A BMP that is an area of permanent vegetation along
a watercourse; plantings to be determined based on site conditions (i.e.,
soils) and the types of plants and vegetation indigenous to the development
area.
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR — A narrow strip of land, centered on a stream
or river, that includes the floodplain as well as related riparian habitats
adjacent to the floodplain.6
RIPARIAN CORRIDOR EASEMENT — An easement created for the purpose
of protecting and preserving a riparian corridor.
RIPARIAN FOREST BUFFER — A type of riparian buffer that consists of
permanent vegetation that is predominantly native trees, shrubs and forbs
along a watercourse that is maintained in a natural state or sustainably
managed to protect and enhance water quality, stabilize stream channels
and banks and separate land use activities from surface waters.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto roof surfaces by incorporating controlledflow
roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SCS — The United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation
Service (now known as "NRCS").
B. Removal of ground cover, grading, filling or excavation;
Construction of new or additional impervious or semi-impervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.), and associated improvements;
C.
D. Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings;
Installation or alteration of stormwater management facilities and
appurtenances thereto;
E.
F. Diversion or piping of any watercourse; and
Any other regulated activities where the Borough determines that said
activities may affect any existing watercourse's stormwater
management facilities or stormwater drainage patterns.
G.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:306
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by stormwater as a
product of erosion.1
SEDIMENTATION — The action or process of forming or depositing
sediment in waters of this commonwealth.1
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt or other material transported
by water during construction.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
clean, loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEMI-IMPERVIOUS/SEMIPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which
prevents some infiltration of water into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff which flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SMALL STORM EVENT — A storm having a frequency of recurrence of once
every two years or smaller.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the SCS (now NRCS) that is based on relating soil type and
land use/cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number (CN)." For more
information, see "Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds," Second Edition,
Technical Release No. 55, SCS, June 1986 (or most-current edition).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — See "hydrologic soil group."
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory requirements
to protect, maintain, reclaim and restore water quality under Title 25 of the
Pennsylvania Code, the Clean Streams Law and the Clean Water Act.
STORAGE — A volume above or below ground that is available to hold
stormwater.
STORM EVENT — A storm of a specific duration, intensity and frequency.7
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels designed to
convey stormwater.
STORMWATER — Drainage runoff from the surface of the land resulting
from precipitation or snow or ice melt.
STORM WATER MANAGEMENT ACT — The Act of October 4, 1978, P.L.
864, No. 167, as amended, 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (SWM
BMPs) — See "BMP."
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:307
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY (SWM FACILITY) — Any
structure, natural or man-made, that, due to its condition, design or
construction, conveys, stores, infiltrates/evaporates/transpires, cleans or
otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical SWM facilities include, but are
not limited to, detention and retention basins, open channels, watercourses,
road gutters, swales, storm sewers, pipes, BMPs and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE PLAN
(O&M PLAN) — A plan, including a narrative, to ensure proper functioning
and maintenance of the SWM facilities in accordance with Part 6 of this
chapter.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN (SWM PLAN) — The plan prepared
by the developer or his representative identifying regulated earth
disturbance activities and indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at a particular development site according to this chapter.
Stormwater (SWM) plans shall be classified and addressed as follows:
STREAM — A watercourse.
SMALL PROJECT PLAN — Regulated activities on existing lots of
record that, measured on a cumulative basis from December 19, 2013,
create additional impervious areas of 1,001 square feet to 2,000 square
feet or involve an earth disturbance activity such as removal of ground
cover, grading, filling or excavation of an area less than 5,000 square
feet and do not involve the alteration of stormwater facilities or
watercourses.
A.
MINOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) PLAN — The use of
land for any purpose involving:
Installation of new impervious or semi-impervious surface between
2,001 and 5,000 square feet; or
(1)
Removal of ground cover, grading, filling or excavation between
5,000 square feet and an acre (43,560 square feet), except for the
agricultural use of land when operated in accordance with a farm
conservation plan approved by the Conservation District.
(2)
B.
MAJOR STORMWATER MANAGEMENT (SWM) PLAN — The use of
land for any purpose involving:
Installation of new impervious or semi-impervious surface that is
either in excess of 5,001 square feet; or
(1)
(2) Diversion of piping of any natural or man-made watercourse; or
(3) Any use within the floodplain area; or
Removal of ground cover, grading, filling or excavation in excess
of one acre, except for the agricultural use of land when operated
in accordance with a farm conservation plan approved by the
Conservation District.
(4)
C.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:308
STRUCTURAL BMPs — Physical devices and practices that capture and
treat stormwater runoff. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent
appurtenances to the development site.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.8
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a single lot, tract or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devises, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWALE — A low lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
SWM — Stormwater management.
SWM SITE PLAN — A stormwater management site plan.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most-distant point (representative of the project) of
the watershed to a point of interest within the watershed. This time is the
combined total of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if
any.
TOP OF STREAM BANK — The first substantial break in slope between the
edge of the bed of the stream and the surrounding terrain. The top of stream
bank can either be a natural or constructed (that is, road or railroad grade)
feature, lying generally parallel to the watercourse.
TREATMENT TRAIN — The sequencing of structural best management
practices to achieve optimal flow management and pollutant removal from
urban stormwater.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture or any agency
successor thereto.
VOLUME CONTROL — SWM controls, or BMPs, used to remove a
predetermined amount of runoff or the increase in volume between the preand
post-development design storm.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water having a
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a watercourse.
WATERS OF THIS COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams,
creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies or channels
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:309
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface water
or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and
that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, fens, and similar areas.
WOODLAND — Land predominantly covered with trees and shrubs. Without
limiting the foregoing, woodlands include all land areas of 10,000 square
feet or greater, supporting at least 100 trees per acre, so that either:
At least 50 trees are two inches or greater in diameter at breast height
(DBH); or
A.
B. Fifty trees are at least 12 feet in height.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:310
Part 3
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT STANDARDS
§ 301. General Requirements. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
1. Preparation of an SWM site plan is required for all regulated activities,
unless preparation and submission of the SWM site plan is specifically
exempted according to § 401 or the activity qualifies as a small project.
2. No regulated activities shall commence until the Borough of
Elizabethtown issues unconditional written approval of a land
disturbance plan in the form of a stormwater permit.
3. SWM site plans approved by the Borough of Elizabethtown, in
accordance with § 406, shall be on site throughout the duration of the
regulated activity.
4. The Borough may, after consultation with the DEP, approve measures
for meeting the state water quality requirements other than those in
this chapter, provided that they meet the minimum requirements of,
and do not conflict with, state law, including, but not limited to, the
Clean Streams Law. The Borough shall maintain a record of
consultations with the DEP pursuant to this subsection. Where an
NPDES permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities is required, issuance of an NPDES permit shall constitute
satisfaction of consultation with the DEP. The applicant shall initiate
and facilitate all consultations between the DEP and the Borough.
5. For all regulated activities, erosion and sediment control and
stormwater management BMPs shall be designed, implemented,
operated and maintained to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code and the Clean Streams Law. Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the E&S Manual, BMP Manual and § 307 of this
chapter.
6. Developers have the option to propose a regional stormwater
management plan or participate in a regional stormwater management
plan developed by others. A regional stormwater management plan may
include off-site volume and rate control, as appropriate, and supported
by a detailed design approved by the Borough in accordance with § 301,
Subsection 4. A regional stormwater management plan must meet all of
the volume and rate control standards required by this chapter for the
area defined by the regional stormwater management plan, but not
necessarily for each individual development site. Appropriate
agreements must be established to ensure the requirements of this
chapter and the requirements of the regional stormwater management
plan are met.
7. Unless prohibited by Chapter 27, Zoning, or Chapter 8, Floodplains,
which regulates construction and development within the areas of the
§ 301 FOREWORD § 301
FWD:311
Borough subject to flooding, and any other applicable requirements of
the Flood Plain Management Act,30 stormwater management facilities
located in the floodplain are permitted when designed and constructed
in accordance with the provisions of the BMP Manual, regulatory
requirements and the requirements of this chapter.
8. Impervious Areas.
A. The measurement of impervious area shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages or phases.
B. For development taking place in stages or phases, the entire
development plan must be used in determining conformance with
this chapter.
C. Any areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be
assumed to be impervious if subject to vehicular/pedestrian traffic.
9. All regulated activities shall include such measures as necessary to:
A. Protect health, safety and property;
B. Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(1) Protect and/or improve the function of floodplains, wetlands
and wooded areas.
(2) Protect and/or improve native plant communities, including
those within the riparian corridor.
(3) Protect and/or improve natural drainageways from erosion.
(4) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of this commonwealth.
(5) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible.
10. The design of all stormwater management facilities over karst shall
include an evaluation of measures to minimize adverse effects and to
certify the following:
A. No stormwater facilities shall be placed in, over or immediately
adjacent to the following features:
(1) Sinkholes.
(2) Closed depressions.
(3) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(4) Fracture traces.
30.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 301 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 301
FWD:312
(5) Caverns.
(6) Intermittent lakes.
(7) Ephemeral streams.
(8) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
B. Stormwater management facilities shall not be located closer than
100 feet from the rim of sinkholes or closed depressions, nor within
100 feet from disappearing streams; nor shall these facilities be
located closer than 50 feet from lineaments or fracture traces; nor
shall these facilities be located closer than 25 feet from surface or
identified subsurface pinnacles unless lined with an impermeable
liner or equivalent design as signed and sealed by a professional
geologist.
C. Stormwater resulting from regulated activities shall not be
discharged into sinkholes.
D. It shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the
development is underlain by carbonate geology. The following
certificate shall be included on all stormwater site plans and shall
be signed and sealed by the developer's professional geologist:
"I, ___________________, certify that the proposed stormwater/BMP
facility (circle one) is/is not underlain by carbonate geology."
E. Whenever an SWM facility will be located in an area underlain by
carbonate geology, a geological evaluation of the proposed location
by a registered professional geologist shall be conducted to
determine susceptibility to sinkhole formation. The evaluation may
include the use of impermeable liners to reduce or eliminate the
separation distances listed in Subsection 10A and B.
11. Infiltration BMPs shall be spread out, made as shallow as practicable,
and located to maximize use of natural on-site infiltration features while
still meeting the other requirements of this chapter. Infiltration BMPs
shall include pretreatment BMPs unless shown to be unnecessary.
12. Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas shall
be selected based on suitability of soils and development site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
A. A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the facility
and the limiting zone. Modifications will be considered if it is
demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Borough that the selected
BMP has design criteria which allow for a smaller separation.
B. A stabilized infiltration rate sufficient to accept the additional
stormwater load and drain completely as determined by field tests
conducted by the applicant's professional designer.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 301
FWD:313
(1) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined in the same
location and within the same soil horizon as the bottom of the
infiltration facility.
(2) The stabilized infiltration rate is to be determined as specified
in the BMP Manual.
13. The calculation methodology to be used in the analysis of volume and
peak rates of discharge shall be as required in § 305.
14. A planting plan is required for all vegetated stormwater BMPs.
A. Native or naturalized/noninvasive vegetation suitable to the soil
and hydrologic conditions of the development site shall be used
unless otherwise specified in the BMP Manual.
B. Invasive vegetation may not be included in any planting schedule.
The List of Invasive Vegetation in Pennsylvania can be found on the
DCNR website at the following address: www.dcnr.state.pa.us/
forestry/plants/invasiveplants/index.htm.
C. The limit of existing, native vegetation to remain shall be
delineated on the plan along with proposed construction protection
measures.
D. Prior to construction, a tree protection zone shall be delineated at
the dripline of the tree canopy. All trees scheduled to remain during
construction shall be marked; however, where groups of trees exist,
only the tress on the outside edge need to be effectively marked to
promote protection of the trees during construction. No
construction, storage of material, temporary parking, pollution of
soil, or regrading shall occur within the tree protection zone.
E. All planting shall be performed in conformance with good nursery
and landscape practice. Plant materials shall conform to the
standards recommended by the American Association of
Nurseryman, Inc., in the American Standard of Nursery Stock.
(1) Planting designs are encouraged to share planting space for
optimal root growth whenever possible.
(2) No staking or wiring of trees shall be allowed without a
maintenance note for the stake and/or wire removal within one
year of planting.
15. Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase to
maintain maximum infiltration capacity, including but not limited to
fencing to limit construction traffic over the infiltration area. Staging of
earthmoving activities and selection of construction equipment should
consider this protection.
§ 301 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 301
FWD:314
§ 302. Volume Controls. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Volume control BMPs are intended to maintain existing hydrologic
conditions for small storm events by promoting groundwater recharge and/
or evapotranspiration as described in this section. Runoff volume controls
shall be implemented using the Design Storm Method described in
16. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff from
disturbed areas until the entire contributory drainage area to the
infiltration BMP has achieved final stabilization.
17. A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement shall be provided for all
SWM facilities with tributary areas equal to or greater than 1,000
square feet and not located within a public right-of-way. Easements
shall provide for ingress and egress to a public right-of-way. This shall
be noted on the plan.
18. Drainage easements shall be provided where the conveyance,
treatment or storage of stormwater, either existing or proposed, is
identified on the SWM site plan. Drainage easements shall be provided
to contain and convey the one-hundred-year frequency flood.
19. The Borough may require additional stormwater control measures for
stormwater discharges to special management areas, including, but not
limited to:
A. Water bodies listed as "impaired" on Pennsylvania's Clean Water
Act 303(d)/305(b) Integrated List.
B. Any water body or watershed with an approved total maximum
daily load (TMDL).
C. Critical areas with sensitive resources (e.g., state-designated
special protection waters, cold-water fisheries, carbonate or other
groundwater recharge areas highly vulnerable to contamination,
drainage areas to water supply reservoirs, source water protection
zones, etc.).
20. Roof drains and sump pumps shall be tributary to surface infiltration or
vegetative BMPs. Use of catchment facilities for the purpose of reuse is
also permitted. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to
streets or storm sewers, roof drain connections to streets or roadside
ditches may be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the Borough. It
shall be the burden of the person seeking to make the connection to
demonstrate to the Borough that such connection is more advantageous
and such connection shall not violate any state or federal statute, rule
or regulation. Proposed storm sewer piping may connect to an existing
storm sewer piping system, provided the existing storm sewer is
adequate.
21. Nonstructural BMPs shall be utilized for all regulated activities unless
proven to be impractical.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:315
Subsection A below, or through continuous modeling approaches or other
means as described in the BMP Manual. Small projects may use the method
described in Subsection B to design volume control BMPs.
A. The Design Storm Method is applicable to any size of regulated activity.
This method requires detailed modeling based on site conditions.
(1) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for all
storms equal to or less than the two-year, twenty-four-hour storm
event.
(2) For modeling purposes:
(a) Existing (predevelopment), nonforested, pervious areas must
be considered meadow in good condition.
(b) When the existing project site contains impervious area, 20%
of existing impervious area to be disturbed shall be considered
meadow in good condition in the model for existing conditions.
(c) The maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in
karst areas shall be 3:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration
area and 5:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. The
maximum loading ratio for volume control facilities in nonkarst
areas shall be 5:1 impervious drainage area to infiltration area
and 8:1 total drainage area to infiltration area. A higher ratio
may be approved by the Borough if justification is provided.
Hydraulic depth may be used as an alternative to an areabased
loading ratio if the design hydraulic depth is shown to be
less than the depth that could result from the maximum area
loading ratio.
B. Volume Control for Small Projects. At least the first one inch of runoff
from new impervious surfaces or an equivalent volume shall be
permanently removed from the runoff flow, i.e., it shall not be released
into the surface waters of this commonwealth. Removal options include
reuse, evaporation, transpiration and infiltration.
C. A detailed geologic evaluation of the development site shall be
performed in areas of carbonate geology to determine the design
parameters of recharge facilities. A report shall be prepared in
accordance with Section 504 of this chapter.
D. Storage facilities, including normally dry, open-top facilities, shall
completely drain the volume control storage over a period of time not
less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours from the end of the
design storm. Any designed infiltration at such facilities is exempt from
the minimum twenty-four-hour standard, i.e., may infiltrate in a shorter
period of time based on a field-tested infiltration rate, provided that
none of this water will be discharged into waters of this commonwealth.
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 302
FWD:316
§ 303. Rate Controls. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Rate control for large storms, up to the one-hundred-year event, is essential
to protect against immediate downstream erosion and flooding.
E. Any portion of the volume control storage that meets all of the following
criteria may also be used as rate control storage:
(1) Volume control storage that depends on infiltration is designed
according to the infiltration standards in § 301.
(2) The volume control storage which will be used for rate control is
that storage which is available within 24 hours from the end of the
design storm based on the stabilized infiltration rate and/or the
evapotranspiration rate.
F. Volume control storage facilities designed to infiltrate shall avoid the
least-permeable hydrologic soil group(s) at the development site.
A. Match Predevelopment Hydrograph. Applicants shall provide
infiltration facilities or utilize other techniques which will allow the
post-development one-hundred-year hydrograph to match the
predevelopment one-hundred-year hydrograph for the development
site. To match the predevelopment hydrograph, the post-development
peak rate must be less than or equal to the predevelopment peak rate,
and the post-development runoff volume must be less than or equal to
the predevelopment volume for the same storm event.
B. Where the predevelopment hydrograph cannot be matched, the postdevelopment
discharge rates shall not exceed the predevelopment
discharge rates for the two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty- and one-hundredyear,
twenty-four-hour storm events.* If it is shown that the peak rates
of discharge indicated by the post-development analysis are less than or
equal to the peak rates of discharge indicated by the predevelopment
analysis for two-, ten-, twenty-five, fifty- and one-hundred-year, twentyfour-
hour storms,* then the requirements of this section have been met.
Otherwise, the applicant shall provide additional controls as necessary
to satisfy the peak rate of discharge requirement.
* A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational
Method storm. (See Table 3-1 in § 305.)
C. Normally dry, open-top, storage facilities shall completely drain the rate
control storage over a period of time less than or equal to 24 hours from
the peak one-hundred-year water surface design elevation.
D. A variety of BMPs should be employed and tailored to suit the
development site. The following is a partial listing of BMPs which can
be utilized in SWM systems for rate control where appropriate:
(1) Decreased impervious surface coverage.
(2) Routed flow over grass.
§ 302 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:317
§ 304. Stormwater Management Performance Standards. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
(3) Grassed channels and vegetated strips.
(4) Bioretention areas (rain gardens).
(5) Concrete lattice block or permeable surfaces.
(6) Seepage pits, seepage trenches or other infiltration structures.
(7) Rooftop detention.
(8) Parking lot detention.
(9) Cisterns and underground reservoirs.
(10) Amended soils.
(11) Retention basins.
(12) Detention basins.
(13) Other methods as may be found in the BMP Manual.
E. Small projects are not required to provide for rate control.
1. Runoff from impervious areas shall be drained to pervious areas within
the development site, unless the site has 85% or more impervious cover
and is a redevelopment,10 in which case the portion of the site that
discharges to pervious areas shall be maximized.
2. Stormwater runoff from a development site to an adjacent property
shall flow directly into a natural drainageway, watercourse or into an
existing storm sewer system or onto adjacent properties in a manner
similar to the runoff characteristics of the predevelopment flow.
3. Stormwater flows onto adjacent property shall not be created,
increased, decreased, relocated or otherwise altered without evidence
of a written certified letter of notification to the adjacent property
owner(s) by the developer. Such stormwater flows shall be subject to
the requirements of this chapter, including the establishment of a
drainage easement. Copies of all such notifications shall be included in
land disturbance plan submission.
4. Existing on-site natural and man-made SWM facilities shall be used to
the maximum extent practicable.
5. Stormwater runoff shall not be transferred from one subwatershed to
another unless they are subwatersheds of a common watershed that
join together within the perimeter of the development site and the
effect of the transfer does not alter the peak discharge onto adjacent
lands.
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 304
FWD:318
§ 305. Calculation Methodology. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
6. Minimum floor elevations for all structures that would be affected by a
basin, other temporary impoundments, or open conveyance systems
where ponding may occur shall be two feet above the one-hundred-year
water surface elevation. If basement or underground facilities are
proposed, detailed calculations addressing the effects of stormwater
ponding on the structure and waterproofing and/or floodproofing
design information shall be submitted for approval.
7. All stormwater-conveyance facilities (excluding detention, retention,
and wetland basin outfall structures) shall be designed to convey a
twenty-five-year storm event.* All stormwater-conveyance facilities
(excluding detention, retention, and wetland basin outfall structures)
conveying water originating from off site shall be designed to convey a
fifty-year storm event.* The SWM report shall also provide calculations
verifying the safe conveyance of the one-hundred-year runoff event* to
appropriate peak rate control BMPs must be demonstrated in the
design.
* A twenty-four-hour SCS Type II storm or an IDF Curve Rational
Method storm.
8. Erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels and at all
points of discharge. Flow velocities from any storm sewer may not
result in erosion of the receiving channel.
1. Any stormwater runoff calculations involving drainage areas greater
than 200 acres and time of concentration (Tc) greater than 60 minutes,
including on- and off-site areas, shall use generally accepted calculation
techniques based on the NRCS Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
2. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Modified Rational Method, a Soil-Cover-Complex
Methodology, or other method acceptable to the Borough. Table 3-1
summarizes acceptable computation methods. It is assumed that all
methods will be selected by the design professional based on the
individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
development site.
§ 304 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:319
Table 3-1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies for Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method
Developed by Applicability
TR-20 (or commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary
Win TR-55 (or
commercial computer
package based on
TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans within
limitations described in
TR-55
HEC-1/HEC-HMS U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary
Rational Method (or
commercial computer
package based on
Rational Method)
Emil Kuichling
(1889)
For development sites less
than 200 acres, Tc<60
min. or as approved by the
Borough
EFH2 USDA NRCS Applicable in rural and
undeveloped areas subject
to the program limits
Other methods Varies Other methodologies
approved by the Borough
3. If the SCS Method is used, Antecedent Moisture Condition 1 is to be
used in areas of carbonate geology, and Antecedent Moisture Condition
2 is to be used in all other areas. A Type II distribution shall be used in
all areas.
4. If the Rational Method is used, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA) Atlas 14 data (see Subsection 2 above) or
PennDOT Publication 584, "PennDOT Drainage Manual," shall be used
to determine the rainfall intensity in inches per hour based on the
information for the five- through sixty-minute duration storm events.
(Refer to Appendix B-3).31
5. Hydrographs may be obtained from NRCS methods such as TR-55,
TR20 or from use of the "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational
methods. If "modified" or "unit hydrograph" rational methods are used,
the ascending leg of the hydrograph shall have a length equal to three
times the time of concentration (3 x Tc), and the descending leg shall
31.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 305
FWD:320
have a length equal to seven times the time of concentration (7 x Tc) to
approximate an SCS Type II hydrograph.11
6. Runoff calculations shall include a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
indicating volume and velocities of flow and the grades, sizes and
capacities of water-carrying structures, sediment basins, retention and
detention structures and sufficient design information to construct such
facilities. Runoff calculations shall also indicate both predevelopment
and post-development rates for peak discharge of stormwater runoff
from all discharge points.
7. For the purpose of calculating predevelopment peak discharges, all
runoff coefficients, both on-site and off-site, shall be based on actual
land use assuming summer or good land conditions. Post-development
runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to design conveyance
facilities shall be based on actual land use assuming winter or poor land
conditions.
8. Criteria and assumptions to be used in the determination of stormwater
runoff and design of management facilities are as follows:
A. Runoff coefficients shall be based on the information contained in
Appendix B-1 and B-2 if the actual land use is listed in those
appendixes.32 If the actual land use is not listed in those
appendixes, runoff coefficients shall be chosen from other
published documentation, and a copy of said documentation shall
be submitted with the SWM plan for review and approval by the
Borough.
B. A sample worksheet for calculating Tc is provided in Appendix
B-5.33 Times of concentration (Tc) shall be based on the following
design parameters or as calculated by an approved hydraulic
program:
(1) Sheet Flow: The maximum length for each reach of sheet or
overland flow before shallow concentrated or open channel
flow develops is 150 feet. Flow lengths greater than 100 feet
shall be justified based on the actual conditions at each
development site. Sheet flow may be determined using the
nomograph in Appendix B-4 or Manning's kinematic solution
shown in the sheet flow section of Worksheet No. 1 in Appendix
B-5.34
(2) Shallow Concentrated Flow: Travel time for shallow
concentrated flow shall be determined using Figure 3-1 from
TR-55, Urban Hydrology for small watersheds, as shown in
Appendix B-6.35
32.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
33.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
34.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:321
§ 306. Riparian Corridors. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
(3) Open Channel Flow: At points where sheet and shallow
concentrated flows concentrate in field depressions, swales,
gutters, curbs or pipe collection systems, the travel times to
the downstream end of the development site between these
design points shall be based upon Manning's Equation and/or
acceptable engineering design standards as determined by the
Borough Engineer.
C. The developer may use stormwater credits for nonstructural BMPs
in accordance with the BMP Manual. The allowable reduction will
be determined by the Borough.
D. Peak rate control is not required for off-site runoff. Off-site runoff
may be bypassed around the site, provided all other discharge
requirements are met. If off-site runoff is routed through rate
control facilities, runoff coefficients for off-site discharges used to
design those rate control facilities shall be based on actual land use
assuming winter or poor land conditions.
9. Times of concentration shall be calculated based on the methodology
recommended in the respective model used. Tc for channel and pipe
flow shall be computed using Manning's Equation. Supporting
documentation and calculations must be submitted for review and
approval.
1. In order to protect and improve water quality, a riparian corridor
easement shall be created and recorded as part of any subdivision or
land development that encompasses a riparian corridor.
2. Except as otherwise required by Chapter 102, the riparian corridor
easement shall be measured to be the greater of the limit of the onehundred-
year floodplain or 35 feet from the top of stream bank (on each
side).
3. Minimum Management Requirements for Riparian Corridors.
A. Existing native vegetation shall be protected and maintained within
the riparian corridor easement.
B. Whenever practicable, invasive vegetation shall be actively
removed and the riparian corridor easement shall be planted with
native trees, shrubs and other vegetation to create a diverse native
plant community appropriate to the intended ecological context of
the site.
4. The riparian corridor easement shall be enforceable by the Borough
and shall be recorded in the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds'
office, so that it shall run with the land and shall limit the use of the
35.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 305 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:322
§ 307. Stormwater Management Facility Design Standards. [Ord.
954, 12/19/2013]
property located therein. The easement shall allow for continued
private ownership and shall count toward the minimum lot area as
required by Chapter 27, Zoning.
5. Any permitted use (as listed below) within the riparian corridor
easement shall be conducted in a manner that will maintain the extent
of the existing one-hundred-year floodplain, improve or maintain the
stream stability and preserve and protect the ecological function of the
floodplain.
6. The following conditions shall apply when public and/or private
recreation trails are permitted within riparian corridors:
A. Trails shall be for nonmotorized use only.
B. Trails shall be designed to have the least impact on native plant
species and other sensitive environmental features.
7. Septic drainfields and sewage disposal systems shall not be permitted
within the riparian corridor easement and shall comply with setback
requirements established under 25 Pa Code Chapter 73.
1. General.
A. For all aboveground storage facilities, the bottom of the excavated
basin shall be a minimum of two feet or 24 inches above the
seasonal high water table or bedrock, or other limiting zone. Soil
sampling, test pits or auger testing must be completed in the
proposed location of the facilities in support of the design.
B. Aboveground storage facilities without restricted access shall have
impoundment areas with side slopes no greater than five horizontal
to one vertical (5:1). Basins with side slopes steeper than five
horizontal to one vertical (5:1) shall be protected by fencing that
will discourage access.
C. Aboveground storage facilities with a facility depth greater than
eight feet shall not be permitted in residential areas.
D. Aboveground storage facilities with a facility depth greater than 15
feet require a dam permit from DEP.
E. All pipe collars, when required, shall be designed in accordance
with Chapter 7 of the E&S Manual. The material shall consist of
concrete, or otherwise nondegradable material approved by the
Borough Engineer, around the outfall barrel and shall be
watertight.
F. The embankment fill material shall be taken from an appropriate
borrow area, which shall be free of roots, stumps, wood, rubbish,
§ 306 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:323
stones greater than six inches, or frozen or other objectionable
materials.
G. When required, embankments shall be compacted by sheepsfoot or
pad roller. The loose lift thickness shall be nine inches or less,
depending on roller size, and the maximum particle size is six
inches or less (2/3 of the lift thickness). Five passes of the
compaction equipment over the entire surface of each lift are
required. Embankment compaction to visible nonmovement is also
required.
H. The minimum bottom slope of facilities not designed for infiltration
shall be 1%. A flatter slope may be used if an equivalent dewatering
mechanism is provided.
I. When required, dewatering shall be provided through the use of
underdrain, surface device or alternate approved by the Borough
Engineer. If the facility is to be used for infiltration, the dewatering
device should be capable of being disconnected and shall only be
made operational if the basin is not dewatering within the required
time frame.
J. When required, pretreatment elements shall consist of forebays,
filter strips or alternate approved by the Borough Engineer, to keep
silt to a smaller portion of the facility for ease of maintenance.
K. Within basins designed for infiltration, existing native vegetation
shall be preserved, if possible. For existing unvegetated areas or
for infiltration basins that require excavation, a planting plan shall
be prepared, in accordance with § 301, Subsection 14, and the BMP
Manual, which is designed to promote infiltration.
L. For facilities with a depth of two feet or greater, a Type D-W
endwall or riser box outlet structure shall be provided.
M. For facilities with a depth less than two feet, no outlet structure is
required.
N. All discharge control devices with appurtenances shall be made of
reinforced concrete and stainless steel. Bolts/fasteners shall be
stainless steel.
O. The spillway shall be designed to provide a nonerosive, stable
condition when the project is completed.
P. The spillway shall be designed to convey the one-hundred-year
post-development peak inflow when required.
Q. Freeboard shall be measured from the top of the water surface
elevation in the spillway to the top of the berm for emergency use.
R. The Borough may require a breach analysis for basins based on
site-specific conditions and concern of threat for downstream
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:324
property. When required, the breach analysis shall be conducted in
accordance with the NRCS methodology, the United States Army
Corps of Engineers methodology (HEC-1) or other methodologies
as approved by the Borough.
S. Embankment construction.
(1) An impervious core/key trench, when required, shall consist of
a cutoff trench (below existing grade) and a core trench (above
existing grade). A key trench may not be required wherever it
can be shown that another design feature, such as the use of an
impermeable liner, accomplishes the same purpose.
(2) Materials used for the core shall conform to the Unified Soil
Classification GC, SC, CH, or CL and must have at least 30%
passing the No. 200 sieve. The contractor shall provide the
soils test results to the Borough.
(3) The dimensions of the core shall provide a minimum trench
depth of two feet below existing grade, a minimum width of
four feet and a side slope of 1H:1V or flatter.
(4) The core should extend up both abutments to the ten-year
water surface elevation or six inches below the emergency
spillway elevation, whichever is lower.
(5) The core shall extend four feet below any pipe penetrations
through the impervious core. The core shall be installed along
or parallel to the center line of the embankment.
(6) Compaction requirements shall be the same as those for the
embankment to assure maximum density and minimum
permeability.
(7) The core shall be constructed concurrently with the outer shell
of the embankment.
(8) The trench shall be dewatered during backfilling and
compaction operations.
2. Aboveground Storage Facilities. Aboveground storage facilities consist
of all stormwater facilities which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire,
clean or otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of which is
exposed to the natural environment. Aboveground storage facilities are
located above the finished ground elevation. Aboveground storage
facilities do not include stormwater management facilities designed for
conveyance or cisterns.
A. Design Criteria. Refer to Table 3-2, Aboveground Storage Facility
Design Criteria.
(1) Facility with facility depth of less than two feet:
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:325
(a) The minimum top of embankment width shall be two feet.
(b) The maximum interior side slope shall be 2:1.
(c) The maximum exterior side slope shall be 2:1.
(d) The minimum outlet pipe diameter shall be six inches.
(e) Outlet pipe material shall be PVC, HDPE or RCP.
(f) An anticlogging device is required in the outlet structure.
(g) The spillway freeboard shall be a minimum of three inches.
(h) The spillway may be used to route the one-hundred-year
storm.
(2) Facility with depth of two to eight feet:
(a) The embankment minimum top width shall be five feet.
(b) The maximum interior side slope shall be 5:1.
(c) The maximum exterior side slope shall be 3:1.
(d) A key trench and antiseep collar shall be provided.
(e) Compaction density testing of the embankment is
required. Test logs shall be provided to the Borough as
part of the inspection requirements.
(f) A dewatering feature is required.
(g) Pretreatment filtering of runoff prior to entering the
facility is required.
(h) The minimum outlet pipe diameter shall be 12 inches.
(i) Outlet pipe material shall be HDPE or RCP.
(j) An anticlogging device is required in the outlet structure.
(k) The outlet structure is required to have an antivortex
design.
(l) Watertight joints shall be provided.
(m) The spillway freeboard shall be a minimum of six inches.
(n) The minimum spillway width is 10 feet, and the maximum
spillway width is 50 feet.
(o) The downstream channel into which the spillway
discharges shall be checked for adequate capacity and
stability.
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:326
(p) The spillway shall not be considered to function as part of
the primary outlet structure and shall be only for
emergency situations.
(3) Facility with depth greater than eight feet:
(a) The embankment minimum top width shall be eight feet.
(b) The maximum interior side slope shall be 5:1.
(c) The maximum exterior side slope shall be 3:1.
(d) A key trench and antiseep collar shall be provided.
(e) Compaction density testing of the embankment is
required. Test logs shall be provided to the Borough as
part of the inspection requirements.
(f) A dewatering feature for the facility is required.
(g) Pretreatment filtering of runoff prior to entering the
facility is required.
(h) The minimum outlet pipe diameter is 15 inches.
(i) Outlet pipe material shall be RCP.
(j) An anticlogging device is required in the outlet structure.
(k) The outlet structure is required to have an antivortex
design as required.
(l) Watertight joints shall be provided.
(m) The spillway freeboard shall be a minimum of 12 inches.
(n) The minimum spillway width is 20 feet; the maximum
spillway width is 50 feet.
(o) The downstream channel into which the spillway
discharges shall be checked for adequate capacity and
stability.
(p) The spillway shall not be considered to function as part of
the primary outlet structure and shall be only for
emergency situations.
(4) General Requirements for Aboveground Storage Facilities:
(a) Where practical, the spillway shall be constructed in
undisturbed ground.
(b) The effect on the downstream areas if the facility
embankment fails shall be considered in the design of all
facilities. Where possible the facility shall be designed to
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:327
minimize the potential damage caused by such failure of
the embankment.
(c) For all aboveground facilities that do not rely on
infiltration to dewater the runoff, a flow path length-towidth
ratio of 2:1 shall be provided to maximize the
treatment time between the inflow point and the outlet
structure.
Table 3-2
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less than 2
Feet
2 Feet to 8
Feet
Greater than 8
Feet
Embankment Geometry
Top width
(minimum)
2 feet 5 feet 8 feet
Interior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 5:1 5:1
Exterior side slope
(maximum)
2:1 3:1 3:1
Embankment Construction
Key trench Not required Required Required
Pipe collar Not required Required Required
Compaction density Not required Required Required
Internal Construction
Dewatering feature N/A Required Required
Pretreatment
elements
Not required Required Required
Outlet Structure
Pipe size (minimum) 6 inches 12 inches 15 inches
Pipe material HDPE, PVC, RCP HDPE, RCP RCP
Anticlogging devices Required Required Required
Antivortex design Not required Required Required
Watertight joints in
piping
No Yes Yes
Spillway Requirements
Spillway freeboard
(minimum)
3 inches 6 inches 12 inches
Width (minimum) Not required 10 feet 20 feet
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:328
Table 3-2
Aboveground Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Depth
Less than 2
Feet
2 Feet to 8
Feet
Greater than 8
Feet
Width (maximum) Not required 50 feet 50 feet
Spillway channel
design
Not required Required Required
Routing of 100-year
storm
Permitted Not permitted Not permitted
3. Subsurface Storage Facilities. Subsurface storage facilities consist of
all SWM facilities which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, clean or
otherwise affect stormwater runoff and the top of which is not exposed
to the natural environment. Subsurface facilities are located below the
finished ground elevation. Subsurface facilities do not include SWM
facilities designed for conveyance.
A. General.
(1) The stone used for infiltration beds shall be clean washed,
uniformly graded coarse aggregate (AASHTO No. 3 or
equivalent approved by the Borough). The void ratio for design
shall be assumed to be 0.4.
(2) Material consistency and placement depths for backfill shall be
(at a minimum) per all applicable pipe manufacturer's
recommendations, further providing it should be free of large
(not exceeding six inches in any dimension), objectionable or
detritus material. Select nonaggregate material should be
indigenous to the surrounding soil material for nonvehicular
areas. Backfill within vehicular areas shall comply with this
section unless otherwise specified in Chapter 21, Streets and
Sidewalks, or Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
Furthermore, if the design concept includes the migration of
runoff through the backfill to reach the infiltration facility, the
material shall be well-drained, free of excess clay or clay-like
materials and generally uniform in gradation.
(3) Nonwoven geotextiles shall be placed on the sides and top of
subsurface infiltration facilities. No geotextiles shall be placed
on the bottom of subsurface infiltration facilities.
(4) When located under pavement, the top of the subsurface
facility, facility piping or conveyance shall be a minimum of six
inches below the bottom of the pavement subbase. Where
located under vegetative cover, the top of the subsurface
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:329
facility shall be a minimum of 12 inches below the surface
elevation or as required to establish vegetation.
(5) Subsurface facilities shall be designed to safely convey and/or
bypass flows from storms exceeding the design storm.
B. Design Criteria. Refer to Table 3-3, Subsurface Storage Facility
Design Criteria.
(1) Infiltration and Storage Facility:
(a) Maximum depth from surface: two feet less than limiting
zone.
(b) Loading ratio: per December 2006 BMP Manual, as
amended. The maximum impervious loading ratio is 5:1
relating impervious drainage area to infiltration area. The
maximum total loading ratio is 8:1 relating to total
drainage area to infiltration area. In areas of karst geology,
the maximum impervious drainage area to infiltration area
is 3:1.
(c) The minimum distribution pipe size shall be four inches.
Distribution system piping may be PVC or HDPE.
(d) Pretreatment of runoff to the facility is required to provide
a method to eliminate solids, sediment, and other debris
from entering the subsurface facility.
(e) Observation/access ports shall be provided in the facility.
For facilities with the bottom less than 12 feet below the
average grade of the ground surface, a cleanout shall be
an acceptable observation port. For facilities with the
bottom 12 feet or more below the average grade of the
ground surface, a manhole or other means acceptable to
the Borough shall be provided for access to and
monitoring of the facility. The number of access points
shall be sufficient to flush or otherwise clean out the
system.
(f) The facility shall be designed to provide a means of evenly
balancing the flow across the surface of the facility to be
used for infiltration.
(2) Storage Without Infiltration Facility.
(a) The minimum distribution pipe size shall be four inches.
Distribution system piping may be PVC, HDPE or RCP.
(b) Pretreatment of runoff to the facility is required to provide
a method to eliminate solids, sediment, and other debris
from entering the subsurface facility.
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:330
(c) Observation/access ports shall be provided in the facility.
For facilities with the bottom less than 12 feet below the
average grade of the ground surface, a cleanout shall be
an acceptable observation port. For facilities with the
bottom 12 feet or more below the average grade of the
ground surface, a manhole or other means acceptable to
the Borough shall be provided for access to and
monitoring of the facility. The number of access points
shall be sufficient to flush or otherwise clean out the
system.
Table 3-3
Subsurface Storage Facility Design Criteria
Facility Type
Infiltration
and Storage
Storage
without
Infiltration
Facility Geometry
Depth from
surface
(maximum)
2 feet less than
limiting zone
N/A
Loading ratio
(maximum)
Per BMP
Manual*
N/A
Distribution System Requirements
Pipe size
(minimum)
4 inches 4 inches
Pretreatment Required Required
Loading/
balancing
Required Not required
Observation/
access ports
Required Required
NOTES:
*Unless otherwise determined by professional geologic
evaluation.
4. Conveyance Facilities. Conveyance facilities consist of all SWM
facilities which carry flow, which may be located either above or below
the finished grade. Conveyance facilities do not include SWM facilities
which store, infiltrate/evaporate/transpire, or clean stormwater runoff.
A. General.
(1) Conveyance pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets and endwalls
within the public street right-of-way or proposed for dedication
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:331
shall conform to the requirements of PennDOT Standards for
Roadway Construction, Publication No. 72M.
(2) Conveyance pipes, culverts, manholes, inlets and endwalls
which are otherwise subject to vehicular loading shall be
designed for the HS-25 loading condition.
(3) Backfill Material. Material consistency and placement depths
for backfill shall be (at a minimum) per all applicable pipe
manufacturer's recommendations, further providing it should
be free of large (not exceeding six inches in any dimension),
objectionable or detritus material. Select nonaggregate
material should be indigenous to the surrounding soil material
for nonvehicular areas. Backfill within vehicular areas shall
comply with this section unless otherwise specified in
governing municipal road/street or subdivision and land
development ordinances.
(4) Inlets or manholes shall be placed at all points of changes in
the horizontal or vertical directions of conveyance pipes.
Curved pipe sections are prohibited.
(5) Access/maintenance ports. An access/maintenance port is
required and may either be an inlet or manhole.
(6) Watertight joints shall be provided where pipe sections are
joined, except for perforated pipe installed as pavement base
drain.
(7) Elliptical pipe of an equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility
conflict conditions exist.
(8) The roughness coefficient (Manning's "n" values) used for
conveyance pipe capacity calculations should be determined in
accordance with the manufacturer's specifications or with
PennDOT Publication 13M, Design Manual, Part 2, Highway
Design, Chapter 10, Appendix 4, as included below in Table
3-4.
Table 3-4
Roughness Coefficient "n" for Manning's Equation
Manning's "n" Types of Pipe
0.010 Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) with smooth inner
walls
0.012 Porous cement concrete pipe; corrugated
high-density polyethylene (HDPE) with
smooth inner walls
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:332
Table 3-4
Roughness Coefficient "n" for Manning's Equation
Manning's "n" Types of Pipe
0.015 Corrugated high-density polyethylene
(HDPE) with corrugated inner walls
(9) All pipes must enter inlets completely through one of the sides.
No corner entry of pipes is permitted.
(10)Within the public street right-of-way, the gutter spread based
on the twenty-five-year storm shall be no greater than 1/2 of
the travel lane and shall have a maximum depth of three inches
at the curbline. A parking lane shall not be considered as part
of the travel lane. In the absence of pavement markings
separating a travel lane from the parking lane, the parking
lane shall be assumed to be seven feet wide if parking is
permitted on the street.
(11) Flow Depth Within Intersections. Within intersections of
streets, the maximum depth of flow shall be 1 1/2 inches based
on the twenty-five-year storm.
(12) Inlets in streets shall be located along the curbline and have
PennDOT Type C top units. The hood shall be aligned with the
adjacent curb height accounting for the required two-inch inlet
sump.
(13) All inlets placed in paved areas shall have heavy-duty, bicyclesafe
grating consistent with PennDOT Publication 72M. A note
to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet
details therein.
(14) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in
depth shall be detailed on the SWM site plan.
(15) A swale shall be considered as any man-made ditch designed to
convey stormwater directly to another SWM facility or surface
waters.
(16) Inlets within swales shall have PennDOT Type M top units or
equivalent approved by the Borough Engineer.
(17) Swale capacities and velocities shall be computed using the
Manning Equation using the following design parameters:
(a) Vegetated Swales.
[1] The first condition shall consider swale stability based
upon a low degree of retardance ("n" = 0.03);
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:333
[2] The second condition shall consider swale capacity
based upon a higher degree of retardance ("n" =
0.05); and
[3] All vegetated swales shall have a minimum slope of 1%
unless otherwise approved by the Borough Engineer.
[4] The "n" factors to be used for paved or riprap swales
or gutters shall be based upon accepted engineering
design practices, as approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(18) Trash racks shall be provided on all endwalls and storm sewer
discharge points for pipe diameters of 18 inches of greater. The
proposed trash rack shall be subject to review and approval by
the Borough. Such protection devices shall be designed to be
removable for cleaning.
(19) Headwalls and endwalls shall be constructed of concrete.
(20) Flared end sections shall be of the same material as the
connecting pipe and shall be designed for the size of the
connecting pipe.
(21) Level spreaders:
(a) Shall discharge at existing grade onto undisturbed
vegetation.
(b) Shall discharge at a depth not exceeding 3.0 inches for a
fifty-year, twenty-four-hour design storm.
(22) Energy dissipaters shall be designed in accordance with the
requirements in the E&S Manual.
(23)SWM facilities which qualify as a dam per DEP regulations or
facilities deemed a potential threat to the life, safety or welfare
of the general public shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Facilities which qualify as a dam per DEP regulation shall
obtain the required permit through the DEP and design
the facility in accordance with DEP standards.
(b) Additional requirements and analysis may be required by
the Borough to prove that the proposed facility has been
designed to limit the potential risk to the life, safety or
welfare of the general public.
(24) In addition to the material requirements in this section,
culverts designed to convey waters of the commonwealth may
be constructed with either a corrugated metal arch or a
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:334
precast concrete culvert pending DEP approval of the
necessary permit(s).
B. Design Criteria. Refer to Table 3-5, Conveyance Facility Design
Criteria.
(1) Within a public street right-of-way:
(a) Conveyance system material shall consist of HDPE or RCP
pipe.
(b) The minimum pipe slope shall be 0.5%.
(c) A minimum one foot of cover to the stone subgrade shall
be provided over the conveyance pipes in paved or
vehicular areas; in grassed areas, a minimum pipe cover of
one foot shall be provided.
(d) The minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches.
(e) The minimum street-crossing angle for the conveyance
system shall be 75° to 90°. The street-crossing angle shall
be measured between the pipe center line and the street
center line.
(f) The maximum spacing between access or maintenance
ports shall be 400 feet.
(g) Inlets and manholes shall be concrete.
(h) Inlets shall be depressed a minimum of two inches below
the surface grade to provide positive flow.
(i) Swales shall be provided with a minimum freeboard of six
inches.
(j) The maximum swale velocity shall be determined based on
the stability of the channel.
(k) The minimum allowable swale slope shall be 1%.
(l) Swale side slopes in residential and nonresidential areas
shall be a maximum of 4:1.
(m) The bottom width to flow depth ratio in any swale shall be
12:1.
(n) Pipe entrances/discharges in public street rights-of-way
shall be provided with a headwall/endwall treatment or
equivalent as approved by the Borough.
(o) The conveyance system discharge locations shall be
provided with an energy dissipater designed to handle the
anticipated flow conditions. The supporting design
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:335
calculations shall be provided in the stormwater
management report.
(2) Outside public street right-of-way: vehicular loading.
(a) Conveyance system material shall consist of PVC, HDPE or
RCP pipe.
(b) The minimum pipe slope shall be 0.5%.
(c) A minimum one foot of cover to the stone subgrade shall
be provided over the conveyance pipes.
(d) The minimum pipe diameter shall be 15 inches.
(e) The maximum spacing between access or maintenance
ports shall be 400 feet.
(f) Inlets and manholes shall be constructed of concrete.
(g) Inlets shall be depressed a minimum of two inches below
the surface grade to provide positive flow.
(3) Outside public street right-of-way: nonvehicular loading.
(a) Conveyance system material shall consist of PVC, HDPE or
RCP pipe.
(b) The minimum pipe slope shall be 0.5%.
(c) A minimum one foot of cover to the surface shall be
provided over the conveyance pipes.
(d) The minimum pipe diameter shall be eight inches.
(e) Maximum spacing between access or maintenance ports
shall be 400 feet.
(f) Manholes shall be constructed of concrete.
(g) Inlets shall be depressed a minimum of one inch below the
surface grade to provide positive flow.
(h) Swales shall be provided with a minimum freeboard of six
inches.
(i) The maximum swale velocity shall be determined based on
the stability of the channel.
(j) The minimum swale slope (longitudinal) shall be 1%.
(k) Swale side slopes in residential areas shall be a maximum
of 4:1, and a maximum of 3:1 in nonresidential areas.
(l) The bottom width to flow depth ratio in swales shall be
12:1.
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:336
(m) Pipe entrances/discharges in public street rights-of-way
shall be provided with a headwall/endwall or flared end
section treatment.
(n) The conveyance system discharge locations shall be
provided with an energy dissipater designed to handle the
anticipated flow conditions.
Table 3-5
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within Public
Street Right-of-
Way
Outside Public Street Right-of-
Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
Pipe design
Material HDPE, RCP PVC, HDPE,
RCP
PVC, HDPE, RCP
Slope (minimum) 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Cover 1 foot to stone
subgrade
1 foot to stone
subgrade
1 foot to surface
Diameter
(minimum)
15 inches 15 inches 8 inches
Street-crossing
angle
75° to 90° N/A N/A
Access/
maintenance port
frequency
(maximum)
400 feet 400 feet 400 feet
Inlet design
Material Concrete Concrete N/A
Grate depression 2 inches 2 inches 1-inch minimum
Manhole design
Material Concrete Concrete Concrete
Swale design
Freeboard
(minimum)
6 inches N/A 6 inches
Velocity
(maximum)
Stability check N/A Stability check
Slope (minimum) 1% N/A 1%
§ 307 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:337
Table 3-5
Conveyance Facility Design Criteria
Location
Within Public
Street Right-of-
Way
Outside Public Street Right-of-
Way
Loading All
Vehicular
Loading
Nonvehicular
Loading
Side slopes
(residential area)
4:1 max N/A 4:1 max
Side slopes
(nonresidential
area)
4:1 max N/A 3:1 max
Bottom width to
flow depth ratio
12:1 N/A 12:1
Outlet design
End treatment Headwall/
endwall
N/A Headwall/
endwall or flared
end section
Energy dissipater Required N/A Required
5. Capture and Reuse Facilities.
A. Design Requirements:
(1) Calculation of water usage to ensure adequate capacity is
available for storage of follow-up rainfall events. The property
will draw from the cistern on a daily basis; the cistern shall be
dewatered in 72 hours to maintain the capacity of the storage
facility. This shall be noted on the plan and maintenance
agreement.
(2) Verification of conveyance pipe capacity in the roof leader
design shall be provided in the stormwater management
report.
(3) The stormwater runoff storage container(s) shall be protected
from direct sunlight to minimize algae growth.
(4) An alternative supply of water shall be available for the
property use during dry periods if the reuse facility is used for
supplying the dwelling with water.
(5) Stormwater runoff storage containers should be watertight
with smooth interior surfaces.
(6) The cover (or lid) should have a tight fit to keep out surface
water, children, animals, dust and light. The cover or lid
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 307
FWD:338
§ 308. Erosion and Sedimentation Control. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
opening should be a minimum 24 inches in order to access the
facility for maintenance and repair.
(7) Cisterns shall be designed to store the runoff volume of a onehundred-
year storm event for the area served by the
stormwater runoff storage facility.
(8) Every stormwater runoff storage facility (cistern, rain barrel,
etc.) shall be provided with an overflow or an emergency
outlet. The overflow shall be designed to discharge away from
buildings and other structures and towards existing natural or
man-made channels, stormwater facilities or vegetated slopes.
(9) The plans proposing a water storage facility shall include the
following:
(a) All calculations and assumptions used in the design.
(b) Sufficient detail showing the proposed method of
dewatering (i.e., pump).
(c) Structural details.
(10) Maintenance responsibilities for water storage and reuse
facilities shall include flushing the storage units to remove any
accumulated sediment; the inside surfaces shall be brushed
and thoroughly disinfected.
(11) The stormwater runoff collected shall not be allowed to freeze
in the devices.
1. The applicant must comply with the erosion control rules and
regulations of Chapter 102.
2. The design plan and construction schedule shall incorporate measures
to prevent soil erosion and sedimentation.
3. The following principles shall be applied to the design plan and
construction schedule to minimize soil erosion and sedimentation:
A. Erosion and sedimentation controls designed in conformance with
the E&S Manual shall be implemented during the construction and
post-construction periods to prevent soil erosion, sedimentation
and other pollutants from entering streams, lakes, etc.
B. Natural vegetation shall be retained and protected on all
undisturbed areas.
C. The extent of the disturbed area and the duration of its exposure
shall be kept to a minimum. Stockpiles to remain in place longer
than 20 days shall be seeded.
§ 307 FOREWORD § 308
FWD:339
D. It shall be the applicant's responsibility during construction to
prevent soil pollution to neighboring property, public streets, and
streams. Soil dropped from construction equipment and
sedimentation shall be immediately removed from roads, public
and private property, and streams.
E. Drainage provisions shall accommodate the stormwater runoff both
during and after construction.
F. Soil erosion and sedimentation facilities shall be installed prior to
any on-site earth disturbances.
4. The developer shall maintain a copy of the erosion and sedimentation
control plan and notes on site during construction.
§ 308 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 308
FWD:340
Part 4
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
§ 401. Exemption from Plan Submission Requirements. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
1. The following regulated activities are specifically exempt from the
SWM site plan preparation and submission requirements articulated in
§ 301, Subsection 1, and Parts 4 and 5 of this chapter:
A. An applicant proposing the cumulative installation of 1,000 square
feet or less of impervious surface coverage may be exempt from
design, plan submittal, and processing requirements of Parts 3, 4
and 5 of this chapter. No person or activity is exempted from
compliance with § 604 and Parts 7, 8 and 9 of this chapter. The
applicant shall comply with the erosion and sediment control
requirements of 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 102. Exemptions do not
relieve the applicant of the responsibility to secure the required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law,
regulation, or ordinance. Exemption shall not relieve an applicant
from implementing such measures as necessary to meet
compliance with any NPDES permit requirements. Any exemption
based on false, misleading, or erroneous information provided by
an applicant is void without the necessity of any proceeding for
revocation. Any work undertaken or use established pursuant to
such permit or other authorization is unlawful. Any applicant
desiring exemption form design, plan submission, and plan
processing requirements shall complete an application for
exemption in the form set forth in Appendix A-1 and pay any
applicable filing fee.36
B. Agricultural activity (see definitions), provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of Chapter 102.
C. Conservation practices being installed as part of the
implementation of a conservation plan written by an NRCScertified
planner.
D. Domestic landscape and/or vegetable gardening.
2. The stormwater exemption application (refer to Appendix A-1) shall be
completed and submitted to the Borough. Upon receipt of a written
approval from the Borough, the applicant may proceed with the
proposed improvements.
3. The Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the Borough believes may pose a
threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
36.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:341
§ 402. Small Projects. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
§ 403. Preapplication Meeting. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Applicants are encouraged to schedule a preapplication meeting to review
the overall stormwater management concept with Borough staff/Engineer.
The preapplication meeting is not mandatory and shall not constitute formal
1. Anyone proposing a small project shall submit three copies of the small
project application to the Borough.
2. A complete small project application shall include:
A. Small project application form (Appendix A-2).37
B. Small project sketch plan, including the following (Appendix A-5):38
(1) Name and address of landowner (and/or) developer.
(2) Date of small project application submission.
(3) Name of individual and/or firm that prepared the sketch if
different than the landowner and/or developer.
(4) Location and square footage of proposed impervious area or
land disturbance.
(5) Approximate footprint and location of all structures on
adjacent properties if located within 50 feet of the proposed
impervious area or land disturbance.
(6) Approximate location of existing stormwater management
facilities if present.
(7) Location and description of proposed stormwater management
facilities.
(8) Direction of proposed stormwater discharge (e.g., with
arrows).
(9) Scale and North arrow.
C. Filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current fee schedule).
3. The small project application shall be submitted in a format that is
clear, concise, legible, neat and well-organized.
4. The small project application shall be reviewed by Borough staff and
does not require processing through the Planning Commission or
Borough Council. Upon receipt of a written approval from the Borough,
the applicant may proceed with the proposed improvements.
37.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
38.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:342
filing of a plan with the Borough. Topics discussed may include the
following:
§ 404. Minor Stormwater Management Plan Submission. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
A. The developer shall provide available geological maps, plans and other
available data.
B. Findings of the site analysis, including identification of any
environmentally sensitive areas, wellhead protection areas, riparian
corridors, hydrologic soil groups, existing natural drainageways, karst
features, areas conducive to infiltration to be utilized for volume
control, etc.
C. Results of infiltration tests.
D. Applicable Borough Subdivision and Land Development and/or Zoning
Ordinance provisions.
E. The conceptual project layout, including proposed structural and
nonstructural BMPs.
1. When a minor SWM plan is required, the applicant shall submit the
following to the Borough:
A. Two copies of the SWM plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Part 5 of this chapter. [Amended by Ord. No.
995, 12/19/2019]
B. Two copies of all supplemental data, including a minor stormwater
management application (Appendix A-3).39
C. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current fee
schedule).
2. The minor SWM plan shall be submitted in a format that is clear,
concise, legible, neat and well-organized.
3. The applicant is responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies,
such as the Borough Engineer, Lancaster County Conservation District,
PennDOT, DEP, etc., when permits from these agencies are required.
Final approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining all
necessary permits.
4. Incomplete submissions, as determined by the Borough staff or its
designee, shall be returned to the applicant within 15 business days,
along with a statement that the submission is incomplete and stating
the deficiencies found. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed
accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance of the
application shall not, however, constitute an approval of the plan or a
39.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:343
§ 405. Major Stormwater Management Site Plan Submission. [Ord.
954, 12/19/2013]
waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal
the Borough's decision not to accept a particular application in
accordance with § 1004 of this chapter.
5. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Part, when an SWM
site plan is found to be deficient, the Borough may either disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Borough may accept submission of revisions.
6. The minor stormwater management plans shall be reviewed by Borough
staff or its designee and do not require processing through the Planning
Commission or Borough Council. Upon receipt of a written approval
from the Borough, the applicant may proceed with the proposed
improvements.
1. When a major SWM site plan is required, the applicant shall submit the
following to the Borough:
A. Two copies of the SWM plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements of Part 5 of this chapter. [Amended by Ord. No.
995, 12/19/2019]
B. Two copies of all supplemental data, including a major stormwater
management plan application (Appendix A-4).40
C. A filing fee (in accordance with the Borough's current fee
schedule).
2. The SWM site plan shall be submitted in a format that is clear, concise,
legible, neat and well-organized.
3. The applicant is responsible for submitting plans to any other agencies,
such as the Borough Engineer, Lancaster County Conservation District,
PennDOT, DEP, etc., when permits from these agencies are required.
Final approval shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining all
necessary permits.
4. Incomplete submissions, as determined by the governing body or its
designee, shall be returned to the applicant within 15 business days,
along with a statement that the submission is incomplete and stating
the deficiencies found. Otherwise, the application shall be deemed
accepted for filing as of the date of submission. Acceptance of the
application shall not, however, constitute an approval of the plan or a
waiver of any deficiencies or irregularities. The applicant may appeal
the Borough's decision not to accept a particular application in
accordance with § 1004 of this chapter.
40.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 405
FWD:344
§ 406. Municipal Review. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
§ 407. Modification Procedures. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
5. At its sole discretion and in accordance with this Part, when an SWM
site plan is found to be deficient, the Borough may either disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor
deficiencies, the Borough may accept submission of revisions.
6. The major stormwater management plan shall be processed through
the Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council.
1. When the regulated activity constitutes a subdivision or land
development, the SWM site plan and subdivision/land development plan
shall be processed concurrently according to the plan processing
procedure outlined in Chapter 22.
2. When the regulated activity constitutes a small project, the Borough
shall review and take action on the small project application within 15
business days of filing.
3. When the regulated activity does not constitute an exemption or small
project, the Borough Engineer shall review the SWM site plan for
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
4. Following receipt of the Borough Engineer's report and within 90 days
following the date of the first regular meeting of the Borough Council
after the date the application is filed, the Borough Council will schedule
the SWM site plan application for action at a regularly scheduled public
meeting.
5. Within 15 days of the meeting at which the SWM site plan application is
acted upon by the Borough Council, written notice of the Borough
Council's action shall be sent to the following individuals:
A. The applicant.
B. The firm that prepared the plan.
6. If the Borough disapproves the SWM site plan, the Borough will state
the reasons for the disapproval in writing. The Borough also may
approve the SWM site plan with conditions and, if so, shall provide the
acceptable conditions for approval in writing. Such conditional
approval shall be contingent upon the applicant's written acceptance of
the conditions.
7. Upon unconditional plan approval, the Borough or its designee will
complete and issue the stormwater management permit allowing
construction of the project to commence.
1. The provisions of this chapter are intended as minimum standards for
the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. The Borough
Council may grant a modification from literal compliance with
§ 405 FOREWORD § 407
FWD:345
§ 408. Revision of Plans. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
mandatory provisions of this chapter if the applicant can prove and
establish that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better
results on the applicant's site.
2. The approval of the modification shall not have the effect of making null
and void the intent and purpose of this chapter. In the approval of a
modification, the Borough Council may impose such conditions as will,
in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards and
requirements of this chapter.
3. All requests for modifications shall be processed in accordance with the
following:
A. A request for a modification shall be submitted to the Borough. The
request shall be made in writing and identify:
(1) The specific section of this chapter or decision which is
requested for modification;
(2) The proposed alternative to the requirement, when applicable;
and
(3) Justifications for an approval of the modification.
B. The Borough shall:
(1) Schedule the request for consideration by the Borough Council
at a public meeting within 45 days of receipt; and
(2) Provide adequate notice to the applicant and any other
involved parties of the meeting at which consideration of the
request is scheduled.
C. The Borough Council shall, following consideration of the request,
take such public action as it shall deem advisable and notify all
parties involved of the action. Such notice shall cite the findings
and reasons for the deposition of the modification.
D. Any application requesting a modification under this section shall
be accompanied by adequate supporting engineering data and
plans and shall be subject to review and recommendations of the
Borough Engineer prior to any action by the Borough.
4. Waivers or modification of § 302, relating to water quality and volume
control, require processing and approval by the regional office of the
PADEP. The applicant shall initiate and facilitate all consultations
between the DEP and the Borough.
1. Revisions to an SWM site plan after submission, but before Borough
action, shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan
§ 407 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 408
FWD:346
§ 409. Authorization to Construct and Term of Validity. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
Approval of an SWM site plan shall be valid for a period of one year
unless extended by the Borough. Any time extensions shall not exceed four
additional one-year extensions, for a total of five years. If a certificate of
completion as required by § 411 of this chapter has not been submitted
within the specified time period, then the Borough may consider the SWM
site plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits issued by the
Borough. SWM site plans that are considered disapproved by the Borough
may be resubmitted in accordance with Part 4 of this chapter.
§ 410. Financial Security. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
consistent with §§ 404 and 405 of this chapter and be subject to review
as specified in § 406 of this chapter.
2. For the purposes of review deadlines, each resubmission required
under § 408, Subsection 1 (after submission but before approval), shall
constitute a new submission for the purposes of time limits as set forth
in the MPC and this chapter.
3. Any substantial revisions to an SWM site plan after approval shall be
submitted as a new plan to the Borough, accompanied by the applicable
review fee.
1. A financial security (bond, restricted account or letter of credit) for
stormwater-related improvements shall be supplied by the developer in
conjunction with the subdivision/land development approval, or in
conjunction with the SWM site plan approval if no subdivision/land
development plan is required. The Borough shall, prior to issuing a
stormwater management or earth disturbance permit, require financial
security to be posted.
2. The applicant shall provide financial security to the Borough for the
timely installation and proper construction of all SWM facilities,
including E&S BMPs, as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter and, as applicable, in accordance with the provisions of
Sections 509, 510 and 511 of the MPC.41
3. As the work of installing the required SWM facilities proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the SWM facilities has been completed in accordance
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10509, 10510 and 10511.
§ 408 FOREWORD § 410
FWD:347
§ 411. Certificate of Completion. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
§ 412. Plan Recordation. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
with the approved SWM site plan. Upon such certification, the Borough
Council shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly
representing the value of the SWM facilities completed. The Borough
Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion and
certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated
cost of the aforesaid SWM facilities.
4. In the event that any SWM facilities which may be required have not
been installed as provided in the approved SWM site plan, the Borough
Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate bond or
other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the
proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the cost
of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the SWM facilities
covered by said security, the Borough may, at its option, install part of
such SWM facilities and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of
the SWM facilities. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the
security or from any legal or equitable action brought against the
developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the SWM
facilities covered by such security.
1. At the completion of the project, and as prerequisite for the release of
the financial security, the applicant shall provide the certification of
completion (Appendix A-8)42 from an engineer, landscape architect,
surveyor or other qualified person verifying that all permanent SWM
facilities have been constructed according to the plans and
specifications and approved revisions thereto.
2. Upon receipt of the certificate of completion and prior to release of the
remaining financial security, the Borough shall conduct a final
inspection to certify compliance with this chapter.
1. Upon completion of the plan improvements and prior to the release of
financial security, the applicant shall submit an as-built plan to the
Borough. The as-built plan must show the final design specifications for
all SWM facilities, grading and site improvements and be sealed by a
registered professional engineer or surveyor. As-built plans shall
include all information identified on the checklist included in Appendix
A-7.43
2. Review by Borough Engineer.
42.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
43.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 410 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 412
FWD:348
A. The as-built plan shall be reviewed by the Borough Engineer to
verify the plan includes all of the SWM facilities on the subject
property and the facilities are shown at the correct location.
B. The Borough Engineer shall either approve the as-built plan or
identify corrections required.
C. If the Borough Engineer identifies corrections required to the asbuilt
plan, the applicant shall submit a revised as-built plan to the
Borough addressing the corrections.
3. Following approval of the as-built plan by the Borough Engineer, the
applicant shall submit the SWM site plan for recordation in the office of
the Recorder of Deeds. Recording fees will be the responsibility of the
applicant/developer.
4. Upon completion of recording, a digital copy of the as-built plan, the
SWM site plan signed and sealed with the recording information and
calculations, waiver requests and other documents shall be submitted
to the Borough along with one paper copy of the recorded plan.
A. The digital inventory shall be in an electronic format acceptable to
the Borough Engineer.
B. All coordinates as depicted on the plan shall be based on the PA
South Zone State Plan Coordinate System (NAD83 for horizontal
and NAVD88 for vertical).
§ 412 FOREWORD § 412
FWD:349

Part 5
INFORMATION TO BE INCLUDED ON OR WITH STORMWATER
MANAGEMENT SITE PLANS
§ 501. General Plan Requirements. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
§ 502. Minor Stormwater Management Plan. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
1. The SWM site plan shall consist of a narrative and all applicable
calculations, maps, plans and supplemental information necessary to
demonstrate compliance with this chapter.
2. All landowners of land included in the SWM site plan shall be required
to execute all applications and final documents.
3. All SWM site plans and design calculations shall be signed and sealed
by the qualified person responsible for the design (Appendix A-6).44
4. Where the regulated activity constitutes subdivision or land
development as hereinabove defined, the SWM site plan shall be
submitted with and form an integral part of the plans required under
Chapter 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
1. Drafting Standards.
A. The plan should be clearly and legibly drawn.
B. If the plan is prepared in two or more drawing sheets, a key map
showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed
on each sheet.
C. Each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5). The cover page
shall include a sheet index indicating which plan sheets are to be
recorded.
D. Drawings or maps of the project area shall be drawn at one inch
equals 50 feet or a larger scale (i.e., one inch equals 40 feet, one
inch equals 30 feet, etc.) and shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch
by thirty-six-inch sheets.
E. SWM site plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the
requirements for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Lancaster County.
F. The total development site boundary and size with distances
marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
G. The proposed name or identifying title of the plan.
44.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 502
FWD:351
2. SWM Site Plan Information. The following items shall be included in the
SWM plan:
A. The date of the SWM plan and all revision dates, graphic scale,
written scale and North arrow.
B. The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
C. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan.
D. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the SWM
facilities to be permanent fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed unless a revised plan is approved by the Borough, which
shall be included on a plan sheet intended for recording.
E. For SWM facilities located off site:
(1) A note on the plan referencing a recorded stormwater
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement that indicates
the location and responsibility for maintenance of the off-site
facilities.
(2) All off-site SWM facilities shall meet the performance
standards specified in this chapter.
F. A note informing the owner that the Borough shall have the right of
entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater conveyance,
treatment or storage facilities.
G. The Borough of Elizabethtown SWM plan approval certification
shall be included on the plan (Appendix A-6).45
H. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals
2,000 feet, relating the plan to Borough boundaries, at least two
intersections of road center lines or other identifiable landmarks.
I. A note on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for
dedication along with the statement that the Borough is not
responsible for maintenance of any area not dedicated to and
accepted for public use and that no alteration to swales, basins or
placement of structures shall be permitted within easements.
J. A certificate, signed and sealed by a qualified professional
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to
perform such duties. See form of certificate in Appendix A-6.46
45.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 502 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 502
FWD:352
K. The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent lands,
including those properties located across street rights-of-way.
L. Existing Features.
(1) In areas of disturbance, contours at intervals of one or two
feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas
undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used. In areas
of very flat slopes, one-foot contours are required.
(2) The locations of all existing utilities (including on-lot disposal
systems and wells), sanitary sewers, and water lines and
associated easements within 100 feet of the development site
boundary.
(3) Physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, wetlands,
sinkholes, streams, lakes, ponds and other water bodies,
existing drainagecourses, karst features, areas of native
vegetation, including trees greater than six inches' diameter at
breast height, woodlands, other environmentally sensitive
areas and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the development site within 100 feet of the
development site boundary.
(4) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(5) All existing man-made features within 100 feet of the
development site boundary.
M. Proposed Features.
(1) Changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including
final proposed contours at intervals of one or two feet in areas
of disturbance. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and
areas undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(2) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, buildings and other
impervious and semi-impervious areas.
(3) The location of any proposed on-lot disposal systems,
replacement drainfield easements and water supply wells.
(4) A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
(5) Plan and profile drawings of all proposed SWM facilities,
including BMPs, drainage structures, pipes, open channels and
swales. This information shall be of the quality required for
construction of all facilities.
(6) Where pervious pavement is to be installed, pavement material
and construction specifications shall be included.
§ 502 FOREWORD § 502
FWD:353
§ 503. Major Stormwater Management Plan. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
(7) The location of all existing and proposed easements, including
drainage easements, access easements and riparian corridor
easements.
(8) A planting plan shall be provided for all vegetated BMPs in
accordance with § 301, Subsection 14.
N. The location of all E&S control facilities and the sequence of
construction.
O. The plan shall include a note on the cover page identifying the
number of square feet of impervious coverage which the
stormwater management facilities have been designed to
accommodate.
3. Additional Information.
A. A general description of the development site, including a
description of existing natural and hydrologic features and any
environmentally sensitive areas.
B. A general description of the overall SWM concept for the project,
including a description of permanent SWM techniques,
nonstructural BMPs to be employed and construction specifications
of the materials to be used for structural SWM facilities. The
narrative shall include a description of any treatment trains and
how the SWM facilities are meant to function with each other to
manage stormwater runoff.
C. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
Borough SWM facilities that may receive runoff from the
development site.
D. Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all
SWM facilities.
E. An expected project time schedule.
1. Drafting Standards.
A. The plan should be clearly and legibly drawn.
B. If the plan is prepared in two or more drawing sheets, a key map
showing the location of the sheets and a match line shall be placed
on each sheet.
C. Each sheet shall be numbered to show the relationship to the total
number of sheets in the plan (e.g., Sheet 1 of 5).
D. Drawings or maps of the project area shall be drawn at one inch
equals 50 feet or a larger scale (i.e., one inch equals 40 feet, one
§ 502 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 503
FWD:354
inch equals 30 feet, etc.) and shall be submitted on twenty-fourinch
by thirty-six-inch sheets.
E. SWM plans shall be prepared in a form that meets the
requirements for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of
Lancaster County.
F. The total development site boundary and size with distances
marked to the nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
G. The proposed name or identifying title of the plan.
H. The plan sheets or sheet index shall clearly indicate which sheets
are to be recorded as part of the project.
2. SWM Site Plan Information. The following items shall be included in the
SWM site plan:
A. The date of the SWM site plan and all revision dates, graphic scale,
written scale and North arrow.
B. The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
C. The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan.
D. A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the SWM
facilities to be permanent fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed unless a revised plan is approved by the Borough, which
shall be included on a plan sheet intended for recording.
E. For SWM facilities located off site:
(1) A note on the plan referencing a recorded stormwater
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement that indicates
the location and responsibility for maintenance of the off-site
facilities.
(2) All off-site SWM facilities shall meet the performance
standards specified in this chapter.
F. A note informing the owner that the Borough shall have the right of
entry for the purposes of inspecting all stormwater conveyance,
treatment, or storage facilities.
G. The Borough of Elizabethtown SWM plan approval certification
shall be included on the plan (Appendix A-6).47
47.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 503 FOREWORD § 503
FWD:355
H. A location map, drawn to a scale of a minimum of one inch equals
2,000 feet, relating the plan to municipal boundaries, at least two
intersections of road center lines or other identifiable landmarks.
I. A note on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered for
dedication along with the statement that the Borough is not
responsible for maintenance of any area not dedicated to and
accepted for public use and that no alteration to swales, basins or
placement of structures shall be permitted within easements.
J. A certificate, signed and sealed by a qualified professional
registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and qualified to
perform such duties. See form of certificate in Appendix A-6.48
K. The names of all owners of all immediately adjacent lands,
including those properties located across street rights-of-way.
L. Existing Features.
(1) In areas of disturbance, contours at intervals of one or two
feet. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and areas
undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used. In areas
of very flat slopes, one-foot contours are required.
(2) The locations of all existing utilities (including on-lot disposal
systems and wells), sanitary sewers and water lines and
associated easements within 200 feet of the development site
boundary.
(3) Physical features, including flood hazard boundaries, wetlands,
sinkholes, streams, lakes, ponds and other water bodies,
existing drainagecourses, karst features, areas of native
vegetation, including trees greater than six inches' diameter at
breast height, woodlands, other environmentally sensitive
areas and the total extent of the upstream area draining
through the development site within 200 feet of the
development site boundary.
(4) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(5) All existing man-made features within 200 feet of the
development site boundary.
M. Proposed Features.
(1) Changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, including
final proposed contours at intervals of one or two feet in areas
of disturbance. In areas of steep slopes (greater than 15%) and
areas undisturbed, five-foot contour intervals may be used.
48.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 503 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 503
FWD:356
(2) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, buildings and other
impervious and semi-impervious areas.
(3) The location of any proposed on-lot disposal systems,
replacement drainfield easements and water supply wells.
(4) A note indicating existing and proposed land use(s).
(5) Plan and profile drawings of all proposed SWM facilities,
including BMPs, drainage structures, pipes, open channels and
swales. This information shall be of the quality required for
construction of all facilities.
(6) Where pervious pavement is to be installed, pavement material
and construction specifications shall be included.
(7) The location of all existing and proposed easements, including
drainage easements, access easements and riparian corridor
easements.
(8) A planting plan shall be provided for all vegetated BMPs in
accordance with § 301, Subsection 14.
N. The location of all E&S control facilities and the sequence of
construction.
O. The plan shall include a note on the cover page identifying the
number of square feet of impervious coverage which the
stormwater management facilities have been designed to
accommodate.
3. Additional Information.
A. A general description of the development site, including a
description of existing natural and hydrologic features and any
environmentally sensitive areas.
B. A general description of the overall SWM concept for the project,
including a description of permanent SWM techniques,
nonstructural BMPs to be employed and construction specifications
of the materials to be used for structural SWM facilities. The
narrative shall include a description of any treatment trains and
how the SWM facilities are meant to function with each other to
manage stormwater runoff.
C. The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality
and peak flows) on adjacent properties and on any existing
municipal SWM facilities that may receive runoff from the
development site.
D. Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural computations for all
SWM facilities.
E. An expected project time schedule.
§ 503 FOREWORD § 504
FWD:357
§ 504. Supplemental Information. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
1. In areas of carbonate geology, a detailed geologic evaluation prepared
by a registered professional geologist (PG) must be submitted as part of
the SWM site plan. The report shall include, but not limited to, the
following:
A. The location of the following karst features:
(1) Sinkholes.
(2) Closed depressions.
(3) Lineaments in carbonate areas.
(4) Fracture traces.
(5) Caverns.
(6) Intermittent lakes.
(7) Ephemeral disappearing streams.
(8) Bedrock pinnacles (surface or subsurface).
B. A plan for remediation of any identified karst features.
C. Impacts of SWM facilities on adjacent karst features and impacts of
karst features on adjacent SWM facilities.
D. The requirements of § 301, Subsection 10, shall be addressed in the
geologic evaluation.
2. An E&S plan, including all approvals, as required by Chapter 102, shall
be provided to the Borough prior to unconditional final plan approval.
3. For any activities that require a DEP joint permit application and are
regulated under Chapter 105 or Chapter 106, require a PennDOT
highway occupancy permit, or require any other permit under
applicable state or federal regulations, the permit(s) shall be part of the
SWM site plan and must be obtained prior to unconditional final plan
approval.
4. An operation and maintenance (O&M) plan that addresses the
requirements of § 603.
§ 504 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 504
FWD:358
Part 6
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE (O&M)
§ 601. Responsibilities of Developers and Landowners. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
§ 602. Operation and Maintenance agreements. [Ord. 954, 12/19/
2013]
§ 603. Operation and Maintenance (O&M) Plan Contents. [Ord. 954,
12/19/2013]
1. The landowner, successor and assigns shall maintain all SWM facilities
in good working order in accordance with the approved O&M plan.
2. The landowner shall convey to the Borough easements to assure the
Borough the right, but not the responsibility, to access the site for
inspections and maintenance.
3. The landowner shall keep on file with the Borough the name, address
and telephone number of the person or company responsible for
maintenance activities; in the event of a change, new information will
be submitted to the Borough within 10 days of the change.
4. Enumerate permanent SWM facilities as permanent real estate
appurtenances and record as deed restrictions or easements that run
with the land.
5. The record owner of the development site shall sign and record an
operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (stormwater
management agreement) covering all SWM facilities, including riparian
buffers and riparian forest buffers, which are to be privately owned.
Said agreement, designated as Appendix D, is attached hereto and
made part hereof.49 The O&M plan and agreement shall be recorded as
a restrictive covenant agreement that runs with the land.
1. The operation and maintenance agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the Borough Solicitor, Borough Engineer and
Borough Council.
2. The Borough is exempt from the requirement to sign and record an
O&M agreement.
1. The O&M plan shall clearly establish the operation and maintenance
necessary to ensure the proper functioning of all temporary and
permanent SWM facilities and E&S control facilities.
2. The following shall be addressed in the O&M plan:
49.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 603
FWD:359
§ 604. Maintenance of Existing Facilities/BMPs. [Ord. 954, 12/19/
2013]
A. A description of maintenance requirements, including, but not
limited to, the following:
(1) Regular inspection of the SWM facilities. To assure proper
implementation of BMPs, maintenance and care SWM BMPs
shall be inspected by a qualified person, which may include the
landowner, or the owner's designee (including the Borough for
dedicated and owned facilities), according to the following
minimum frequencies:
(a) Annually for the first five years.
(b) Once every three years thereafter.
(c) During or immediately after the cessation of a ten-year or
greater storm (six-inch equivalent).
(d) As specified in the O&M agreement pursuant to § 602.
(2) All pipes, swales and detention facilities shall be kept free of
any debris or other obstruction and in original design
condition.
(3) Removal of silt from all permanent structures which trap silt or
sediment in order to keep the material from building up in
grass waterways, pipes, detention or retention basins,
infiltration structures or BMPs, and thus reducing their
capacity to convey or store water.
(4) Reestablishment of vegetation of scoured areas or areas where
vegetation has not been successfully established. Selection of
seed mixtures shall be subject to approval by the Borough.
B. A riparian forest buffer management plan prepared in accordance
with Chapter 102, § 14(b)(4), if required.
C. Identification of a responsible individual, corporation, association
or other entity for ownership and maintenance of both temporary
and permanent SWM and E&S facilities.
D. Establishment of suitable easements for access to all SWM
facilities.
1. SWM facilities existing on the effective date of this chapter, which have
not been accepted by the Borough, or for which maintenance
responsibility has not been assumed by a private entity such as a
homeowners' association, shall be maintained by the individual
landowners. Such maintenance shall include, at a minimum, those
items set forth in § 603, Subsection 2A, above. If the Borough
determines at any time that any permanent SWM facility has been
§ 603 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 604
FWD:360
§ 605. Permanence of Stormwater Management/BMP facilities.
[Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
eliminated, altered, blocked through the erection of structures or the
deposit of materials, or improperly maintained, the condition
constitutes a nuisance, and the Borough shall notify the landowner of
corrective measures that are required and provide for a reasonable
period of time, not to exceed 30 days, within which the property owner
shall take such corrective action. If the landowner does not take the
required corrective action, the Borough may either perform the work or
contract for the performance of the work and bill the landowner for the
cost of the work plus a penalty of 10% of the cost of the work. If such
bill is not paid by the property owner within 30 days, the Borough may
file a municipal claim against the property upon which the work was
performed in accordance with the applicable laws. The Borough shall
have the right to choose among the remedies and may use one or more
remedies concurrently.
1. The following note shall be included on the cover page: "No person shall
modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter SWM facilities and/or BMP
facilities which may have been installed on a property unless a
stormwater management permit has been obtained to permit such
modification, removal, filling, landscaping or alteration. No person shall
place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into an SWM facility,
a BMP facility or within a drainage easement."
§ 604 FOREWORD § 605
FWD:361

Part 7
FEES AND EXPENSES
§ 701. General Provisions. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The Borough may include all costs incurred in the fees charged to an
applicant.
§ 702. Expenses Covered by Fees. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The fees (per the Borough Fee Schedule, as amended) may include, but not
be limited to, costs for the following:
§ 703. Borough of Elizabethtown Stormwater Management
Inspection Fund. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan.
C. Review of the stormwater operation and maintenance plan and
stormwater agreement by the Borough Solicitor/Engineer/staff.
D. Inspections.
E. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
1. Persons installing SWM storage facilities or BMPs shall be required to
pay a specified amount to the Elizabethtown Borough Stormwater
Management Inspection Fund to help defray costs of periodic
inspection expenses.
2. The amount of the deposit shall be determined as follows:
A. If the storage facility is to be privately owned and maintained, the
deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections performed by
the Borough for a period of 10 years.
B. If the storage facility is to be owned and maintained by the
Borough, the deposit shall cover the cost of periodic inspections
performed by the Borough for a period of 10 years.
C. The Borough's Engineer will establish the estimated costs utilizing
information submitted by the applicant. If the applicant is not
satisfied with costs prepared by the Borough Engineer, the
applicant can appeal the same pursuant to § 1004.
3. All interest earned shall become the property of the Borough to be
further used for inspection.
§ 701 FOREWORD § 703
FWD:363
4. Nothing contained herein in § 703 shall constitute a waiver of any duty
of any private owner to maintain its SWM storage facilities at its sole
expense.
5. At a minimum, the Borough shall inspect the stormwater and BMP
facilities:
A. Once the first three years.
B. Once every two years thereafter.
C. During or immediately after the cessation of a rainfall event of six
inches or greater.
6. The Borough shall prepare a report of the site inspection for the file
records; and if deficiencies are found or the owner is in violation of the
stormwater management maintenance and declaration of easement
agreement, the Borough shall issue a letter of violation to the property
owner to be satisfactory addressed within the time frame indicated in
the letter. The property owner shall be responsible to reimburse the
Borough for legal, engineering and administrative costs of enforcement
if the violations are not remedied within the time frame indicated.
§ 703 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 703
FWD:364
Part 8
INSPECTIONS
§ 801. Schedule of Inspections. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
1. The Borough or its designee shall inspect all phases of the installation
of any temporary or permanent SWM facilities.
2. A schedule of required inspections shall be determined through a
preconstruction meeting with Borough staff. The schedule shall include,
but not be limited to, inspections for erosion and sedimentation control
measures, pipe installation prior to backfilling, outlet structure
installation prior to backfilling, seepage bed installation, underdrain
installation prior to backfilling, site grading, antiseep collar installation,
impermeable liner installation, roof leader installation and connection,
site stabilization, etc.
3. Required inspections shall be scheduled through the Borough a
minimum of 48 hours prior to the time the inspection is requested.
4. During any stage of work, if the Borough or its designee determines
that any temporary or permanent SWM facilities are not being installed
in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, the Borough shall
revoke any existing permits until a revised SWM site plan is submitted
and approved, as specified in this chapter.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 801
FWD:365

Part 9
PROHIBITIONS
§ 901. Prohibited Discharges and Connections. [Ord. 954, 12/19/
2013]
1. The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 901,
Subsection 4, below.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface,
that allows any nonstormwater discharge, including sewage,
process wastewater and wash water, to enter a municipal separate
storm sewer or waters of this commonwealth and any connections
to the storm sewer from indoor drains and sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or
industrial land use to the municipal separate storm sewer which
has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and
approved by the Borough.
2. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into surface waters
of this commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater,
except:
A. As provided in § 901, Subsection 4, below; and
B. Discharges allowed under a state or federal permit.
3. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
an SWM facility or within a drainage easement.
4. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of this
commonwealth:
A. Discharges from firefighting activities.
B. Potable water sources, including water line flushing.
C. Irrigation drainage.
D. Air-conditioning condensate.
E. Springs.
F. Water from crawl space pumps.
G. Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
H. Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
I. Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
§ 901 FOREWORD § 901
FWD:367
J. Lawn watering.
K. Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
L. Uncontaminated groundwater.
M. Water from individual residential car washing.
N. Routine external building wash down (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
O. Diverted stream flows.
P. Rising groundwaters.
5. In the event that the Borough or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in § 901, Subsection 4, above significantly
contribute to pollution of the waters of this commonwealth, the
Borough or DEP will notify the responsible person(s) to cease the
discharge.
§ 901 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 901
FWD:368
Part 10
ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
§ 1001. Right-of-Entry. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any property within the
Borough to investigate or ascertain the condition of the subject property in
regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 1002. Enforcement. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
The Borough Council is hereby authorized and directed to enforce all of the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 1003. Violations, penalties and remedies. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
A. Any permit or approval issued by the Borough of Elizabethtown
pursuant to this chapter may be suspended by the Borough for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or O&M agreement.
(2) A violation of any provisions of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development that constitutes or creates a hazard,
nuisance, pollution or endangers the life or property of others.
B. A suspended permit may be reinstated by the Borough when:
(1) The Borough has inspected and approved the corrections to the
violation that caused the suspension;
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation has been corrected.
1. It shall be a violation of this chapter to commit or permit any other
person to commit any of the following acts:
A. To commence regulated activities prior to obtaining unconditional
approval of an SWM site plan or in violation of the terms or
conditions of an SWM site plan approved under this chapter.
B. To install, repair, modify or alter SWM facilities prior to obtaining
approvals under this chapter or in a manner which violates the
terms and conditions of any approval issued under this chapter.
C. To misuse or fail to maintain any SWM facility installed upon a
property.
D. To construct any improvements upon, grade, fill or take any other
action which will impair the proper functioning of any SWM facility.
§ 1001 FOREWORD § 1003
FWD:369
§ 1004. Appeals. [Ord. 954, 12/19/2013]
E. To place false information on or omit relevant information from an
application for approval under this chapter.
F. To fail to comply with any other provisions of this chapter.
2. For each violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner, agent,
lessee, contractor or any other person who commits, takes part in, or
assists in any such violation shall be liable, upon conviction thereof in a
summary proceeding, to pay a fine of not less than $200 nor more than
$1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution. In
accordance with Section 3321(6) of the Borough Code,50 any person
found guilty of violating this chapter may be assessed reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceeding.
Each day or portion thereof in which a violation exists shall be
considered a separate violation of this chapter, and each section of this
chapter which is violated shall be considered a separate violation.
3. The Borough may also institute suits to restrain, prevent, or abate a
violation of this chapter in equity or at law. Such proceedings in equity
or at law may be initiated before any court of competent jurisdiction. In
cases of emergency where, in the opinion of the court, the
circumstances of the case require immediate abatement of the unlawful
conduct, the court may, in its decree, fix a reasonable time during which
the person responsible for the unlawful conduct shall correct or abate
the same. The expense of such proceedings shall be recoverable from
the violator in such manner as may now or hereafter be provided by law.
In accordance with Section 3321(6) of the Borough Code, any person
found guilty of violating this chapter may be assessed reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement proceeding.
4. The Borough Council may also take actions relating to suspension or
revocation of permits set forth in § 1002.
5. The Borough Council may, by resolution, appoint a Code Enforcement
Officer to enforce this chapter and may authorize such Code
Enforcement Officer to institute summary criminal proceedings without
prior action by the Borough Council.
1. Any person aggrieved by any administrative action of the Borough may
appeal to the Elizabethtown Borough Council within 30 days of that
action. Any such appeal shall be governed by the procedures of Article
V of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 501 et seq.
2. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Council may
appeal to the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas in accordance
with Article VII of Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 701 et seq., the
Local Agency Law, within 30 days of that decision.
50.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 48321(6).
§ 1003 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1005
FWD:370
§ 1005. Modification of Ordinance Provisions. [Ord. 954, 12/19/
2013]
1. The provisions of this chapter not relating to water quality are intended
as minimum standards for the protection of the public health, safety
and welfare. The Borough reserves the right to modify or to extend
them conditionally in individual cases as may be necessary in the public
interest; provided, however, that such variation shall not have the effect
of nullifying the intent and purpose of this chapter, and that the
applicant shows that to the satisfaction of the Borough that the
applicable regulation is unreasonable, or will cause undue hardship, or
that an alternative proposal will allow for equal or better results. The
list of such modifications, along with an explanation of and justification
for each modification, shall be included on the SWM site plan. This
section does not apply during an enforcement action.
2. In granting waivers/modifications for provisions of this chapter not
relating to water quality, the Borough may impose such conditions as
will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the
standards and requirements of this chapter.
§ 1005 FOREWORD § 1005
FWD:371

Part 11
REFERENCES
§ 1101. References.
1. 25 Pennsylvania Code, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment Control.
2. Minnesota Pollution Control Agency.
3. Code of Federal Regulations, Title 44: Emergency Management and
Assistance, § 9.4, Definitions.
4. 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 105.
5. Based on definition in Wisconsin Department of Natural Resources
Administrative Rule NR 151.006.
6. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, No.
363-0300-002 (December 2006), as amended and updated,
Pennsylvania Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual,
Harrisburg, Pennsylvania.
7. City of Jacksonville website, http://www3.coj.net/Departments/
CityFees/ Glossary.aspx.
8. Lancaster County Model Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.
9. Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, No.
363-2134-008 (March 2012), as amended and updated, Erosion and
Sediment Pollution Control Program Manual, Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania.
10. CSN Technical Bulletin No. 5, Stormwater Design for High Intensity
Redevelopment Projects in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed, Version
2.0, Chesapeake Stormwater Network, January 5, 2011, page 43.
11. "Penn State Urban Hydrology Model User Manual," by Thomas A.
Seybert, PE, David F. Kibler, PE, and Elizabeth I. White, PE, August
1993, page 70, and VT/PSUHM help screen.
12. 25 Pa. Code, Chapter 71, Administration of Sewage Facilities
Planning Program, § 71.1.
§ 1101 FOREWORD § 1101
FWD:373
Chapter 18
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
§ 1101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1101
FWD:374
Part 1
SEWER SYSTEM CONNECTIONS
§ 101. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
These rules and regulations are a part of the contract with every person who
takes sewer service and every such person by taking that service agrees to
be bound hereby. These rules and regulations are not intended to conflict
with any local, State or Federal legislation. Any provisions that are found to
be in direct conflict with such legislation shall not be applicable.
§ 102. Enforcement. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 2; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
These rules and regulations shall become effective on the date of adoption
of this Part for all properties then and after connected to the sewer system.
All prior rules and regulations not consistent herewith are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that all rights and fees due the Borough under such
rules and regulations are preserved. The Borough reserves the right to
amend these rules and regulations in such manner and at such time as, in
its opinion, may be advisable.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 3; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
APPLICANT — A person, building owner or lot owner who applies sewer
services at a premises.
APPLICATION — Form supplied by the Borough indicating the desire to
connect to the sewer system.
BOROUGH — Borough of Elizabethtown.
BOROUGH SERVICE LINE — The service pipe and appurtenances
extending from the Borough's main including:
CUSTOMER — Any person who receives water service from the Borough.
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — That part of the sewer service pipe
extending from the Borough's service line to the premises.
OWNER — The person in whose name the deed for a property is designated.
PERMIT — Borough of Elizabethtown sewer permit (including application
form).
PREMISES — The property, building, or other site to which sewer service is
furnished, including:
SEWER SERVICE LINE — The tee or tap in the main and the lateral
pipe to the curb.
A.
A. A building under one roof and occupied by one family or one business;
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:375
SEWER SYSTEM — The Borough's sewer treatment and collection facilities,
taken as a whole, or as any portion thereof.
TOWNSHIP — Mount Joy Township or West Donegal Township.
§ 104. Application Procedure. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Each combination of buildings owned by one person, serviced by one
service line, and occupied by one family or business;
B.
C. Each side of a double house or each housing unit;
Each apartment, office, or suite of offices located in a building having
several such apartments, offices, or suites of offices and using in
common one or more means of entrance;
D.
E. Any mobile home occupied by one family or business.
Any other type of dwelling unit or business requiring sewer usage as
determined by the Borough.
F.
1. Any applicant desiring sewer service from the Borough's main into his
or her premises must first make a written application on the form
furnished by the Borough.
2. The applicant must also demonstrate that the premises has received
final subdivision or land development plan approval and recorded at the
County level. If the applicant's premises is located within the Township,
the applicant must also produce a letter from the Township stating that
the lot(s) have received final plan approval and recordation as above
mentioned.
3. The application, which must be signed by the owner or duly authorized
agent, shall not be approved until the Borough receives full payment of
all applicable service connection charges, tapping fees or other charges
adopted by the Borough.
4. Separate service applications shall be made for each premises as
defined by this Part.
5. The fact that an application may not exist, or may not be signed by the
owner, shall not relieve the owner of his or her responsibility for
ultimate payment of all service charges related to the premises.
6. Applications for sewer service will be reviewed by the Borough and its
consulting engineers. Completed applications shall be reviewed in
order of date of submittal.
7. In the event that service connections are available on a limited basis
only, applications will be reviewed and approved in order of date of
submittal. A waiting list of approved applications will be on file at the
Borough Office until new permits are issued.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:376
§ 105. General Conditions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 5; as amended
by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 106. Residential Conversions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 8]
Conversions of existing industrial or commercial structures to a residential
use, provided that the previous use has not lapsed by more than 30 months,
may average the previous metered usage towards the proposed residential
8. In the event that a deposit is required, no interest will be paid by the
Borough.
9. A permit shall be issued when the completed application has been
approved by the Borough.
1. No customer or any premises receiving sewer service shall be allowed
to supply such service to other persons or other premises without
written consent of the Borough.
2. Upon approval of the sewer service application, and payment of all
applicable charges, the Borough will install its service lines. The
location of the service line will be designated by the Borough.
3. All Borough property owners, customers or premises shall be
connected to Borough sewer service lines as of the effective date of this
Part. A waiver of this provision may be granted only by Borough
Council.
4. The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repair of its
service line.
5. The customer's service line, beyond the Borough's service line, shall be
installed and maintained by the customer at his expense.
6. The customer's service line shall be installed as a continuous length of
pipe and shall meet Borough specifications.
7. When a customer desires to change in location or size of an existing
service line, he shall bear the entire cost of the change, including the
Borough's service line.
8. Although service line pressure may be undesirably low, the Borough
shall be under no obligation to increase pressure by pumping or other
means.
9. Each customer will be supplied through a separate metered service
connection unless the Borough waives this requirement in written form.
10. In private developments, the Borough shall own and maintain the
Borough sewer service line in the same manner as a publicly owned
development.
11. No cross-connections of any type shall be allowed by the Borough.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 106
FWD:377
use for the purpose of computing the connection fees. Future residential
use shall be calculated at 12,000 gallons per quarter for each premises.
Example: An existing industrial structure consumed 480,000 gallons in the
four quarters prior to closing its operation. An applicant seeks to renovate
this structure or include 20 apartment units. The connection fee for water
and sewer services would by calculated as follows:
§ 107. Fee Adjustment. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 9]
Borough Council may, at its sole discretion, review and modify the sewer
connection fees for a particular property when such an adjustment is in the
overwhelming public good.
A. Four hundred eighty thousand gallons ÷ four quarters = 120,000
gallons per quarter.
B. Twelve thousand gallons per quarter ÷ 12,000 gallons = 10 units.
C. Twenty proposed units — 10 adjusted units = 10 units.
D. The applicant would pay $10,000 for water connections and $10,000 for
sewer connections.
§ 106 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:378
Part 2
SEWER RENTAL
§ 201. Classifications and Rates. [Ord. 399, 4/19/1960, § I; as
amended by Ord. 453, 10/15/1963, § 1; by Ord. 507, 10/17/1967, § I;
by Ord. 524, 1/7/1969, § I; by Ord. 563, 4/17/1973, § 1; by Ord. 587,
7/15/1975, § 1; by Ord. 606, 3/31/1978, § 1; by Ord. 636, 12/17/1981,
§ I; by Ord. 679, 12/18/1986, § I; by Ord. 739, 4/15/1993, § I; by Ord.
791, 12/17/1998, § I; by Ord. 849, 9/16/2004; by Ord. 924, 10/21/
2010]
There is hereby imposed upon all owners of property located within the
Borough of Elizabethtown which are connected to and have use of Borough
sewers, sewerage system and sewage treatment plant, hereinafter
collectively called "sewer system," an annual sewer rental, effective April
1, 1978, and thereafter, and which shall be due and payable quarterly in
accordance with the schedule of rates and classifications hereinafter set
forth:
A. Private Dwellings or Living Units. [Amended by Ord. 965, 12/18/
2014; and by Ord. 971, 12/17/2015]
(1) Each single-family dwelling unit — $92.00 per quarter.
(2) Each apartment unit — $92.00 per quarter.
B. Commercial and Industrial and Other Nonresidential Users.
(1) Sanitary Sewage. The quarterly sewer rents or charges for all
commercial or industrial users, including without limitation, retail
gas stations with or without car washing facilities, laundromats,
bowling alleys, motel and hotel units, restaurants, bars, grocery
stores, drug stores or pharmacies, nursing homes, private clubs,
photofinishers, swimming pools, hospitals, retail stores, beauty
salons, barber shops, funeral homes, financial institutions, office
buildings, theaters, municipal buildings, dry cleaners, coinoperated
car washes and bakeries, shall be based on the volume or
quantity of water used as evidenced by meter readings of water
meters installed by the water supplier for the purpose of measuring
water purchased from such water supplier or such other meters or
measuring devices as may be installed or otherwise determined
pursuant to the provisions of this Part, and shall be subject to the
minimum charges hereinafter provided, all as follows: [Amended
by Ord. 965, 12/18/2014; and by Ord. 971, 12/17/2015]
(a) Quarterly Rate — $0.0081 per gallon.
(b) Minimum Charge per Quarter — $92.00.
(2) Sanitary Sewage Users Who Have Purchased Reserved Capacity.
The quarterly sewer rate or charges for all industrial
establishments and nonresidential users who have purchased
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:379
reserved capacity in the treatment works shall be the proportion
of the total cost to the Borough of operating the wastewater
treatment plant (including applicable administrative costs but
excluding debt service cost) equal to the ratio of the user's total
recorded flow of wastewater to the total recorded flow of all
industrialized and sanitary wastewater from all sources discharged
into the facility. The charge shall be calculated in accordance with
the following formula:
The charge shall be determined by multiplying the total operation
and maintenance cost of the treatment works (excluding the
Borough's debt service) by the ratio of the user's total recorded
flow of wastewater to the total recorded flow of all industrial
and sanitary wastewater from all Borough customers through the
treatment works.
A = B x C/D
Where:
A = user's basic operation and maintenance charge
B = total operation and maintenance cost of the
treatment works exclusive of all principal or interest
payable by the Borough because, on account of, or by
reason of any outstanding obligation of the Borough
C = user's total recorded quarterly wastewater flow
through the treatment works
D = total recorded quarterly wastewater flow through the
treatment works
(3) Surcharge. In addition, a surcharge shall be imposed for any
industrial waste which the Borough consents to accept into the
sewer system which has a total suspended solids concentration in
excess of 250 milligrams per liter or a total biochemical oxygen
demand concentration in excess of 250 milligrams per liter or an oil
and grease concentration in excess of 80 milligrams per liter, and
the charge for treatment of such industrial waste shall be
computed in accordance with the following formula: [Amended by
Ord. 965, 12/18/2014]
Total Charge = Q + [0:01 Q(TSS-250)] + [0.01 Q(BOD-250)] +
[0.01 Q(OG-80)]
Where:
Q = Quarterly metered charge
TSS = Total suspended solids in milligrams per liter
BOD = Biochemical oxygen demand in milligrams per
liter
OG = Oils/grease in milligrams per liter
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:380
(4) Nutrient Surcharge. Due to the addition of nutrient limits to the
Borough's NPDES wastewater discharge permit, a nutrient
surcharge shall be imposed for any industrial waste which the
Borough consents to accept into the sewer system which has a total
nitrogen concentration in excess of 40 milligrams per liter and a
total phosphorus concentration in excess of 10 milligrams per liter,
and the charge for treatment of such industrial waste shall be
computed in accordance with the following formula: [Added by
Ord. 965, 12/18/2014]
Total Nutrient Surcharge = Q + [0.01 Q(NITROGEN-40)] + [0.01
Q(PHOSPHORUS-10)]
Where:
Q = Quarterly metered charge
NITROGEN = Total nitrogen concentration in
milligrams per liter
PHOSPHORUS = Total phosphorus concentration in
milligrams per liter
C. Multipurpose Commercial or Industrial Use. In case of a combination of
one or more private dwellings or living units with one or more
commercial or industrial establishments in one building or structure,
such unit and such establishment having the use of the sewer system
through one sewer connection, then the sewer rentals and charges shall
be determined as follows:
(1) A quarterly flat rate of $92.00 per quarter shall be imposed for each
private dwelling or each living unit. [Amended by Ord. 965, 12/
18/2014; and by Ord. 971, 12/17/2015]
(2) The nonresidential fraction of the total combined discharge shall be
determined using the rate schedule in Subsection B of this Section
allowing a credit of 15,000 gallons per quarter per residential unit
included in the combined total.
(3) In no case shall the quarterly charge be less than the total number
of residential and nonresidential units multiplied by a rate of
$92.00 per quarter. [Amended by Ord. 965, 12/18/2014; and by
Ord. 971, 12/17/2015]
(4) Where a single building or structure contains a multipurpose
commercial or industrial use and each unit and establishment has
its own separate connection to the sewer system, then the metered
charges and rentals shall be based on each separate connection as
if each unit and establishment were located in a separate structure.
D. Definitions. Unless the contest specifically and clearly indicated
otherwise, the meanings of the terms used in this Part shall be as
follows:
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:381
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the purpose of carrying on
a trade, business or profession of for social, amusement, charitable or
public uses. In a structure where the individual offices or similar units
share sanitary facilities, those units sharing the same facilities shall be
considered as one establishment.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any structure or portion thereof
intended to be used wholly or in part for the manufacturing, fabricating,
processing, cleaning, laundering or assembling of any product,
commodity or article. In a structure where the individual units share
sanitary facilities, those units sharing the same facilities shall be
considered as one such establishment.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or water
borne wastes or form of energy ejected or escaping from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or business process or from the development,
recovery or processing of natural resources as distinct from sanitary
sewage.
MULTIPURPOSE COMMERCIAL or INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT —
Any structure of building which contains a combination of one or more
dwelling or living units with a commercial or industrial establishment
or a combination of a commercial establishment with an industrial
establishment.
PRIVATE DWELLING or LIVING UNIT — Any structure intended to be
occupied as a whole by one family, or an apartment intended to be
occupied by one family, or a one family living unit containing plumbing
for kitchen or toilet facilities.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wasted from residences, business building, institutions and commercial
or industrial establishments.
WATER SUPPLIER — Any public agency or private company furnishing
water service to the particular property connected to the sewer system.
E. Measuring Volume or Quantity.
(1) Methods of Measuring Volume or Quantity. Whenever a person
purchasing all water used from the water supplier discharges
sanitary sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system, the
volume of water used, as determined from meter readings, made
by, or made available to the Borough, shall be used in computing
the sewer rentals.
(2) In cases where persons have sources of water supply in addition to,
or other than from, the water supplier and discharge sanitary
sewage and/or industrial waste into the sewer system the Borough
may require owner to furnish and install at owner's cost and
expense, a meter on such additional or other source of supply. The
total amount of water used as shown by these meter readings will
be used in computing the sewer rentals.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:382
(3) In cases where persons (a) use water from the water supplier and/
or from any other source and (b) all or any part of the water so used
in not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of water used
to determine the sewer rentals shall be computed by one of the
following methods:
(a) Method No. 1. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
sewer connection. The readings from this meter or measuring
device shall be used in computing the sewer rentals.
(b) Method No. 2. By placing a meter or measuring device on the
effluent or waste water not discharging into the sewer system.
The reading from this meter or measuring device will then be
deducted from the total water meter readings and the
remainder will be used in computing the sewer rentals.
(c) Method No. 3. When in the opinion of the Borough Manager it
is not desirable or practical to install devices to continuously
determine the quantity of water discharged to the sewer
system, the Borough Manager will determine, in such manner
and by such method as he may prescribe, the percentage of
metered water and waste discharged into the sewer system
and the quantity of water used to compute the sewer rentals
shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity
measured by the water meter or meters, or may determine the
appropriate sewer rental in any other manner which he may
deem appropriate; provided however, that any sewer rental
established by this Method No. 3 shall be reasonable in light of
sewer rentals determined by other methods established
hereunder. Any dispute as to the estimated amount shall be
submitted to Borough Council after notice of the estimate,
whose decision on the matter shall be final for the current
calendar year.
(4) Measuring Devices. All water supply, meters or water supply
measuring devices not provided by the water supplier but
otherwise used under the provisions of this Part shall be furnished
and installed by owner, at owner's own cost and expense. All
sewage meters and sewage measuring devices used under the
provisions of this Part shall be used only upon the election of the
owner and with the consent of the Borough. All sewage meters and
sewage measuring devices shall be furnished and installed by the
owner, at the owner's cost and expense. All meters and measuring
devices shall be under the control of the Borough and may be
tested, inspected or repaired by Borough employees whenever
deemed necessary. The owner shall be responsible for maintenance
and safekeeping of all meters or measuring devices and all repairs
thereto shall be made by the Borough at the property owner's
expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs shall be due
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:383
§ 202. Collection and Lien. [Ord. 399, 4/19/1960, § II; as amended
by Ord. 900, 11/20/2008]
§ 203. Refusal And Discontinuance. [Ord. 399, 4/19/1960, § III]
The Borough reserves the right to refuse connection to the sewer system, to
compel discontinuance of the use of any sewer, or to compel pretreatment of
industrial wastes deemed harmful to the sewer system or sewage treatment
plant.
§ 204. Industrial Use Regulated. [Ord. 399, 4/19/1960, § IV]
The Borough's representative shall have access at all times to industrial
establishments and any meters used for establishing or determining
volumes of sewage and/or waste water discharged into the sewer system.
and payable at the same time and collected in the same manner as
are Bills for sewer services.
(5) Meter Readings. The Borough shall be responsible for the reading
of all meters or measuring devices, unless such readings are
otherwise made available to the Borough by the water supplier, and
such meters shall be made available to Borough employees for
meter reading at any reasonable time.
1. All billings for sewer rentals, excepting those based on metered
volumes, shall be rendered quarterly in advance on the first day of
January, April, July and October of each year and shall be subject to a
ten-percent penalty if not paid within 30 days from the first day of the
quarter for which the bill is rendered. All billings based on metered
volumes shall be rendered quarterly as invoiced and shall be subject to
a ten-percent penalty if not paid within 30 days from the date of the
invoice.
2. The annual rental or charge imposed under this Part if not paid shall be
a lien against the property served and the lien thereof shall be
preserved by the Borough against the property served by filing in the
office of the Prothonotary, all as now is or may in the future be provided
by law.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:384
Part 3
TAP-IN FEES
§ 301. Title. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the Elizabethtown Borough
Sewer Tapping Fee Ordinance.
§ 302. Definitions and Word Usage. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 2]
In the interpretation of this Part, the singular shall include the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter. The following terms
shall have the meanings indicated.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
CONNECTION FEE — A fee based upon the actual cost of the connection of
the improved property extending from the Borough's main to the property
line of the improved property so connected, including reasonable costs for
inspection and restoration.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room, group of rooms, mobile home, building
or other enclosure connected, directly or indirectly, to the sewer system
and occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters,
apartment, office or suite of offices or any other residential, commercial,
institutional or industrial use.
EDU — An equivalent dwelling unit; when computing the tapping fee, the
amount of wastewater discharged by an average dwelling or commercial,
industrial or institutional user in a day which is estimated to be 239 gallons
per day (gpd). When computing the tapping fee, nonresidential users shall
be assigned a number of EDUs based upon the estimated or actual
discharge and each 239 gpd shall be considered one EDU.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property upon which there is erected a
structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use
by human beings or animals and from which structure wastewater shall or
may be discharged.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, entity, partnership, estate, trust, firm,
association, corporation, municipality, municipal authority, school district,
or any other group or legally recognized entity, and the members of such
partnership or association and the officers of such corporation.
SEWER SYSTEM — The public wastewater collection and treatment system
owned and operated by the Borough.
TAPPING FEE — A fee imposed to enable the recovery in the equity in the
sewer system composed of a capacity part and a distribution part and may,
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:385
in the future, if warranted, include for some customers a special purpose
part and/or a reimbursement part.
§ 303. Permits Required Prior to Connection To The Sewer System.
[Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 3]
No person shall connect any improved property with any part of the sewer
system without first making application for and securing a permit, in
writing, from the Borough. The application shall be made on a form
provided by the Borough, and no application shall be considered complete
until all fees imposed in this Part have been paid in full. A permit shall be
valid for a period of one year and is for a specific property. Permits are not
transferable without the express written consent of the Borough.
§ 304. Connection Fee. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 4]
§ 305. Imposition of Tapping Fee. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 5]
A tapping fee as set forth in § 306 of this Part is imposed upon and shall be
collected by the Borough from the owner of each improved property who or
which shall physically connect such improved property to the sewer system
or who or which shall expand, change or intensify the use of an improved
property previously connected to the sewer system, for the use of the sewer
system, whether such use or the expansion, change or intensification of
such uses shall be direct or indirect. A tapping fee is charged for each
dwelling unit as set forth in § 306.
1. The owner of each improved property who or which shall be physically
connect such improved property to the sewer system shall pay a
connection fee to reimburse the Borough for the costs of making such
connection to the sewer system. The amount of the connection fee for
each connection to the sewer system shall be the actual cost incurred
by the Borough, including the cost of inspection and restoration. The
connection fee is the total of the:
A. Permit processing fee, including administration and bookkeeping:
$172.58.
B. Connection fee, including inspection and review: $66.76.
C. Customer facilities fee, including inspection and review: $91.66.
2. The owner of the improved property shall deposit with the Borough the
connection fee sum in order to ensure reimbursement of the Borough's
actual costs in connecting the improved property to the sewer system.
In the event the actual expenses incurred by the Borough in the owner's
improved property connected to the sewer system exceed the paid
amount, the owner shall pay such excess amount within 30 days of
receipt of the Borough's invoice for such expenses.
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:386
§ 306. Calculation of Tapping Fee. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 6]
Each owner of improved property shall pay a tapping fee for the use, ability
or expansion of use of the sewer system calculated as follows:
§ 307. Expansion of Use. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 7]
Should any owner of any improved property connected to the sewer system
expand, change or intensify the use of said improved property, the owner
shall pay a tapping fee calculated in the manner set forth in this Part
upon the expanded, changed or intensified portion of such use of the sewer
system by the improved property. Examples of an expansion, change or
intensification of the use of an improved property shall include, but shall
not be limited to, the installation of an additional dwelling unit or units
A. Capacity Part. A fee shall be imposed to recover the cost of capacity per
dwelling unit or nonresidential unit (for each EDU or portion thereof) —
$1,227.
B. Collection Part. A fee shall be imposed to recover the cost of collection
per dwelling unit or nonresidential unit (for each EDU or portion
thereof) — $459.
C. In the case of a combination of two or more dwelling units, each having
use of the sewer system through one sewer connection, each such
dwelling unit shall be charged the tapping fee herein provided as
though each dwelling unit had a direct and separate connection to the
sewer system. Each dwelling unit in a duplex, row or connecting
houses, mobile home or commercial, industrial or institutional use shall
be considered as a separate entity for the purpose of calculating the
tapping fee. In the case of apartment buildings, each dwelling unit shall
be imposed a separate fee as provided herein.
D. If an applicant for capacity in the sewer system or an owner of improved
property which will expand its use of the sewer system has submitted or
shall submit a planning module for land development to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or a local agency
which has been delegated to approve such planning documents in
accordance with Act 149 of 1994 which sets forth the capacity in the
sewer system serving such improved property required by the applicant
or the owner for the improved property, the amount of the tapping fee
shall be based upon the number of EDUs attributable to the use or
expansion of the use calculated using the capacity requirements set
forth in the planning module for land development. The tapping fee
shall not be reduced, regardless of actual flow, unless and until a
revision to the planning module for land development is filed with, and
approved by, the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
or the delegated local agency reducing the projected capacity required.
E. The tapping fee shall not be charged for the re-occupancy of vacant
buildings where flows have temporarily been reduced or eliminated.
§ 306 FOREWORD § 307
FWD:387
in an existing dwelling or the commencement of a home occupation which
requires use of the sewer system such as a beauty salon or barber shop; the
conversion of a warehouse to a restaurant or manufacturing facility; or the
adding of a third work shift to an industrial processing operation. A change
in flow for an improved property of more than 239 gallons per day on the
basis of average daily flow over the prior 12 months shall be considered
an expansion of the use of the sewer system regardless of whether the
improved property has been enlarged or any new use has been instituted.
The Borough may compare current flow with flow previously approved by
means of the payment of tapping fees or the approval of a planning module
for land development or with the last calendar year average daily flow
to determine whether there has been a change in sewer flow exceeding
239 gallons per day regardless of whether the improved property has been
expanded or any new use has been instituted.
§ 308. Time of Payment of Fees. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 8]
The connection fee and tapping fee shall be due and payable at the time
application is made to the Borough to make any such connection to the
sewer system as provided in § 303, or at the time application is made to
the Borough for a zoning permit; or when the use of an improved property
connected to the sewer system is expanded, as the same may hereafter be
amended or supplemented, whichever shall occur earlier.
§ 309. Fees Paid to the Borough. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 9]
All connection fees and tapping fees shall be payable to the Treasurer of the
Borough or to such other officer or representative of the Borough as shall be
authorized, from time to time, to accept payment thereof. Connection fees
and tapping fees which are not paid in full when due shall bear interest at
a rate of 12% per annum or at the rate of any outstanding debt incurred by
the Borough, whichever is greater.
§ 310. Fees in Addition to Other Charges. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005,
§ 10]
The connection fees and tapping fees imposed hereunder shall be in
addition to any fees or charges imposed by the rate ordinance or any
other fees or charges fixed or imposed by the Borough by reason of the
reservation of capacity in the sewer system or the use, or availability for use
of the sewer system.
§ 311. Expiration of Permit. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 11]
Upon the expiration of a connection permit and upon request of an
applicant, the Borough will refund the tapping fee, less an administrative
fee of 5%. Such refunds must be requested by the applicant promptly, but
in any event not later than six months after the expiration of a permit.
§ 307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 312
FWD:388
§ 312. Remedies. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 12]
In addition to or in lieu of any penalties which the Borough may impose, the
Borough may commence actions to collect fees which are due and payable
under this Part and/or may file a municipal claim for the unpaid fees, plus
costs of collection including the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Borough, against the improved property. Any violations of this Part may be
abated by proceeding against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 313. Reservation of Rights. [Ord. 861, 7/21/2005, § 13]
The Borough reserves the right, from time to time, to adopt modifications
of, supplements to, or amendments of this Part.
§ 312 FOREWORD § 313
FWD:389

Part 4
INDUSTRIAL WASTES
§ 401. General Provisions. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 1]
1. Purpose and Policy.
A. This Part sets forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect
contributors to the sewerage facilities of the Borough of
Elizabethtown and enables the Borough to comply with all
applicable State and Federal laws required by the Clean Water Act
of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 CFR, Part
403).
B. The objectives of this Part are:
(1) To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the sewerage
system which will interfere with the operation of the system or
contaminate the resulting sludge.
(2) To prevent the introduction of pollutants which will pass
through the sewerage system, inadequately treated, to
receiving waters or the atmosphere or which will otherwise be
incompatible with the system.
(3) To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters
and sludges from the system.
(4) To provide for equitable distribution of the cost for operation of
the sewerage system.
(5) To serve as the basis for the Borough pretreatment program.
C. This Part defines certain terms and provides for the regulation of
direct and indirect contributors to the sewerage system through
the issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through
enforcement of general requirements for the other users,
authorizes monitoring, testing, inspection and enforcement
activities, requires user reporting, assumes that the existing
customer's capacity will not be preempted, provides for the setting
of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
program established herein and imposes penalties for user
noncompliance.
D. This Part shall apply to the Borough of Elizabethtown and to all
persons who are, by contract or agreement with the Borough, users
of the sewerage system. Except as otherwise provided herein, the
Borough Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this Part.
2. Short Title. The short title of this Part shall be the "Borough of
Elizabethtown Industrial Waste Ordinance."
§ 401 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:391
§ 402. Definitions. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 2]
1. Scope. The following words, terms and phrases when used in this Part
shall have the meaning described in this Section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning. Words, terms and phrases
are as follows:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ALLOWABLE INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous
substance, water-borne waste or form of energy ejected or escaping
from any industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from
the development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as
distinct from sanitary sewage, which complies with all provisions of this
Part and which is allowed to be discharged into the sewer system by the
Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An
authorized representative of an industrial user may be:
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen,
expressed in mg/l, utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic
matter under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C.
The standard laboratory procedure shall be found in the latest edition
of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater"
published by the American Public Health Association.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, or its authorized deputy, agent or representative.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The person designated by the Borough to
supervise the operation of the sewerage system and who is charged
with certain duties and responsibilities by this Section or his duly
authorized representative.
CATEGORICAL STANDARDS — EPA Categorical Pretreatment
Standard or Borough pretreatment standard.
COLOR — Color of an industrial waste is the color of the light
transmitted by the waste solution after removing the suspended
material, including the pseudocolloidal particles.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, or water to which the only
pollutant added is heat.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice-president,
if the industrial user is a corporation.
(1)
(2) A general partner or proprietorship, respectively.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
(3)
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 402
FWD:392
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
DISSOLVED SOLIDS — The anhydrous residues of the dissolved
constituents in water or wastewater.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
GARBAGE — Solid waste resulting from the domestic and commercial
preparation, cooking and dispensing of food and from handling,
storage, and sale of produce.
GRAB SIMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on
a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and
without consideration of time.
GROUND WATER — That water which is contained in or passing
through the ground.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks such as
vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and vacuumpump
tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under § 307(b) or
(c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317), into the sewerage system (including
holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge which does not
constitute a "discharge of pollutants" under regulations issued
pursuant to Section 402, of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid, liquid or gaseous substances, water
borne waste or form of energy discharged or escaping in the course of
any industrial, manufacturing, trade, or commercial process or in the
course of development, recovering or processing of natural resources,
but not sewage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in § 404 of
this Part.
INTERFERENCE — The inhibition or disruption of the sewage
treatment plant processes or operations which contributes to a
violation of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES permit. The
term includes prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the
Borough in accordance with § 405 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1345) or
any criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid
Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances
Control Act, or more stringent State criteria (including those contained
in any State sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of
§ 402 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:393
SWDA) applicable to the method of disposal or use employed by the
Borough.
LATERAL SEWER or SERVICE CONNECTION — That part of the
sewerage system extending from the sewer main to a point at the inside
face of the curb or edge of pavement if no curb.
MANHOLE — A structure leading from the surface of the ground to a
sewer, permitting access to the owner.
MG/L — Milligrams per liter.
MUNICIPALITY — Any county, county authority, municipal authority,
city, borough, township, or school district.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — Any regulation containing pollutant
discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with § 307(b)
and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1347) which applies to a specific category
of industrial users.
NATIONAL POLLUTION DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM or
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued pursuant to § 402 of the Act (33
U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PROHIBITIVE DISCHARGE STANDARD or PROHIBITIVE
DISCHARGE STANDARD — Any regulation developed under the
authority of § 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR § 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any source, the construction of which is commenced
after the publication of proposed regulations prescribing a § 307(c)
(33 U.S.C. § 1317) categorical pretreatment standard which will be
applicable to such source, if such standard is thereafter promulgated
within 120 days of proposal in the Federal Register. Where the standard
is promulgated later than 120 days after proposal, a new source means
any source, the construction of which is commenced after the date of
promulgation of the standard.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control
of a tank truck or trucks for use in the removal, transportation and
disposal of sewage and industrial wastes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole
or partial, of an improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by
the context.
pH — The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions, expressed in gram equivalent per liter of solution, and indicating
the degree of acidity or alkalinity of a substance. A stabilized "pH" will
be considered as a "pH" which does not change beyond the specified
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 402
FWD:394
limits when the waste is subjected to aeration. It shall be determined
by one of the accepted methods described in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater"
published by the American Public Health Association.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water.
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incineration residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes,
biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into water.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to
or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into
the sewerage facilities. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by
physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes or other
means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR § 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirements related to pretreatment, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
PROCESS WATER — Industrial waste resulting from any industrial,
manufacturing, trade or commercial process or operation, but not
sewage.
QUALIFIED LABORATORY — Any laboratory which is certified by the
Environmental Protection Agency to perform drinking water analysis
for inorganics and which can document satisfactory participation in the
EPA Quality Assurance Program for wastewater testing administered by
the Quality Assurance Branch, Environmental Monitoring and Support
Laboratory, U.S. EPA.
REFRIGERATION — The preservation of food products, the
maintenance of temperature for aid in process work, and the
maintenance of storage temperature.
REGULATORY AUTHORITY — The administrator of the EPA until such
time as the State's pretreatment program is approved by the EPA.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and/or authorized
industrial wastes and to which storm, surface, and ground waters are
not intentionally admitted.
SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet waste from
any improved property, excluding, however, the effluent from septic
tanks or cesspools, rain, storm and ground water, as well as roof
or surface water, drainage or percolating or seeping waters, or
accumulation thereof, whether underground or in cellars or basements.
§ 402 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:395
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage or authorized
industrial waste.
SEWERAGE SYSTEM or SEWERAGE FACILITY — A publicly owned
treatment works (POTW) as defined by § 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C.
§ 1292), which is owned in this instance by the Borough. This definition
includes any sanitary sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage
treatment plan, but does not include pipes, sewers or other
conveyances not connected to a facility providing treatment. For the
purposes of this Part, "sewerage system" shall also include any sewers
that convey wastewaters to the sewerage system from persons who are,
by contract or agreement with the Borough, users of the Borough's
sewerage system.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewerage system
designed to provide treatment to wastewater. Includes but is not
necessarily limited to any arrangement of devices and structures used
for treating sewage and authorized industrial waste.
SEWER INSPECTOR — The Borough of Elizabethtown Sewage
Treatment Plant Supervisor, his duly authorized assistant or
representative.
SHALL — Is mandatory. MAY is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the
sewerage system who (a) has a discharge flow of 25,000 gallons or
more per average day, or (b) has a flow greater than 5% of the flow in
the sewerage system, or (c) has in its wastes toxic substances, or (d)
is found by the Borough, Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency to have
significant impact, either singly or in combination with other
contributing industries, on the sewerage system, the quality of sludge,
the system's effluent quality, or air emissions generated by the system.
SLUG — Any discharge of water, sewage or industrial waste in which
concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds
for any period of duration longer than 15 minutes more than five times
the average twenty-four-hour concentration, or flow, during normal
operation.
STANDARD METHODS — An abbreviated expression used to denote
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Waste Water,"
a manual published by the American Health Association specifying
official analytical procedures for the measurement of wastewater
parameters.
STATE — Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972.
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 402
FWD:396
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface of or
are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids and which are
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOTAL NITROGEN — When related to wastewater, the sum of the
organic nitrogen, ammonia nitrogen, nitrite and nitrate in the
wastewater; an essential nutrient.[Added by Ord. 966, 12/18/2014]
TOTAL PHOSPHORUS — When related to wastewater, the sum of
orthophosphates, polyphosphates, and organic phosphates in the
wastewater; an essential nutrient.[Added by Ord. 966, 12/18/2014]
TOTAL SOLIDS — The sum of dissolved and undissolved constituents in
water or wastewater.
TOXIC SUBSTANCES — Any substance or combination of substances
that: (a) is listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the
Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under the
provisions of CWA, § 307(a), or other Acts, or (b) is present in sufficient
quantity, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, to injure or
interfere with any sewage treatment process, to constitute a hazard
to humans or animals, to create a public nuisance, or to create any
hazard in the sewerage system or in the receiving waters of the sewage
treatment plant.
TWENTY-FOUR-HOUR COMPOSITE WASTEWATER SAMPLE —
Consists of 24 hourly wastewater samples collected over a twentyfour-
hour period. The individual hourly samples shall be proportioned
according to the flow rate at the time of the sample or shall be of equal
volume. The cumulative sample shall be refrigerated.
UNAUTHORIZED WASTE — Any waste which is not in compliance with
the provisions of this Part, or which is discharged into the sewerage
system by a person in violation of any provision contained in this Part.
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the
contribution of wastewater into the Borough's sewerage system.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic
wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and
institutions, whether treated or untreated, which is contributed into or
permitted to enter the sewerage system.
WATER-COOLED EQUIPMENT — Any equipment using water as a
cooling medium for purposes other than air conditioning or
refrigeration.
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the State or
any portion thereof.
§ 402 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:397
§ 403. Regulations. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 3; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
2. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD5 — Biochemical Oxygen Demand
CFR — Code of Federal Regulations
COD — Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA — Environmental Protection Agency
l — Liter
mg — Milligrams
mg/l — Milligrams per liter
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
POTW — Publicly Owned Treatment Works
SIC — Standards Industrial Classifications
SWDA — Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
TSS — Total Suspended Wastes
USC — United States Code
1. Use of Sanitary Sewers and Admission of Industrial Waste.
A. All sewage and authorized industrial waste may be discharged to
the sewerage system except those which are deemed harmful to
the system or are specifically prohibited by this Part.
B. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water,
surface water, spring water, ground water, roof runoff, subsurface
drainage, building foundation drainage, cellar drainage or
noncontaminated cooling or process water into the sewerage
system.
C. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or waste water which will interfere with
the operation or performance of the sewage treatment plant. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of the sewerage system
whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State or local
pretreatment standards or requirements.
D. No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged any septic waste
or septic tank effluent.
E. Except as otherwise provided in this Part, no user shall discharge
or cause to be discharged into the sewerage system any sewage,
industrial wastes, or other matter or substance:
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:398
(1) Having a temperature at the point of user discharge higher
than 150° F., having a temperature at the point of introduction
into the sewerage system which exceeds 104° F. or is less than
32° F., or which will inhibit biological activity at the sewage
treatment plant.
(2) Containing more than 80 milligrams per liter of oil and grease.
(3) Containing any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their
nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by
interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or
be injurious in any other way to the sewerage system or to the
operation of the sewage treatment plant. Prohibited materials
include, but are not limited to, gasoline, fuel oil, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, paint products, ethers,
alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, acids or bases,
chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and
sulfides and any other substances which are a fire hazard or a
hazard to the system.
(4) Containing unground garbage with particles greater than 1/2
inch in any dimension.
(5) Containing solid or viscous substances which may cause
obstruction to the flow in a sewer or other interference with
the operation of the sewage treatment plant such as, but not
limited to: ashes, cinders, spent lime, stone dust, sand, mud,
straw, shavings, metals, glass, rags, grass clippings, feathers,
tar, plastics, wood, whole blood, paunch manure, bentonite,
lye, building materials, rubber, asphalt residues, hair, bones,
leather, porcelain, china, ceramic wastes, polishing wastes,
glass grinding or other solid or viscous substances capable of
causing obstruction or other interference with the operation of
the sewerage system.
(6) Having a pH, stabilized, lower than 6.5 or higher than 8.5 or
having any other corrosive or scale forming property capable
of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment,
bacterial action or personnel of the sewerage system or the
sewage treatment plant.
(7) Containing toxic or poisonous pollutants in sufficient quantity,
either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, to injure
or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute
a hazard to humans or animals or create a toxic effect in the
receiving waters of the sewage treatment plant, or to exceed
the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard.
A toxic pollutant shall include, but not be limited to, any
pollutant identified pursuant to § 307(a) of the Act.
(8) Containing a BOD5 or suspended solids concentration greater
than 250 mg/l or a total nitrogen concentration greater than 40
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:399
mg/l, a total phosphorus concentration greater than 10 mg/l
or an oil and grease (OG) concentration greater than 80 mg/
l or of such a character and quantity that unusual attention
or expense is required to handle such materials at the sewage
treatment plant. Discharges of BOD5 or suspended solids in
excess of 250 mg/l or total nitrogen in excess of 40 mg/l or total
phosphorus in excess of 10 mg/l shall be subject to surcharge
as provided for in § 407 of this part. Discharges of BOD5 or
suspended solids in excess of 2,000 mg/l shall be subject to a
penalty surcharge as provided for in § 407. [Amended by Ord.
966, 12/18/2014]
(9) Containing any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids
which either singly or by interaction with other wastes are
sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and
repair.
(10) Containing dye from any source that will not have an effluent
the equivalent of that produced by chemical coagulation and
chlorination to remove suspended or colloidal matter and
bleach the dissolved dyes.
(11) Containing radioactive substances or isotopes of such half life
or concentration as may exceed limits in compliance with
applicable State or Federal regulations.
(12) Having a chlorine demand of such quantity that unusual
attention or expense is required to handle such materials at the
sewage treatment plant.
(13) Prohibited by any permit issued by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or the Environmental Protection Agency.
(14) Containing any substance which will cause the sewage
treatment plant to violate its NPDES permit or the receiving
water quality standards.
(15) Containing any substance which may cause the sewage
treatment plant's effluent or any other product of the sewage
treatment plant such as residues, sludges or scums to be
unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the
reclamation process. In no case shall a substance discharged
to the sewerage system cause the sewage treatment plant to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria,
guidelines or regulations developed under § 405 of the Act, any
criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or
disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act,
the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State
criteria applicable to the sludge management method being
used.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:400
(16) Containing wastes which are not amenable to biological
treatment or reduction in existing treatment facilities,
specifically nonbiodegradable complex carbon compounds.
(17) Containing any organic compounds of endrin, lindane,
methoxychlor, toxaphene, dichlorophenoxyacetic acid or
trichlorophenoxypropionic acid.
(18) Causing a hazard to human life or public nuisance.
(19) Containing total dissolved solids of such character and
quantity that unusual attention or expense is required to
handle such materials at the sewage treatment plant.
(20) Containing pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants
(BOD5, etc.) released at a flow rate and/or pollutant
concentration which will inhibit or cause interference to the
process or operation of the sewage treatment plant.
(21) Containing industrial waste slugs having an average daily flow
greater than 15% of the average daily sewage flow at the
sewage treatment plant.
(22) Containing any hazardous waste or substance as defined by
EPA's Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) or
Chapter 75 of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Regulations.
(23) Containing concentration of anions, cations, and other various
objectionable substances in excess of the following limits,
measured in a representative sample collected at the point of
discharge to the sewerage system.
Substance
Allowable Concentration
mg/l
Arsenic 0.1
Barium 5.0
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium (hexavalent) 0.10
Chromium (total) 1.0
Copper 1.0
Cyanides 0.5
Lead 0.2
Mercury 0.01
Nickel 0.2
Phenolics 0.1
Selenium 0.05
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:401
Substance
Allowable Concentration
mg/l
Silver 0.20
Zinc 2.0
Provided, however, that deviations from the above schedule
may be authorized by the Borough in its sole discretion, upon
an affirmative showing, by the person requesting the same,
that such deviation will not be harmful to the sewerage system
or the sewage treatment plant or cause the plant effluent
to violate its current NPDES discharge limitations. For the
purpose of this Part, an allowable deviation may be granted
by the Borough up to the following maximum concentrations
provided that the corresponding total loading for each
objectionable substance does not exceed the maximum
loading specified.
Substances
Maximum
Concentration
mg/l
Maximum
Loading
lbs./day
Arsenic 1.0 0.01
Barium 50.0 0.5
Cadmium 0.5 0.005
Chromium
(hexavalent)
1.0 0.01
Chromium (total) 10.0 0.1
Copper 10.0 0.1
Cyanides 5.0 0.05
Lead 2.0 0.02
Mercury 0.1 0.001
Nickel 2.0 0.02
Phenolics 1.0 0.01
Selenium 0.5 0.005
Silver 2.0 0.02
Zinc 20.0 0.2
F. If such amounts of any waters or wastes are discharged, or are
proposed to be discharged to the sewerage system, which waters
contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated
in this Section or which in the judgment of the Borough may have a
deleterious effect upon the sewerage system or the sewage
treatment plant, the Borough may, upon giving official notice to the
discharger:
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:402
(1) Reject the waste.
(2) Require pretreatment to reduce characteristics to maximum
limits permitted by this Part, or any other applicable rules or
law.
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge.
(4) Require immediate discontinuance of the waste discharge until
such time as it meets the requirements of this Section.
G. Nothing contained in this Part shall be construed as prohibiting any
special agreement or arrangement between the Borough and any
person whereby industrial wastes of unusual strength or character
may be admitted into the sewerage system, either before or after
pretreatment.
2. Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Upon the promulgation of
the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards for a particular
industrial subcategory, the Federal standard, if more stringent than
limitations imposed under this Part for sources in that subcategory,
shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed under this Part.
The Borough shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting
requirements under 40 CFR § 403.12.
3. Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards. Where the
Borough's sewage treatment plant achieves consistent removal of
pollutants limited by Federal pretreatment standards, the Borough may
apply to the regulatory authority for modification of specific limits in
the Federal pretreatment standards. "Consistent removal" shall mean
reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the
pollutant by the sewage treatment plant to a less toxic or harmless state
in the effluent which is achieved by the system for 95% of the samples
taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in
§ 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403)
— "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of
Pollution," promulgated pursuant to the Act. The Borough may then
modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal pretreatment standards
if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, § 403.7, are fulfilled
and prior approval from the regulatory authority is obtained.
4. State Requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than Federal
requirements and limitations or those in this Part.
5. Borough's Right to Revision. The Borough reserves the right to
establish by ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on
discharges to the sewerage system if deemed necessary to comply with
the objectives presented in § 401(1) of this Part.
6. Excessive Discharges. No user shall ever increase the use of process
water or, in any way, attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:403
complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with
the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment
Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitations developed by
the Borough or State.
7. Accidental Discharges.
A. Each user shall provide protection from accidental discharge of
prohibited materials or other substances regulated by the Borough.
Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials
shall be provided and maintained at the owner or user's own cost
and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating
procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the
Borough for review, and shall be approved by the Borough before
construction of the facility.
B. No user who commences contribution to the sewerage system after
the effective date of this Part shall be permitted to introduce
pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures
have been approved by the Borough. Review and approval of such
plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user
from the responsibility to modify the user's facility as necessary to
meet the requirements of this Part. In the case of an accidental
discharge, it is the responsibility of the user to immediately
telephone notify the Borough of the incident. The notification shall
include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and
volume, and corrective actions.
8. Written Notice. Within five days following an accidental discharge, the
user shall submit to the Borough a detailed written report describing
the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve
the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be
incurred as a result of damage to the sewerage system, fish kills, or any
other damage to person or property, nor shall such notification relieve
the user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be
imposed by this Section or other applicable law.
9. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's
bulletin board or prominent place advising employees whom to call in
the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all
employees who may cause or suffer a dangerous discharge to occur are
advised of the emergency notification procedure.
10. Drainage of Swimming Pools. Filter backwash lines shall be discharged
to the sewerage system as follows:
A. Sand filter backwash may be discharged directly to the sewerage
system.
B. Diatomaceous earth filter backwash shall be connected to the
sewerage system through settling tanks with a minimum of three
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:404
months storage capacity for spent diatomaceous earth. The tanks
shall be readily accessible for removing solid waste for disposal.
11. Disposal of Tank Truck Waste. Tank truck waste shall not be discharged
to the sewerage system except in the event of an emergency at the sole
discretion of the Borough. The waste shall not contain industrial waste,
chemicals, or other matter, with or without pretreatment, that does not
conform to the requirements of § 403(1) of this Part. Tank truck waste
shall be discharged to the same system at the location and at the time
or times designated and at the rate of discharge fixed by the Borough.
12. Interceptors. Grease, oil and sand interceptors or traps shall be
provided when required by the Borough, for the proper handling of
liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amounts or any flammable
wastes, sand or other harmful ingredients. All interceptors shall be of a
type and capacity approved by the Borough and shall be located as to be
readily and easily accessible for cleaning and inspection.
13. Garbage Grinders. The use of mechanical garbage grinders producing a
finely divided mass, properly flushed with an ample amount of water,
shall be permitted. However, no such mechanical garbage grinder to
serve premises used for commercial purposes shall be installed until
permission for such installation is obtained from the Borough.
14. Pretreatment Requirements.
A. User shall design, construct, operate and maintain wastewater
pretreatment facilities whenever necessary to reduce or modify the
user's wastewater to achieve compliance with this Part. The review
or approval of pretreatment facility plans, specifications and
operating procedures by the Borough or its consulting engineer
shall not excuse or mitigate any violations by the user of this Part or
any Federal, State or local requirements.
B. The construction of required pretreatment facilities shall be
accomplished in accordance with a reasonable completion
schedule prepared by the user and approved by the Borough. If, in
the opinion of the Borough, the schedule prepared by the user is
not reasonable, a completion schedule shall be established by the
Borough.
C. When required by the Borough to provide pretreatment facilities,
no construction of such facilities shall commence until:
(1) Construction drawings, specifications, completion schedule
and other pertinent information relating to the proposed
facilities are submitted to the Borough.
(2) The Borough provides written approval for the construction of
the proposed facilities.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:405
§ 404. Administration. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 4; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
D. When approved by the Borough and placed in operation,
pretreatment facilities shall be continuously maintained in
satisfactory and effective operation by the user, at his own expense.
The Borough shall have the right to inspect said facilities at any
reasonable time to insure such are being properly maintained and
operated in accordance with the requirements of the Borough.
15. Flow Equalization. The Borough reserves the right to require users
having large variations in the rate of waste discharge to install suitable
regulating devices for equalizing flows to the sewerage system. This
requirement shall apply specifically to users with a discharge
containing industrial waste slugs having an average daily flow greater
than 15% of the average daily sewage flow at the sewage treatment
plant.
1. Industrial Waste Discharge Permit.
A. General. All industrial users connected or proposing to connect to
the sewerage system shall obtain an industrial waste discharge
permit.
B. Permit Application. Users required to obtain an industrial waste
permit shall complete and file with the Borough an application in
the form prescribed, and accompanied by a fee as detailed in
§ 405(2). Existing users shall apply for an industrial waste
discharge permit within 60 days after the effective date of this Part.
New users shall apply at least 90 days prior to the anticipated date
for connecting to the sewerage system. In support of the
application the user shall submit the following information:
(1) Name and address of user and location of discharge.
(2) Wastewater characteristics including, but not limited to, those
listed in § 403(1) of this Part. Sampling and analysis shall be
performed in accordance with "Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Wastewater," latest edition, and
shall be performed by a qualified laboratory.
(3) Time and duration of industrial waste discharge.
(4) Average daily and peak flow rates (including daily, monthly and
seasonal variations, if appropriate).
(5) Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and
details to show all sewers, sewer connections and
appurtenances by size, location and elevation.
(6) Description of process producing industrial waste.
(7) Description of product and approximate rate of production.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:406
(8) Description of raw materials processed.
(9) Number of employees, hours of plant operation, and projected
hours of operation of pretreatment system (if applicable).
(10) Additional information required by the Borough as necessary
to evaluate the permit application.
C. Permit Conditions. Industrial waste discharge permits shall be
expressly subject to all provisions of this Part and all other
applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the
Borough. Permits shall include any or all of the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges for the wastewater
to be discharged to the sewerage system.
(2) Limits on the average and maximum wastewater
characteristics.
(3) Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection
and sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of discharge reports.
(8) Requirements for maintaining operating records relating to
wastewater discharge and affording Borough access thereto.
(9) Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to
ensure compliance with this Part.
D. Procedures. The procedure to be followed by the Borough in acting
on industrial waste discharge permit applications shall be as
follows. Within 30 days of receipt of the application, the Borough
shall notify the applicant in writing:
(1) That the wastewater proposed to be discharged is acceptable
and a permit will be issued by the Borough.
(2) That the wastewater proposed to be discharged is
unacceptable.
(3) That the wastewater proposed to be discharged will be
acceptable provided certain action is taken and maintained by
the applicant, specifying the terms and conditions thereof.
§ 404 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:407
(4) That the Borough requires further information, studies or
tests, specifying the requirements thereof, before it can
determine whether the proposed discharge is or is not
acceptable.
E. Permit Duration. A permit shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five years or it may be issued to expire on a
specific date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum
of 180 days prior to the expiration of an existing permit. The terms
and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by the
Borough during the term of the permit as limitations or
requirements are modified or other just cause exists. The user shall
be informed of any proposed changes in his permit at least 30 days
prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule
for compliance.
F. Permit Transfer. Industrial waste discharge permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific operation. A permit may not be
reassigned, transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises or a new or changed operation without the approval of
the Borough.
G. Waste Characteristic Change. Any owner of any improved property
who is discharging industrial waste into the sewerage system and
who contemplates a change in the method of operation or in the
pretreatment facilities which will alter the type of industrial waste
then being discharged into the sewerage system shall apply for a
new industrial waste discharge permit at least 30 days prior to
such change. The revised industrial waste discharge permit will be
subject to a fee as established from time to time by resolution of
Borough Council. Approval or disapproval of a modified permit
shall be regulated by the procedures established hereunder for the
issuance of an original permit.
H. Separation of Wastes. In the case of complete separation of
domestic sewage from industrial wastes within an industrial
establishment, with the domestic wastes only discharged to the
sanitary sewer, no discharge permit fee shall be imposed on that
portion of the wastes going to the sanitary sewer.
2. Reporting Requirements for Permittee.
A. Each industrial waste permittee shall submit to the Borough 10
days prior to the first day of March, June, September and
December, an industrial waste contribution report. The report shall
be on a form provided by the Borough and shall indicate the nature
and concentration of pollutants in the industrial waste effluent. The
waste characteristics shall be based on the results of analysis of the
waste performed by a qualified laboratory. Upon specific approval
of the Borough the permittee may elect to employ in-house facilities
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:408
for the analysis of certain parameters being monitored. However,
at least once per year, a split sample shall be analyzed for all
parameters being monitored in-house by both the in-house
laboratory and a qualified laboratory. The results of both
laboratories shall then be submitted to the Borough for review. The
Borough reserves the right to waive approval for the use of inhouse
facilities at any time.
B. The report shall also include the average daily flow for the
reporting period. At the discretion of the Borough and in
consideration of such factors as production schedules, budget
cycles, etc., the Borough may agree to alter the months during
which the above reports are to be submitted.
3. Sampling, Flow Measurement, Testing and Inspection.
A. Any user whose property is serviced by a sewer carrying industrial
waste shall install at his expense a suitable control manhole
together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in
the sewer to provide for inspection, sampling and measurement of
the waste. The control manhole should normally be situated on the
user's premises, but the Borough may, when such a location would
be impractical or cause undue hardship on the user, allow the
faculty to be constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and
located so that it will not be obstructed by landscaping or parked
vehicles.
B. There shall be ample room in or near the control manhole to allow
sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The control
manhole, sampling and measuring equipment shall be maintained
at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense
of the user. Construction of the control manhole shall be completed
within 90 days following notification by the Borough.
C. Users discharging industrial waste to the sewerage system shall
provide the Borough and its representatives the opportunity of
access at any time, upon reasonable notice, to any improved
property served by the sewerage system as shall be required for
purposes of inspection, measurement, sampling, testing and
records examination to ascertain whether the purpose of this Part
is being met and all requirements are being complied with, and for
performance of other functions relating to service rendered by the
Borough. The Borough shall have the right to set up on the user's
property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling
inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations.
D. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control
manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream
manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building
sewer is connected.
§ 404 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:409
§ 405. Fees. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 5]
§ 406. Enforcement. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 6]
E. All measurements, tests, and analysis of the characteristics of
waters and wastes to which reference is made in this Part shall be
determined in accordance with the latest edition of "Standard
Methods for Examination of Water and Wastewater," published by
the American Public Health Association.
F. A twenty-four-hour flow proportional composite sample shall be
considered the standard for all sampling performed in accordance
with the Part. However, other appropriate sampling procedures
may be acceptable at the discretion of the Borough.
G. The costs of all sampling, testing, inspection and other monitoring
activities incurred by the Borough while enforcing the provisions of
this Part shall be reimbursable from the respective user.
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Section to provide for the recovery of
costs from users of the Borough's sewerage system for the
implementation of the program established herein. The applicable
charges or fees shall be set forth in the Borough's Schedule of Charges
and Fees.
2. Charges and Fees. The Borough may from time to time collect charges
and fees to include:
A. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
Borough's pretreatment program.
B. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures.
C. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction.
D. Fees for permit and modified permit applications.
E. Fees for filing appeals.
F. Fees for consistent removal (by the Borough) of pollutants
otherwise subject to Federal pretreatment standards.
G. Other fees as the Borough may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein.
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this Part and are
separate from all other fees chargeable by the Borough.
1. Harmful Contributions.
A. The Borough may suspend wastewater treatment service and/or an
industrial waste discharge permit when such suspension is
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 406
FWD:410
necessary, in the opinion of the Borough, in order to stop an actual
or threatened discharge which presents an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the
environment, causes interference to the sewerage system or causes
the Borough to violate any condition of its NPDES permit.
B. Any person notified of a suspension of wastewater treatment
service and/or an industrial waste discharge permit shall
immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In the event of a
failure of the person to comply voluntarily with the suspension
order, the Borough shall take such steps as deemed necessary
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent
or minimize damage to the sewerage system or endangerment to
any individuals. The Borough shall reinstate the industrial waste
discharge permit and/or wastewater treatment service upon proof
of the elimination of the noncomplying discharge. A detailed
written statement submitted by the user describing the causes of
the harmful discharge and measures taken to prevent any future
occurrence shall be submitted to the Borough within five days
following the date of occurrence.
2. Revocation of Permit.
A. Any user who violates the following conditions is subject to having
his permit revoked in accordance with the procedures of this
Section of this Part:
(1) Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater
constituents and characteristics of his discharge.
(2) Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations,
or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3) Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the
purpose of inspection or monitoring.
(4) Violation of conditions of the permit.
B. If a permit is revoked, the Borough may take any steps it deems
advisable, including severance of the sewer connection, to promote
compliance with this Part.
3. Legal Action. If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes or
other wastes into the sewerage system contrary to the provisions of this
Part, or any order of the Borough, the Borough Solicitor may commence
an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the Court of
Common Pleas of Lancaster County.
4. Settlements. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to limit or deny the
right of the Borough or any other person to such equitable or other
remedies as may otherwise be available with or without process of law,
including payment of damages to the Borough by any person causing
§ 406 FOREWORD § 406
FWD:411
§ 407. Surcharges. [Ord. 700, 11/16/1989, § 7]
damage or injury to the sewer system. Any person who causes harm or
damage to the sewerage system as a result of a violation of this Part
shall be liable to the Borough for the full costs of such harm or damage.
1. General.
A. Discharges containing concentrations of BOD, and/or suspended
solids in excess of 250 mg/l shall be subject to a surcharge.
B. Discharges containing concentrations of BOD5 and/or suspended
solids in excess of 2,000 mg/l shall be subject to a penalty
surcharge of three times the standard surcharge rate for that
portion of the concentration in excess of 2,000 mg/l, and the
standard surcharge rate for the portion of the concentration in
excess of 250 mg/l but less than 2,000 mg/l.
2. Surcharge Formula.
A. Whenever the Borough consents to accept industrial waste into the
sewer system which has a total suspended solids concentration in
excess of 250 mg/l or BOD5, in excess of 250 mg/l, a surcharge
factor will be applied to the normal sewer bill to arrive at the
industrial surcharge bill. The surcharge factor will be computed as
follows:
Surcharge factor 0.001 x [(BOD5-250 + (TSS- 250)]
The surcharge factor cannot exceed 1.75 for BOD5 and 1.75 for
suspended solids.
B. Whenever the Borough consents to accept industrial waste into the
sewer system which has a total suspended solids concentration in
excess of 2,000 mg/l or BOD5 in excess of 2,000 mg/l, a penalty
surcharge factor will be applied to the normal sewer bill to arrive at
the industrial surcharge bill. The penalty surcharge factor will be
computed as follows:
Penalty Surcharge Factor =.003 x [(BOD5-2,000) + (TSS-2,000)]
The penalty surcharge factor is added to the surcharge factor to
determine the factor to be applied to the monthly metered charge
to arrive at the total industrial waste surcharge bill.
3. Nutrient Surcharge. Whenever the Borough consents to accept
industrial waste into the sewer system which has a total nitrogen
concentration in excess of 40 mg/l or a total phosphorus concentration
in excess of 10 mg/l, a nutrient surcharge factor will be applied to the
normal sewer bill to arrive at the industrial surcharge bill. The nutrient
surcharge factor will be computed as follows: [Added by Ord. 966, 12/
18/2014]
§ 406 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 407
FWD:412
§ 408. Responsibility of Owners of Improved Property. [Ord. 700,
11/16/1989, § 10]
The owner of each property connected to the sewerage system shall be
responsible for all acts of tenants or other occupants of such improved
property insofar as such acts shall be governed by provisions of this Part.
Nutrient surcharge factor = 0.01 x [(Nitrogen-40) + (Phosphorus-10)]
The nutrient surcharge factor is added to any other surcharge factors
to determine the factor to be applied to the monthly metered charge to
arrive at the total industrial waste surcharge bill.
§ 407 FOREWORD § 408
FWD:413

Part 5
SANITARY SEWER INSTALLATION SPECIFICATIONS
A.
General Provisions.
§ 501. Purpose. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § 1]
§ 502. Short Title. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § II]
The short title of this Part shall be the "Borough of Elizabethtown Sanitary
Sewer Installation Specification Ordinance."
1. This Part sets forth uniform requirements for the acceptance and
ownership of sewers and appurtenances constructed by others.
2. This Part defines certain terms and provides for the regulation of the
construction or repair of sewers and appurtenances by others, by
contract or agreement or any other means with the Borough. Except as
otherwise provided herein, the Borough Manager shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 502
FWD:415

B.
Rules and Regulations.
§ 511. General. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § A; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
1. Rules and Regulations. In these rules and regulations, Borough shall
mean Elizabethtown Borough and contractor shall mean contractor,
subcontractor, owner or developer. Any sewers, pump stations, force
mains and other sewerage facilities constructed within Elizabethtown
Borough shall meet the requirements contained herein before the
ownership of such facilities is accepted by the Borough.
2. Observance of Laws. The contractor at all times shall observe and
comply with all Federal and State laws and regulations, and local
bylaws, ordinances and regulations in any manner affecting the conduct
of the work, as well as all safety precautions and orders or decrees
which have been promulgated or enacted, or which may be
promulgated or enacted, by and legal bodies having authority or
jurisdiction over the work. Such observance and compliance shall be
solely and without qualification the responsibility of the contractor
without reliance on superintendence or direction by the Borough. The
duty of enforcement of all of said laws, ordinances, regulations, orders,
or decrees lies with the body or agency promulgating them, not with the
Borough.
3. Legal Documentation. After all construction and inspection
requirements are fulfilled and approved by the Borough, the contractor
shall prepare proper legal documentation to the satisfaction of the
Borough in order to formally transfer ownership of the sewerage
facilities to the Borough. General forms and guidelines for conveying
the facilities to the Borough are included in Appendix A.
4. Warranty. The contractor shall provide a warranty for one year
following the date of acceptance of the facilities by the Borough. This
warranty shall include all equipment, materials or appurtenances
installed. It shall be the sole responsibility of the contractor to repair or
replace any equipment, materials or appurtenances deemed defective
by the Borough during that period. The warranty shall include
restoration and/or settlement of excavated areas either in public or
private rights-of-way. The contractor shall be solely responsible for
refilling excavations and restoring surfaces damaged due to settlement
during that period. In State highways, the warranty shall be extended
to two years from date of acceptance of the facilities by the Borough. In
Borough roads, the warranty shall be as required by the Borough.
5. Plans and Specifications.
A. Plans and specifications for all sewerage facilities shall be properly
prepared by either a registered professional engineer or
professional land surveyor as allowed by the Pennsylvania
§ 511 FOREWORD § 511
FWD:417
Department of Environmental Protection (DEP), and approved by
the Borough.
B. Complete plans of all facilities must be prepared, including plan
and profile views on the same sheet, and shall be submitted to the
Borough for approval. The scale shall be one inch = 50 feet
horizontally, and one inch = 10 feet vertically for all sewers and
force mains. An overall plot plan reflecting the proposed sewer
installation with arrows indicating the direction of flow shall be
included. The Borough may require the contractor to extend a
terminal sewer section to a nearby public road. Unless written
permission is obtained from the Borough for an exception, all
sewers will be installed in public rights-of-way. Suitable scales shall
be used for pump stations and appurtenances. Sheet size shall be
standard 22 inches by 36 inches or 24 inches by 36 inches. The
Borough datum (U.S.G.S.) shall be used for all elevations. All rightsof-
way shall be shown on all drawings, and shall be properly
acquired and properly recorded in the name of the Borough prior to
acceptance of the sewer. The right-of-way agreement shall be in a
format approved by the Borough. All plans shall bear and signature
and seal of a registered professional engineer.
C. Upon completion of the work and prior to acceptance by the
Borough, record plan mylar reproducibles shall be given to the
Borough, and these shall include the location, pipe type, length and
depth of all sewer lines, lateral sewers, and forcemains, record
drawings for pumping stations and all operating manuals. In
addition, two complete sets of legible prints of each mylar sheet
shall be furnished by the Borough.
6. Shop Drawings. The Borough reserves the right to require shop
drawing submission by the contractor for any and all items to be used in
the construction of the sewers or appurtenances. The contractor must
obtain approval of shop drawing items prior to use or installation.
7. Permits. The contractor shall secure in the name of the Borough all
permits that are required in the name of the Borough such as those
from the Department of Environmental Protection, Conrail, and
PennDOT. Any existing street, highway, or other improvements
disturbed during construction shall be restored to the satisfaction of the
Borough before the facilities will be approved for final acceptance by
the Borough. All costs of such permits including any and all bonds
required shall be the sole expense of the contractor. All costs of
inspections, as may be required by permit issuing agencies, shall be the
sole expense of the contractor.
8. Inspections. The work shall at all times be subject to inspection and
examination by the Borough's representative. The contractor shall
provide free access and reasonable facility for examination of the work,
including uncovering and testing thereof.
§ 511 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 512
FWD:418
§ 512. Design. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § B; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
§ 513. Materials and Equipment. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § C; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. All designs shall conform to good engineering practice, meet the
requirements of DEP, OSHA and the Pennsylvania Department of Labor
and Industry, and shall conform to the requirements contained herein.
The minimum diameter shall be eight inches and the minimum slope for
all terminal sections of sewers shall be 1.0%. The minimum slope for all
other eight inch diameter sections shall be 0.50%.
2. Sewers shall be designed on the basis that all units shall be served by a
four inch sewer lateral having a minimum cover of three feet at any
point along its entire length. All wyes shall be set in accordance with
the details noted on Plate 1 contained herein using four-inch bends. The
invert elevation of the four inch service lateral at the 30 bend shall be
the same as the elevation of the crown of the main. The use of PVC "Twyes"
will not be permitted.
3. Under normal conditions, sewer lines with depths greater than 15 feet
will not be approved. In each instance, these conditions should be
thoroughly evaluated and discussed with the Borough during the
design. In all cases were subsequent approval is given by the Borough,
trench load calculations shall be submitted to verify the type of pipe and
bedding conditions to be utilized. The calculations for PVC pipe shall
include a safety factor of 1.5.
1. Gravity Sewer Pipe Materials and Joints.
A. Cement Lined Ductile Iron Pipe and Fittings.
(1) Ductile iron pipe shall be in full accord with the standard
specification as set forth in the ANSI Specification A21.51 or
A.W.W.A. specification C151, Latest Edition, with wall
thickness in full accord with the standard specification as set
forth in the ANSI Specification A21.50 or A.W.W.A.
Specification C150, Latest Edition.
(2) Joints shall be of the push-on type or mechanical joint type in
full accordance with ANSI A21.11 or A.W.W.A. C111
specifications, latest edition.
(3) Cement mortar linings shall be in full accord with ANSI
Specification A21.4 or A.W.W.A. C104, latest edition, except the
thickness of linings should not be less than the following:
(a) Three inches through 12 inches — 1/8 inch.
(b) Fourteen inches through 24 inches — 3/16 inch.
§ 512 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:419
(4) Minimum Thickness. The minimum pipe thickness shall be
Class 52.
B. Polyvinyl Chloride Sewer Pipe.
(1) Materials. Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC) sewer pipe conform to
ASTM D-3034-SDR35.
(2) Joints. The pipe and fittings shall be joined with an integral
bell-and-spigot type rubber gasketed joint. Each integral bell
joint shall consist of a formed bell with a single locked rubber
gasket as manufactured by J.M. Manufacturing Co. or
approved equal. Gaskets shall conform to ASTM D-3212.
2. Pressure Sewer Pipe Materials and Joints.
A. Ductile Iron Pipe.
(1) Material.
(a) Ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be Class 52 in full
accordance with the standard specification as set forth in
the ANSI Specification A21.S1 or A.W.W.A. Specification
C151 latest edition, with wall thickness in full accordance
with the standard specification as set forth in the ANSI
Specification A21.50 or A.W.W.A. Specification C150, latest
edition.
(b) All ductile iron pipe and fittings shall be coated inside and
outside with a bituminous based material at least one mil.
thick. In long force mains, the Borough may require a
polylining of the pipe.
(2) Joints. Pipe joints shall be of a type which employs a single
elongated grooved rubber gasket to effect the joint seal or
mechanical joints in full accordance with ANSI A21.11, or
A.W.W.A. C111 specifications, latest edition.
B. Steel.
(1) Material. Steel pressure sewer pipe shall conform to A.W.W.A.
Standard C-202. Interior lining shall be in accordance with
A.W.W.A. Standard C-203. All steel pipe and fittings shall be
coated inside and outside with a bituminous based material at
least one mil, thick.
(2) Joints. Joints shall be bell and spigot type with O-ring gasket,
or approved sleeve type couplings with rubber gaskets.
3. Concrete.
A. Cast-in-place concrete shall be in accordance with the ACI 350;
concrete sanitary engineering structures and shall be normal
weight concrete with 3000 psi, 28 day compressive strength.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:420
B. Ready-mix concrete shall comply with ASTM C94.
4. Air Release Valves.
A. The valves shall be designed for sewage service and shall be
nonclogging with cast iron body, bronze trim and stainless steel
floats. Valves shall be provided with shutoff valve, blow-off valve
and quick disconnect hose connection and backflushing hose and
valve.
B. Valves shall have a venting capacity of 270 C.F.F.A.M. at 50 psig
differential pressure and shall be similar to those manufactured by
APCO.
C. Manhole shall be standard precast concrete construction in
accordance with ASTM C-478. Manhole base shall be provided with
drain. Manhole cover shall be adequately vented to insure
discharge or intake of free air as specified above.
5. Precast Reinforced Concrete Manholes.
A. Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Risers and Tops.
(1) Precast reinforced concrete manhole risers and tops shall
conform to A.S.T.M. Specification C-478 (latest revision) and
shall be of watertight construction. Joints between manhole
sections shall be provided with performed plastic joint sealing
material such as Rub-R-Nek as manufactured by K. T. Snyder
Co., MAS-STIK as manufactured by Concrete Products Supply
Co., or approved equal. The performed joint sealer shall be
protected by a removable two piece wrapper and shall be
applied in strict accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations. The chemical composition of the sealer
shall meet the following requirements: the latest revision of
Bitumen-A.S.T.M. D-4-77, Inert Ash Mineral A.A.S.H.T.O.
T-111-42, Volatile Matter A.S.T.M. D-6-67.
(2) Manholes shall be constructed in accordance with the standard
details noted on Plate 1 contained herein. Shop drawings shall
be submitted for approval.
(3) All manhole covers shall be set at same slope and crown as
finished road surface. If an extension is made from an existing
manhole that will be below finished grade, that manhole shall
be raised to finished grade at the expense of the contractor. If
the existing Borough manhole will be above the finished grade,
the contractor shall adjust the manhole to finished grade. If the
proposed construction includes an existing street or right-ofway
in which the existing grade will be changed, the contractor
shall be responsible for adjusting all existing manholes to
finished grade. All adjustments required shall be in accordance
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:421
with methods approved by the Borough. Such approval must
be obtained in writing prior to construction.
(4) Lift holes in manholes shall not extend through the entire
width of the wall.
(5) Manhole bases may be cast-in-place concrete, and shall have a
compressive strength of not less than 3,000 psi after 28 days
(tests to be in accordance with A.S.T.M. Specification C-39,
latest revision).
(6) Precast manhole bases shall have flexible watertight joints at
the point of entry of any sewer pipe into the manhole. The
rubber materials shall conform to ASTM C443. The gaskets
shall be cast into the manhole base to become an integral part
of the concrete. The gaskets shall be Press Wedge II as
manufactured by Press-Seal Gasket Corporation, Dura-Seal III,
or Dura-Seal PSX, as manufactured by Dura Tech Inc., and
supplied by Monarch, Dallastown, PA, Dual Seal II as supplied
by Terre Hill concrete Products, "FLEX-LOK" as supplied by
York Concrete, York, PA or equal.
B. Frame and Cover. Manhole frame and cover shall be of soft grey
iron equal in design to Number R-1656 manufactured by the
Neenah Foundry Company, Neenah, Wisconsin, machined and
having the words "SANITARY SEWER" cast approximately in the
center of the cover. All frames on manholes shall be securely
attached to the manhole by use of anchor bolts. The joint between
the frame and the precast manhole section shall be provided with
preformed plastic joint sealing material equal to Ram-Nek as
manufactured by K. T. Snyder Company, Inc. of Houston, Texas. It is
required that this joint be watertight.
C. Watertight Manhole Frame and Cover. Watertight manhole frames
shall be of soft grey iron similar in design to Number R-1755C as
manufactured by Neenah Foundry Co., Neenah, Wisconsin, and
having the word "SANITARY SEWER" cast approximately in the
center of the cover. Watertight frames shall be securely attached to
the manhole by use of anchor bolts. The joint between the frame
and the precast manhole section shall be provided with performed
plastic joint sealing material equal to Ram-Nek as manufactured by
K. T. Snyder Company, Inc. of Houston, Texas. It is required that
this joint be watertight.
D. Manhole Steps.
(1) Manhole steps shall be 3/4 inch diameter aluminum alloy
6061-T6, similar in design to R-1982-W as manufactured by the
Neenah Foundry Co., Neenah, Wisconsin. Manhole steps shall
be grouted in place using a nonshrink, nonmetallic grout, cast
in place or driven into polypropylene inserts or manhole steps
made of steel reinforced copolymer polypropylene similar in
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:422
design to PS2-PF or PS2-PFS as manufactured by M. A.
Industries Inc., Peachtree City, GA.
(2) The Borough reserves the right to have steps tested according
to the latest revision of ASTM Specification C-478 at the
contractor's cost.
(3) Manhole steps shall be positioned in the manhole in such a
manner to permit easy access to the manhole and not conflict
with either influent or effluent lines. The first step shall be no
further than 24 inches from the top of the manhole.
6. Pumping Stations.
A. General.
(1) Sewage pump stations which are intended to be transferred to
the Borough shall be properly designed to conform to all
applicable regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (DEP), OSHA, and the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry. Prior to approval by the
Borough, detailed construction drawings and specifications, as
well as the design calculation, must be submitted.
(2) Both wetwell/drywell, and submersible type stations will be
considered. These requirements pertain to pumping stations
which will serve multiple dwellings and/or industrial or other
developments which discharge sewage by gravity to the pump
station site. They do not apply to individual effluent or sewage
pumps in low-pressure systems.
(3) The contractor shall obtain DEP approval and permits in the
name of the Borough.
(4) Special consideration must be given to the fact that wet wells,
other than those on residential properties, are considered
hazardous Class 1, Group D environment.
(a) Safety Requirements. All gears, chains, coupling,
projecting set screws, keys and similar rotating or
reciprocating parts shall be protected in accordance with
American Standards Association Safety Code for
Mechanical Power-Transmission Apparatus 815-1927.
(b) Drawings and Details. The contractor shall furnish the
Borough detailed plans and instructions for installation
and operation of the pumps, detailed drawings showing
the piping arrangement required, and two copies of
characteristic performance curves for each proposed
pump. The drawings will be examined only for general
design, general dimensions and apparent suitability and
will be approved or returned for the changes required.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:423
Such approval will not relieve the contractor of the
responsibility for furnishing equipment which will
satisfactorily perform under the conditions specified.
(c) Description of Equipment. The contractor shall furnish a
complete description of all equipment offered under this
specification, including manufacturer's information and
pertinent curves based on laboratory tests of existing
similar pumps. The curves shall show the capacity, head,
efficiency and brake horsepower throughout the head and
capacity range.
(d) Spare Parts and Tools.
1) The contractor shall furnish one complete set of tools
that are necessary for the maintenance and repair of
the pumps. One pressure grease gun for each type of
grease required for pumps and motors shall be
furnished.
2) Spare parts shall consist of one extra set of pump
bearings, two sets packing, or mechanical seals for
each pump station and one extra shaft sleeve for each
size pump.
(e) Site and Access Road.
1) The pump station site shall be properly graded to
eliminate any stormwater problems and/or ponding
conditions. After grading, the site shall be seeded and
landscaped. Provisions shall be made to include
shrubbery in the landscaping to enhance the
appearance of the station. The contractor is
responsible for obtaining a good stand of grass until
the time of first cutting. The site shall be fenced and
shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the pumping
facilities and to permit the turnaround of service
vehicles. The access road and turnaround shall have a
paved surface. The minimum width of the paved
surface of the access road shall be 12 feet.
2) Specifications. Form, shape and compact subgrade.
Six inches compacted stone base course. One and a
half inch BCBC base course and one inch BCBC
wearing course. Toe drains and stormwater culverts
as dictated by topography.
3) The site shall be provided with overhead exterior
lighting.
4) The site shall be fenced with vinyl coated link Fence
six feet high with sliding/rolling link fence gate and
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:424
man gate. Locking devices must be provided on both
gates.
(f) Emergency Generator Building. An emergency generator
shall be mounted permanently in a building with all
appropriate electrical controls (including automatic
"switch-over" controls). This building shall also house
pump control panel specified elsewhere. The building shall
conform aesthetically with adjoining residential units.
Construction details of the building shall be subject to
approval of the Borough. Temporary or flimsy housing or
structures will not be accepted, nor will metal or fiberglass
enclosed generators.
B. Station Construction.
(1) Wetwell/Drywell Type.
(a) General.
1) The wetwell must be capable of being isolated by
means of a gate valve located upstream of the wetwell.
2) The station shall consist of two prefabricated sections
assembled in the field. The entrance tube shall be a
minimum 42 inches I.D. The pump chambers shall be
of 1/4 inch structural plate and the top and bottom
heads 3/8 inch structural plate. Reinforcing eight inch
I-beams shall be welded to the bottom head. Top head
shall be reinforced with either eight inch I-beams or
channels. Lifting lugs shall be provided of sufficient
capacity to carry the entire weight of the complete
chamber. Pump chamber dimensions shall be eight
feet inside diameter and eight feet in height.
3) All welds shall be continuous and watertight. Lugs
shall be properly positioned and welded to the ceiling
to lift each pump and motor.
4) The entrance tubes shall be 1/4 inch structural steel
plate, rolled and seam welded and reinforced at the
top and bottom with rolled angles. Entrance tubes
shall extend above grade a minimum of 18 inches. The
lid shall be raintight and fitted with a handle and
positive automatic latching device and have a lock that
can be opened with a knob from the inside and a key
from the outside. Two steel vent pipes shall be
attached to the outside of the entrance tube to provide
a fresh air intake and exhaust vent. Pipes shall be
screened and have a rain-proof opening.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:425
5) Two magnesium anodes shall be furnished with
insulated wire to be attached to each station and
placed in the backfill to provide cathodic protection.
6) The entrance tubes shall be provided with
intermediate landings in accordance with DEP
standards.
(b) Pumping Facilities.
1) A minimum of two pumps shall be provided and
installed. Pumps shall be of the nonclog type capable
of passing a sphere with a minimum diameter of three
inches. Pump casing shall have built-in suction elbow.
Each pump shall be close coupled and shall have two
sets of ball bearings designed for both radial and
vertical thrust.
2) The pump shaft shall be sealed by a standard packed
stuffing box. Stuffing box shall have minimum of five
rings of graphite impregnated square packing with
cast iron gland seal. The seal shall be lubricated by:
a) Water taken directly from the public water supply,
if available, to a lantern ring inside the seal
housing; or,
b) Water taken from the pump volute through a filter
to a lantern ring inside the seal housing. Filter
shall be of corrosion resistant materials and shall
screen out solids larger than 50 microns.
3) The use of mechanical seals shall also be considered.
4) A manually operated brass valve shall be provided to
vent the pump volute.
(c) Motors.
1) The pump motors shall be specially built NEMA P
base, open drip-proof induction type, suitable for
three phase, 60 Hz, 230/460 volt electrical service.
The motors shall have a service factor of 1.15. They
shall have normal starting torque and low starting
current, as specified for NEMA Design B
characteristics. The motors shall not be overloaded at
the design condition, nor at any head in the specified
operating range.
2) Motors shall have Class F insulation, Class B
temperature rise, 40°C ambient. Insulation shall be of
non-hygroscopic materials which resist moisture and
are fungus resistant.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:426
3) Each motor shall have oversized, grease-lubricated
ball bearings with the thrust bearing at the bottom
locked in position to eliminate shaft end-play. The
motor shaft shall be solid stainless steel.
4) The motor-pump shaft shall be centered, in relation to
the motor base, within 0.005 inches. The shaft run-out
shall be limited to 0.003 inches.
5) The motor shall be fitted with heavy lifting eyes, each
capable of supporting the entire weight of the pump
and motor.
6) A special varnish treatment shall be applied to the
stator windings and rust preventative compounds
shall be used to coat the rotor and stator air gap
surfaces and protect the motor against corrosion.
(d) Controls. The control equipment shall be as for
submersible type stations. (See § 113(6)(A)(2) et seq.)
(e) Dehumidifier. The contractor shall install an automatic
refrigeration type dehumidifier to maintain the relative
humidity of the air in the pump chamber as low as
possible. The dehumidifier shall be capable of removing
three gallons of moisture per 24 hours, and shall be
automatically controlled by an adjustable cold coil
thermostat and a panel mounted humidistat. The
condensation shall drain to the sump.
(f) Sump Pump. The contractor shall install in each pump
station a submersible sump pump with 1/3 HP motor
mounted directly above the impeller. The volute casting
shall have feet to support the impeller entrance the proper
distance above the bottom of the pump. It shall have a
minimum capacity of 1000 GPH at 20 feet TDH. The pump
shall be controlled by a level control switch, capable of
operation on a two inch differential water level. It shall
discharge back into the wet well through a 1 1/4 inch pipe
with two check valves and a gate valve within the pump
chamber.
(g) Ventilating Blowers. A ventilating blower capable of
displacing 30 air changes per hour should be installed in
the pump chamber and the wet well. The blower and lights
shall be turned on by a NEMA one entrance switch at the
entrance to the pump chamber or wet well respectively.
The pump chamber blower shall also be timer controlled.
No piping from the wet well may enter the pump chamber.
(h) Wiring.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:427
1) The pump station shall be completely wired at the
factory, except for the power feeder lines, and shall be
in accordance with the National Electric Code. All
wiring in the pump station shall be color coded as
indicated on the wiring diagram. Minimum wire size
shall be #12 AWG copper. All wiring outside the panel
shall be in rigid galvanized steel conduit, 3/4 inch
minimum, except for 115 volt accessory items which
are provided with connecting insulated service cord
by the manufacturer. The manufacturer shall furnish
and install conduit from the control panel across the
ceiling, and up the entrance tube to receive the feeder
lines. The conduit shall terminate in a threaded
conduit connection through the wall of the entrance
tube above ground level.
2) Accessory items such as the sump pump, dehumidifier,
and air compressors shall be plugged into polarized,
grounded convenience outlets, located close to their
installed position so that such items can be readily
removed and serviced if necessary.
(i) Heater. A 750 watt, 120 volt, electric heater shall be
installed in the station. The heater shall be
thermostatically controlled. The heater shall not be placed
within two feet of the control panel.
(j) Station Painting.
1) After welding, all inside and outside surfaces of the
structure shall be blasted with steel grit to remove
rust, mill scale, weld slag, etc. All weld spatter and
surface roughness shall be removed by grinding.
Immediately following cleaning, a single heavy inert
coating shall be factory applied to all inside and
outside surfaces prior to shipment. This coating shall
be of "Versapox" epoxy resin, or equal, especially
formulated for abrasion and corrosion resistance. The
dry coating shall contain a minimum of 85% epoxy
resin with the balance being pigments and thixotropic
agents.
2) A touch-up kit shall be provided for repair of any mars
or scratches occurring during installation. This kit
shall contain detailed instructions for use and shall be
a material which is compatible with the original
coating. The touchup coating shall contain a minimum
of 85% epoxy resin.
3) All motors, pumps, bases, brackets, ladders, piping
and steel support shall be properly primed and
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:428
painted with two coats of rust inhibitor paint in strict
accordance with the manufacturer's
recommendations.
(2) Submersible Type.
(a) General. A minimum of two pumps must be provided and
installed. The station, including pump and valve chambers,
manholes, meter pits and other structures constructed
below grade shall be watertight and must meet current
ASTM Specifications. A separate valve chamber must be
provided in accordance with DEP requirements.
(b) Sump Basin and Cover.
1) The sump basin shall be of reinforced concrete and
shall be provided with a hinged aluminum cover of
non-skid pattern. The basin shall be large enough to
comfortably accommodate the pumps. The cover shall
have angle frame with rectangular opening of
sufficient size to permit easy removal of the pumps.
Cover shall have a hold-open bar that can be locked in
open position, and shall have a lock that uses a key or
special insert to open. All hardware shall be of
noncorrosive material.
2) Basin shall be provided with an extendable aluminum
access ladder with rungs at 12 inch oc. Extendable
section must consist of two vertical handrails
projecting a minimum of three feet above top of basin.
(c) Valve Chamber.
1) A separate valve chamber shall be provided on the
discharge side of the sump basin. The valve chamber
shall accommodate a check valve and gate valve for
each pump, and shall be large enough to comfortable
accommodate the valves and fittings.
2) A NEMA four limit switch shall be provided on each
check valve to signal open/close operation. The
switches shall have N.O./N.C. contacts rated 120 volts,
10 amps. These switches shall be connected into the
pump fail circuitry.
3) The valve chamber shall be provided with an
aluminum hatch cover a described in subsection (2),
above.
4) Chamber shall be minimum four feet six inches deep
with aluminum access ladder with rungs at 12 inches
oc. A three inch diameter drain shall be provided from
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:429
the floor of the chamber to the pump sump. The floor
shall be sloped towards the drain. The drain shall have
a check valve to prevent backflow from pump sump in
case of high water level in the pump sump.
(d) Lift-Out Rail System. Station shall be provided with a rail
system to facilitate easy removal of the pumps. Rails shall
be firmly fixed with rail supports to the wall of the sump
basin. Rails, supports and all hardware shall be made of
noncorrosive materials.
(e) Submersible Pumps.
1) Casings. Pump casing and motor casing of ASTM-A48
cast iron. Pump casing of the single volute type,
ribbed to prevent excessive deflection and
hydrostatically tested to twice the design head or 1 1/
2 times the shutoff head whichever is greater. Volute
sized at all points to pass solids which can pass
through the impeller and internally finished to provide
smooth, unobstructed flow.
2) Impeller. Nonclogging type of ASTM-A48 cast iron,
statically, dynamically and hydraulically balanced,
capable of passing three inch solids. Key seat the
impeller and secure it to the shaft by a hex head
impeller nut.
3) Pump Shaft. Stainless steel of sufficient strength and
size to safely transmit the maximum torque developed
by the drive unit. Shaft sized to provide rigid support
of the impeller and prevent excessive vibration.
4) Pump Shaft Bearings Ball or roller type, oil lubricated.
Upper bearings to support full dead load and
hydraulic thrust. Design bearings with a 20,000 hour
B10 minimum bearing life per AFBMA test procedure.
5) Shaft Seals. Provide each pumping unit with a double
mechanical seal, running in an oil filled reservoir,
composed of two separate lapped faced seals, each
consisting of one stationary and one rotating tungsten
carbide ring each held in contact by a separate spring,
so that the outside pressure assists spring
compression in preventing the seal faces from
opening.
a) Protect the compression spring against exposure
to the pumped liquid. Seal the pumped liquid from
the oil reservoir by one face seal and the oil
reservoir from the motor chamber by the other.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:430
b) Equip each pumping unit with a liquid sensing
device to prevent damage to the motor in the
event of a shaft seal failure.
6) Pump Motor. Provide a motor having Class F insulated
windings (which are moisture resistant) housed in a
watertight casing. The motor shall have cooling
characteristics suitable to permit continuous
operation in a totally, partially or nonsubmerged
condition. Motors shall be rated Class one, Group D
hazardous.
7) Pump Accessories. Provide the following accessories
with each pumping unit.
a) Stainless steel chain of adequate strength and
length to permit raising of the pumping unit for
inspection and removal. Chain must have large
secondary links attached at minimum 10 foot
intervals.
b) Guide rails.
c) Upper guide rail brackets.
d) Pump motoring plate with discharge elbow and
lower guide rail support brackets.
e) Power cable of adequate length.
(f) Controls.
1) Mercury Float Switch Controller. Provide a control
system consisting of mercury float switch and other
necessary appurtenances. Switches to be molded into
an epoxy filled polypropylene float. Provide two spare
floats with cables to the Borough.
2) Pump Controls.
a) One circuit breaker disconnect unit per pump
with magnetic trip sized for individual pump
protection. This unit shall provide the maximum
electrical motor protection available, serving as a
circuit breaker and manual disconnect switch.
b) One across-the-line starter per pump, sized in
accordance with NEMA horsepower standards.
c) 1 N.O. auxiliary contact for run status and 1 N.C.
auxiliary contact for stop status, overload relay,
and all other controls and accessories necessary
for proper operation and protection.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:431
d) Low voltage (24 VAC) level sensing circuitry for
intrinsically safe relaying.
e) Solid state alternator for duplex controls.
f) Individual toggle type selector switches to
provide "AUTO-OFF-HAND" control of each
pump.
g) Twenty-four volt AC control transformer,
protected by circuit breakers or fuses on both the
primary and secondary.
h) Terminals shall be provided for connection of the
level sensors.
i) A removable dead-front panel shall be provided to
protect the operator.
j) All operator's controls, toggle switches, circuit
breakers, etc., shall be accessible without
removing the dead-front panel.
k) NEMA one enclosure with latch mechanism.
l) Duplex three phase 240 or 480 volt power supply
as dictated by the power company and motor
requirements.
m) A relay which automatically reconnects the
control circuit to pump number two if pump
number one circuit breaker trips.
n) High level and low level alarm relays with
unpowered contacts and terminals shall be
included.
o) Pump running transformer type pilot lights (red)
mounted on operator's control panel. Pump
stopped pilot lights (green) mounted on
operator's control panel.
p) Nonresettable running time meters mounted on
operator's control panel.
q) Seal leak detector for each pump with unpowered
relay contacts for alarming.
r) Three phase power monitor with adjustable
settings, stops pump for low voltage, single
phasing and phase reversal.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:432
s) One pump to be locked off during generator
operation with ability to switch to other pump
should selected pump fail.
t) A "HAND-OFF-AUTO" selector switch provided
for each of the two pumps controlled with the
following operation:
i) Hand Position. In this position, the pump
controlled by the switch will run regardless of
the wet well level. The pump will continue to
run until the switch is turned to "OFF" or
"AUTO".
ii) Auto Position. In this position, the operation
of the pumps is controlled automatically by
the level sensors in the wet well as follows:
a. The control circuit is placed in standby
when the liquid level rises to tilt the
lowest sensor which is a redundant
cutoff and low water alarm.
b. As the level continues to rise, the
control circuit is energized when the
pump off level sensor rises.
c. As the level continues to rise and the
next level sensor is tilted, the first
(lead) pump will start. In this step, the
pumps will alternate on successive
cycles. If pump number one starts first
on one cycle, pump number two will
start first on the next cycle. This
insures equal operating time and wear
on each pump.
d. As the level in the well is pumped
down, the pump or pumps will continue
to operate until the level drops just
below the pumps off level sensor.
e. If the level in the well continues to rise
with one pump in operation, the second
pump will be turned on when the level
reaches lag pump on/high water level
float.
f. If the water continues to rise, the high
water alarm level sensor will activate
an alarm.
C. Pipes and Fittings.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:433
(1) Suction and discharge piping shall be Class 52 (Min) Ductile
Iron (Cement Lined): ANSI A21.50 and ANSI A21.51. Fittings
shall be Gray Iron or Ductile Iron: ANSI A21.10, up to 12
inches inclusive 250 psi rated.
(2) Flanged joints shall be used inside structures.
(3) Pipes and Fittings to be factory coated inside and out with
bituminous material; minimum one mil dry thickness.
D. Valves.
(1) Gate Valves.
(a) Provide valves of the same type by the same manufacturer
suitable for the intended service.
(b) Valves shall open to the left (counter-clockwise). Operating
nuts or wheels shall have cast thereon, an arrow and the
word OPEN indicating the direction of opening.
(c) Acceptable manufacturers:
1) Clow Corporation;
2) American Darling Valve;
3) Kennedy Valve; or,
4) Equal.
(2) Check Valves.
(a) Designed for a minimum working water pressure of 150
psi.
(b) Iron body, bronze mounted, full opening swing check type
with bolted cover, stainless steel hinge and malleable iron
clapper arm.
(c) Disc of cast iron with bronze seat ring.
(d) Valves less than 10 inches and larger furnished with
outside lever and spring.
(e) Valves less than 10 inches furnished with outside lever and
weight.
E. Alarm System. An alarm system capable of monitoring the
following functions and transmitting the relevant signal to the
designated location, shall be installed:
(1) Wetwell/Drywell Type Stations.
(a) Power failure.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:434
(b) High wetwell.
(c) Low wetwell.
(d) Water in drywell.
(e) Generator failure.
(f) Louver failure.
(g) Pump failure.
(2) Submersible Type Stations.
(a) Power failure.
(b) High wetwell.
(c) Low wetwell.
(d) Seal leak.
(e) Generator failure.
(f) Louver failure.
(g) Pump failure.
(3) Acceptable Manufacturers. The dialer shall be a real voice type
with eight-channel capacity. Dialer shall be Verbatim by RACO
or MCS500 by Microtel.
(4) Provide a wall mounted pushbutton telephone and RJ11 jack.
Acceptable Manufacturer: Bell, AT&T, G.E., or approved equal.
Contractor shall make all arrangements with telephone
company and pay all relevant installation charges and fees.
F. Flow Metering. [Amended by Ord. 966, 12/18/2014]
(1) A flow metering device must be provided capable of
continuously recording pumped flows. If meter is used with a
wet well/dry well type station, the meter shall be installed
inside the dry well area. If the meter is used with a submersible
type station it shall be installed in a manhole of sufficient size
as to permit easy access for maintenance.
(2) Acceptable Product: Toshiba Mount Anywhere flow meter or
equal.
G. Water Supply. Where public water supply is available, a 3/4 inch
diameter metered water service terminating at a frostproof yard
hydrant, in the case of submersible type station, and terminating
inside the drywell in the case of wetwell/drywell station, must be
provided. Service to include all fees and charges for the provision
thereof.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:435
H. Tests. Field tests shall be carried out at the expense of the
contractor to ensure that pumps and all equipment meet the design
criteria. The Borough's personnel will witness the field tests.
I. Emergency Power.
(1) The contractor shall install a diesel or propane powered
emergency generator set and automatic transfer switch
required to run the pumps and all equipment within the station
upon loss of normal power.
(2) The system components shall be new equipment of current
design, not one-of-a-kind, and consist of an approved enginedriven
electric plant with mounted start-stop controls, an
automatic load transfer control, and all necessary accessories.
All components shall be completely built, tested and shipped
by a manufacturer who has been regularly engaged in the
production of such equipment for the past 10 years and who
has local parts and service facilities, so there is one
responsibility for the proper functioning of the entire system.
The plant shall be as manufactured by Kohler, Caterpillar,
Onan or approved equal.
(3) The plant shall be mounted on a welded steel skid base, which
in turn shall mount on six-inch high I-beams securely mounted
to the frame and a concrete pad. The pad shall be sloped to
prevent standing water to accumulate under the generator set.
The starting batteries shall be placed on a cast iron rack on the
inside of the housing. The muffler shall be attached to the
exhaust line by 125 pound American standard pipe flanges.
The exhaust line shall contain a condensate trap with drain
cock, at the first point of rise in the line from the engine. Only
long radius elbows shall be used in the exhaust line. All
required anchor bolts shall be furnished and installed. A
stainless steel flexible pipe shall connect engine to the exhaust
system.
(4) Exhaust air ductwork between radiator and exhaust louver,
shall be 20-gauge galvanized sheet steel. Engine radiator shall
have a flexible duct adapter.
(5) A thermostatically controlled jacket water heater shall be
provided to maintain a jacket water temperature of 90° F. This
unit shall be as manufactured by Chromalox, Singer, or
approved equal.
(6) Provide a line circuit breaker with the generator. Breaker shall
be rated to handle the generated fault currents and shall be
one of those listed by the transfer switch manufacturer as
providing withstand and closing ratings listed. Breaker shall
have the required number of poles and current rating capable
of handling required load.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:436
(7) Provide generator control panel with the following: voltmeter,
ammeter, selector switch, start controls, voltage level
adjustment rheostat, oil pressure gauge, fault indicators for
safety shutdown, "AUTO/MANUAL" switch, water temperature
gauge, battery charge rate ammeter, field circuit breaker,
running time meter, panel face illumination from the battery,
generator failure output contacts.
(8) Provide base mounted diesel fuel/gas tank of sufficient
capacity to sustain a minimum of 24 hours running at full tank
of fuel/gas.
(9) A current limiting battery charger shall be furnished to
automatically recharge the starting batteries. Charger shall
float at 2.17 volts per cell and equalize at 2.33 volts per cell. It
shall include overload protection, silicon diode full wave
rectifiers, voltage surge suppressors, DC ammeter, and fused
AC input. AC input voltages shall be 120 volts. Amperage
output shall be no less than five amperes. Charger shall be
LaMarche Manufacturing Company, Model A-5, ESB Inc., or
approved equal.
J. Transfer Switch.
(1) The automatic transfer switch shall be fully rated, to protect all
types of loads, inductive and resistive, from loss of continuity of
power. The switch shall afford complete protection. The switch
shall be rated as suitable for all classes of loads without
derating, either open or enclosed.
(2) The transfer switch shall automatically transfer its load circuit
to an emergency or alternate power supply from failure of its
normal or original supply. Upon restoration of the normal
supply, the transfer switch shall automatically retransfer its
load circuits to the normal supply.
(3) All pilot devices/relays shall be of the industrial type rated 10
amperes with self-cleaning contacts.
(4) Transfer mechanism shall be energized only momentarily
during transfer.
(5) Components of the operating mechanism shall be insulated or
electrically dead.
(6) All electrical equipment or apparatus of any one system must
be the product of one manufacturer or equivalent products of a
number of manufacturers which are suitable for use in a
unified system. No circuit breaker types are acceptable nor
parts thereof.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:437
(7) For complete protection, close differential voltage sensing
relays shall be provided to monitor each phase of the normal
supply. A drop in voltage in any phase below the predetermined
dropout value of the relay shall initiate load transfer. The relay
shall initiate retransfer of the load to the normal supply as soon
as the voltage is restored in all phases beyond the
predetermined pickup value of the relay.
(8) The transfer switch shall obtain its operating current from the
sources to which the load is being transferred.
(9) The automatic transfer switch shall also be furnished with the
following options: adjustable two to 120 seconds time delay on
normal to emergency; adjustable zero to 15 second time delay
on engine starting; adjustable 12 seconds to 30 minutes time
delay on emergency to normal; adjustable zero to 30 minutes,
set at five minutes time delay for engine cool off; frequency/
voltage relay for emergency source; test switch in cover of
switch; normal supply pilot lights, emergency supply pilot
light; engine start-stop contacts; relay auxiliary contacts on
normal and emergency source, 1 N.O. and 1 N.C.; solid neutral
bar assembly; plant exerciser for automatic test operation of
plant with transfer of load for pre-selected intervals
(adjustable 0-168 hours in multiples of 15 minutes) at least
once a week.
(10) All accessories and equipment shall be front accessible for
ease of maintenance or removal.
(11) Transfer switches and options shall be as manufactured by
ASCO 940, Kohler, Onan or approved equal.
K. Lighting.
(1) The contractor shall furnish all luminaries, lighting equipment
and components shown on the drawings, listed in the fixture
schedule, and specified herein. He shall furnish all labor and
materials required to install specified equipment in a
workmanlike manner.
(2) The contractor shall furnish and install lamps and accessories
as required. Prior to acceptance of building by the Borough, all
fixtures shall be cleaned, free of dust, insects and all foreign
matter.
(3) The light fixture schedule is listed below.
(4) Description.
(a) Industrial, ceiling mounted fluorescent, two lamp, four
foot, 10 15 apertured up-light porcelain enamel reflectors,
120 volts.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:438
(b) Outdoor wall mounted high pressure sodium, 120 volts,
photo control.
L. Electric Unit Heaters.
(1) Horizontal forced air unit heaters shall be rated for the
building size. Mounting brackets designed for either ceiling or
wall swivel mounting shall be furnished for each heater. The
cabinet shall be of 18 gauge dieformed furniture grade steel.
Individual adjustable louvers shall be furnished to provide
desired control of discharge air. All metal surfaces of the
casing shall be phosphate coated to resist corrosion, with a
baked enamel finish.
(2) Automatic reset thermal over-heat protection shall be
provided.
(3) Motors shall be of the totally enclosed continuous fan-duty
sleeve bearing type equipped with built-in thermal overload
protection.
(4) Fans shall be aluminum, directly connected to fan motor,
dynamically balanced and designed specifically for unit heater
application.
(5) Heaters shall be equipped with built-in comfort control
thermostats and necessary control transformers and
contractors. Heaters shall be equipped with cord and twist lock
plug for connection to receptacle and shall be Chromalox Type
MUH, Singer, Berko or approved equal.
M. Metal Louvers.
(1) The contractor shall furnish all metal louvers (both the gravity
and motor operated type) required for installation in the
generator building. He shall provide the metal louvers
complete with all motors, controls, screens, trim and closure
pieces required for a complete installation. It shall be the
responsibility of the contractor to check all opening sizes and
completely coordinate the installation to insure a neat
workmanlike job.
(2) A gravity louver shall be furnished for installation on the
generator discharge. This shall be a fully automatic louver with
the exhaust blades normally in a closed position and set to
open when air pressure is applied. The blades shall move
independently of each other, smoothly and without flutter.
(3) The head, sill, jambs and blades shall be extruded aluminum
section, 6063-T52 alloy with reinforced bosses. The exhaust
blades shall be cushioned the full length by vinyl gaskets. The
heads, sills and jambs shall be one piece structural members
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:439
with integral caulking strips and retaining beads. All fasteners
to be stainless steel or aluminum. All louvers shall be provided
with #2 mesh 0.063 inch diameter wire bird screen secured by
an extruded aluminum frame on the louver exterior which can
be easily removed for cleaning.
(4) The louvers shall be free of scratches and blemishes and
provided in a fluorocarbon polymer finish in a color to be
selected by the Borough.
(5) The gravity louver shall be Model ASA/FBE as manufactured
by Penn Ventilator Airstream, Airolite Co., or approved equal.
(6) A motor operated louver shall be furnished for use as the
generator air intake. This shall be a fully automatic louver with
the operating blades normally in a spring closed position and
opened by a motorized operator. The blades shall operate in a
smooth continuous motion.
(7) The head, sill, jambs and blades shall be extruded aluminum
sections, 6063-T52 alloy with reinforced bosses. The operating
blades shall be double gasketed with a vinyl material. The
heads, sills and a jambs shall be one piece structural members
with integral caulking slot and retaining beads. All fasteners
shall be stainless steel or aluminum.
(8) The operating blades shall be operated by electrically
controlled motor operator. The motor shall be totally enclosed
and suitable for operation on 120 volt, 60 Hz, single phase
service. The unit shall be furnished with all controls and
miscellaneous accessories for a complete working installation.
(9) The motor operated louver shall be Model ASA/FBI as
manufactured by Penn Ventilator Airstream, Airolite or
approved equal.
(10) The louvers are to be sized to suite the generator air
requirements. The exhaust louver shall be sized so that the
maximum pressure drop shall not exceed 1/2 inch of water
when the generator is operating at full speed. The intake
louver shall be sized 25% larger than the exhaust louver.
(11) The motor operated intake louver shall be wired for both
manual and automatic operation. A selector switch shall be
provided for manual open-close operation.
(12) The intake louver shall automatically open when the
emergency generator starts, and shall remain open until the
generator shuts down. All necessary controls, relays and
wiring necessary for a complete working installation shall be
furnished and installed.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:440
(13) A thermostat shall also be provided to automatically open the
intake louver on excessive heat build-up within the generator
building. Thermostat shall have control range of 70° to 140° F.,
with a 2° F. differential, and shall be Model T631C, as
manufactured by Honeywell, Chromalox or approved equal.
(14) A limit switch shall be installed at the intake louver location,
and shall be positioned so that the switch is operated by the
opening of the louver blades. If the louver, and switch, does not
open after a preset time, a relay shall signal a "louver failure"
condition to the telemetering alarm system. Limit switches
shall be as manufactured by Westinghouse Type RR, Square D
or approved equal.
N. Electrical Construction.
(1) The contractor shall meet with the electric company (PP&L)
and the local telephone company (UTS) to determine all
requirements at the site for service and metering. Any excess
charges by the utilities for furnishing the required service shall
be the responsibility of the contractor.
(2) The contractor shall furnish and install a service pole at each
pumping station if the service is overhead. Service conductors
and raceways shall be installed from the generator building
underground to the service pole, and up pole terminating in an
approved entrance fitting. The power company will furnish and
install an overhead service drop to the pole and connect to
service conductors. Poles shall be guyed if required to offset
pull of power company's service drop.
(3) If the service is underground, the contractor shall furnish and
install underground conduit, current transformer cabinet, and
meter base. Current transformer cabinet or self-contained
meter base, as necessary, shall be mounted on the generator
building. The utility companies will furnish and install and
service lateral.
(4) A grounding grid shall be provided at the service pole. Metal
raceways, metal enclosures of electrical devices, transformer
frames, neutral conductor and other equipment shall be
completely grounded in accordance with the National
Electrical Code. All necessary conduit, conductors, clamps,
connectors, etc. for the grounding system shall be furnished
and installed by the contractor.
(5) Provide a main service entrance approved disconnect switch
with current limiting fuses as required. Heavy duty type,
NEMA 1 enclosure indoors, NEMA 3R enclosure outdoors with
padlock attachment; Square D, Cutler-Hammer, G.E. or equal.
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:441
(6) The panel board shall be rated for the voltage present, deadfront
type, lockable with thermal-magnetic bolt-on circuit
breakers, neutral and ground bus, typed circuit directory.
(7) Lightning protection shall be provided on the feeders
immediately on the load side of the main disconnect witch,
grounding lead as short as possible to grounding system,
Innovative Technology, Inc. "P-Plus" series, or equal as
manufactured by Liebert, Current Technologies or Transducer;
A plug-in protector shall be used which has receptacles and
RJ-11 jack for the telephone/dialer connections, Innovative
Technology, Inc., Model PIU, or equal as manufactured by
Liebert, Current Technologies or Transducer.
(8) Light switches to be 20 amp, 120/277 volt rated, P&S Series
20AC or approved equal; if weatherproof use P&S WP-1 level
handle weather-sealing cover with FS box.
(9) Receptacles shall be 20 amp rated, 120 volt, two-pole,
grounding duplex, P&S 5362 or approved equal; ground fault
type to be P&S 2091-F; if weatherproof use FS box with set
location cover; power outlet receptacle rated as shown on the
drawing and as required, heavy-duty, twist-lock, P&S series or
approved equal.
(10) Underground conduit shall be polyvinyl chloride schedule 40
as manufactured by Carlon, Sedco or approved equal. All
bends in duct lines of 40° and greater shall be manufactured
steel elbows of the same size as the PVC ducts. Ducts shall be
encased in four inches of concrete. Where conduits pass under
roadways, parking lots or on filled ground, a mat shall be
provided in concrete, consisting of two longitudinal #4 bars
with #3 ties, one foot on center. Trenches shall be backfilled
with clean dirt, thoroughly compacted.
(11) All conduit shall be rigid galvanized steel or intermediate type,
conforming to Federal Specifications WW-C-581E and be U.L.
listed and manufactured by Triangle Conduit & Cable
Company, National, Allied Tube & Conduit or approved equal.
(12) Fittings for IMC conduit shall conform to Federal
Specifications W-F-408 and shall be threaded type.
(13) Install sealing fittings, Crouse-Hinds type EYS and EZS,
Appleton type EYS or ESU or approved equal, wherever a
conduit passes into a hazardous area or extends between areas
having widely different temperatures.
(14)Wires and cables shall be medium hard drawn copper of the
size as shown on the drawings, or #12 minimum if unspecified.
For 600 volt service and under, wire shall have Type THHNTHWN
insulation. Wire size of #10 and larger shall be
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 513
FWD:442
stranded. All wiring shall be color coded in accordance with
current NEC requirements.
(15) For wire size #10 and smaller, a solderless type press
connector similar to "Buchanan" shall be used with snap-on
type nylon insulator; splices of larger sizes of wire shall be
made using an indentor type coupling applied with a hydraulic
pressure tool.
(16) All materials and workmanship shall meet the minimum
requirements of the following standards where applicable:
(a) National Electrical Code — National Fire Protection
Association, 60 Batterymarch Street, Boston,
Massachusetts (N.E.C.)
(b) National Electrical Manufacturers Association, 155 East
44th Street, New York, New York — Standards (NEMA)
(c) Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, 33 West
39th Street, New York, New York — Standards (IEEE)
(d) The U.S.A. Standards Institute, 29 West 39th Street, New
York, New York — Standards and Definitions of Electrical
Terms (U.S.A.S.)
(e) National Bureau of Standards, Washington, D.C. —
National Electrical Safety Code.
(f) Reflector and Lamp Manufacturers Institute, Inc., 307
North Michigan Avenue, Chicago, Illinois — Lamp
Reflector.
(g) Underwriters' Laboratories Inc. — Standards.
(h) OSHA standards, where applicable, shall also be met,
including those for temporary wiring on construction sites.
(17) All necessary permits and fees for this work shall be secured
and paid for by the contractor. Inspection shall be by an
approved inspection agency licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and final certificate of approval shall be delivered
to the Borough prior to acceptance.
O. Phase Converter.
(1) If single phase power is the only source of utility power and the
motors must operate from three phase, then a phase converter
shall be used.
(2) Phase converter shall be static using capacitors and auto
transformer, no rotary phase converter is acceptable. The
converter shall independently operate two duplex pump
motors. House in a NEMA 1 enclosure indoors or a NEMA 3R
§ 513 FOREWORD § 513
FWD:443
§ 514. Installation. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § D]
enclosure if outdoors, pad-mounted if outdoors, lockable
enclosure; unit shall be Ronks Duo Add-A-Phase or approved
equal; field adjust the capacitors to the motor loads.
P. Startup.
(1) The contractor shall provide the services of fully qualified
manufacturer's representatives for services during
installation, at start-up, for instructing the Borough's
personnel in the operation, routine maintenance and "trouble
shooting" for all equipment, mechanical and electrical,
furnished with the pumping station.
(2) Contractor shall full load the generator for four continuous
hours using a contractor furnished load bank. If testing stops
for any reason, correct the problem and start a new four hour
test. Submit test results to the Borough, contractor shall notify
the Borough and the Engineer at least 48 hours prior to
performing load test.
(3) The contractor shall provide five bound copies of a manual fully
explaining the operation, routine maintenance and "trouble
shooting" for equipment. The manuals shall include copies of
all shop drawings with all required revisions. These manuals
must be submitted to the contractor for approval prior to
acceptance.
(4) The manuals must include information relative to suppliers of
spare and replacement parts.
1. Laying Pipe, Bedding and Backfill.
A. All pipe shall be laid to a uniform line and grade, bell ends upgrade,
with a firm and even bearing along the barrel of the pipe. The
spigot end of the pipe is to be centered in, shoved tight and secured
against the bell of the previously laid pipe. The interior of each pipe
shall be cleaned of all excess joint and foreign material before the
next pipe is laid. Pipe-laying shall commence at the lowest point
and proceed upgrade. At the close of each day's work and at such
other times when pipe is not being laid, the open end of the pipe
shall be protected with a close fitting stopper.
B. The trench shall be excavated to a depth of six inches below the
outside diameter of the pipe barrel, or deeper if so specified. The
resultant subgrade shall be undisturbed, or compacted as approved
by the Engineer, if disturbed. The bedding shall be thoroughly
compacted.
C. The bedding shall provide uniform and continuous bearing and
support for the pipe at every point between the bells.
§ 513 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 514
FWD:444
D. The pipe shall be bedded on six inches of B stone, the full width of
the trench, and shall be covered with b stone to a height of 12
inches over the top of the pipe.
E. The trench may be filled with excavated material above the b stone
as specified above except that stones larger than eight inches may
not go in the trench and the fill shall not contain more than 20%
stone in total volume.
F. The trench shall be properly tamped in lifts not to exceed the
maximum thickness for the type of tamping equipment being used.
If the trench is in an existing street, the surface is to be restored as
required by the regulating authority.
G. All bedding and backfill shall be compacted to 95% of maximum dry
density per ASTM T-180 method D test.
H. During the installation of a force main, the pipe shall be laid at a
constantly increasing grade to each high point, air release
manhole, or point of discharge, as shown on the contract drawings.
The contractor shall provide sufficient construction control to
assure that there are no sags or decrease in slope in the force main
which could tend to accumulate air other than at the high points
shown on the drawings. Failure to comply with this requirement
shall necessitate the contractor take remedial steps to correct the
situation. All such costs shall be borne by the contractor.
2. Special Bedding.
A. Concrete Cradle and Concrete Encasement.
(1) Preparation. Prior to the formation of the cradle or
encasement, temporary supports consisting of timber wedges
and solid concrete bricks or cap blocks shall be used to support
the pipe in place. Temporary supports shall have minimum
dimensions and shall support the pipe at not more than two
locations, one at the bottom of the barrel of the pipe adjacent
to the shoulder of the socket and the other near the spigot end.
(2) Placing.
(a) After jointing of the pipe has been completed, concrete
shall be uniformly poured beneath and on both sides of the
pipe. Placement shall be done by the use of suitable
equipment. The concrete shall be wet enough during
placement to permit its flow, without excessive prodding,
to all required points around the pipe surface. The width of
cradle shall be such as to fill completely the trench width.
In case of extremely wide trenches, concrete encasement
may be confirmed above the top of the pipe to a narrower
width, but in no case shall it be less than the width of
trench required for the size of pipe being used.
§ 514 FOREWORD § 514
FWD:445
(b) Before depositing concrete, the space within the limits of
the pour shall have been cleared of all debris and water.
Water shall not be allowed to rise adjacent to or flow over
concrete deposited for less than 24 hours. Concrete shall
be protected from the direct rays of the sun and kept
moist, by a method acceptable to the Borough, for a period
of seven days or until backfilling is begun. In no case shall
backfilling begin within 24 hours of the time of placing and
the Borough shall have strict control of the rate of
backfilling.
(3) Design Mixes. The cradle or encasement shall be made with
normal weight concrete with a twenty-eight day compressive
strength of 3000 psi.
B. Unstable Subgrade. Where the bottom of the trench at subgrade is
found to be unstable or to include ashes, cinders, any type of
refuse, vegetable, or other organic material or large pieces or
fragments of inorganic material, which, in the opinion of the
Borough, should be removed, the contractor shall excavate and
remove such unsuitable material to the width and depth
recommended by the Borough. Before pipe is laid, the subgrade
shall be formed by backfilling with 2B stone in three inch
(uncompacted thickness) layers thoroughly compacted to a Proctor
density of 95% and the bedding prepared as hereinbefore specified.
C. Special Foundations. Where the bottom of the trench at the
subgrade is found to consist of material which is unstable to such a
degree that, in the opinion of the Borough, it cannot be removed
and replaced with an approved material thoroughly compacted in
place to support the pipe properly, the contractor shall construct a
foundation for the pipe, consisting of piling, timbers or other
materials, in accordance with plans approved by the Borough.
D. Excavation in Fill. When the pipe is to be laid in fill, prior to
excavation, the fill shall be compacted to a proctor density of 95%
to a height of 12 inches above the proposed top of the pipe.
3. Backfilling Methods.
A. Backfilling shall not be done in freezing weather except by
permission of the Borough, and it shall not be done with frozen
material. No backfilling fill shall be done if the material already in
the trench is frozen.
B. In State highways all backfill shall be in accordance with the
requirements of PA DOT Chapter 459. The requirement for
backfilling in other streets shall be as required by the Borough.
4. Pipe Clearance in Rocks.
§ 514 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 514
FWD:446
A. Ledge rock, boulders and large stones shall be removed to provide
a clearance of at least six inches below and on each side of all pipe
and fittings for pipes 24 inches in diameter or less, and nine inches
for pipes larger than 24 inches in diameter.
B. The specified minimum clearances are the minimum clear
distances which will be permitted between any part of the pipe and/
or fitting being laid and any part, projection or point of such rock,
boulder or stone.
C. Excavation for laterals shall extend four feet beyond the end of the
lateral and backfilled with selected excavated material.
5. Pipes at Manholes or Other Rigid Structures. Pipes directly connected
to or supported by rigid structures, shall not have a length beyond the
rigid support in excess of that shown in the manhole detail on Plate 1.
6. Manholes.
A. Unless otherwise noted, manholes shall be constructed of precast
concrete with cast iron frames and covers, as shown on Plate 1
contained herein. The invert channels shall be smooth and
semicircular in shape conforming to the inside of the adjacent
sewer section. Changes in direction of flow shall be with a smooth
curve of as large a radius as the size of the manhole will permit.
B. Changes in size and grade of the channels shall be made gradually
and evenly. The invert channels may be formed directly in the
concrete of the manhole base, may be built up with brick and
cement grout, may be half tile laid in concrete, or may be
constructed by laying full section sewer pipe through the manhole
and breaking out the top half after the surrounding concrete has
hardened. If this method is utilized, the manhole floor shall form a
neat joint with the pipe barrel. The floor of the manhole outside the
channels shall be smooth and shall have a slope toward the
channels of not less than two inches per foot and not more than
four inches per foot.
7. Lateral Sewers. Fittings, (Wye branches, risers and bends) and lateral
sewer pipe shall be furnished and installed in strict accordance with
these specifications and any and all practices and precautions required
for the main sewers are equally applicable to the lateral sewers. Lateral
sewers shall be a minimum four-inch diameter, and shall be installed to
serve all lots. Installation shall be at a minimum 1% slope, shall be to a
point five feet behind curb line or edge of street, or one foot beyond the
road right-of-way, whichever is the greater and shall include a watertight
plug at the end. Excavation, in any material, shall extend for four
feet beyond the end of the lateral for the full depth of the lateral. Prior
to backfilling, a minimum two inch x four inch wooden marker shall be
placed against the end of each lateral, and shall extend a minimum of
12 inches above the ground.
§ 514 FOREWORD § 514
FWD:447
§ 515. Testing. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § E]
8. Grade and Alignment Control. Prior to construction, the contractor
shall furnish three copies of a grade sheet for each manhole run to the
Borough. Grade and alignment control shall be established by one of
the following methods:
A. Laser — direct reading.
B. Twin string line offset.
Same "pavement restoration" specs as in water line specs.
1. Gravity Sewers.
A. Alignment. After the mains have been laid and backfill placed to a
depth of 1 1/2 feet above the top of the pipe, a light will be flashed
between manholes or manhole locations to determine whether the
alignment of the sewer is true and whether any pipe has been
displaced, broken or otherwise damaged subsequent to laying. This
test will again be conducted before final acceptance of the sewer.
Each section (manhole to manhole) of sewer shall show a good light
circle throughout its length and any and all defects shall be
corrected to the satisfaction of the Borough before acceptance.
Sewers shall be tested for leakage only after all sewers and lateral
sewers, including stoppers, are installed.
B. Leakage Tests.
(1) Each sewer section between manholes including all laterals
will be tested with low pressure air. Testing will be done only
after all back-filling has been completed and trench settlement
has been minimized. The contractor shall furnish all labor,
materials, water, tools, equipment and accessories necessary
to perform the required tests. All tests shall be made in the
presence of, and to the complete satisfaction of, the Borough.
(2) The pipe shall remain under pressure for not less than two
minutes before the test begins, to allow equilibrium of the air
temperature with the pipe wall.
(3) The minimum test pressure, measured in pounds per square
inch (psig), shall be calculated by the following formula:
(D / 2) + 2
Where D = Depth of the deeper manhole in feet
Example: D = 9.6 feet
Minimum Test Pressure = (9.6 / 2) + 2 = 6.8 psig
§ 514 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 515
FWD:448
(4) In no case shall the test pressure in the sewer or the laterals be
greater than the maximum differential joint pressure
recommended by the manufacturer of the pipe.
(5) The contractor shall repair or replace all defective material
and/or workmanship and shall conduct such additional retests
as required to demonstrate that the sewer meets the
requirements, at his own expense and at no additional cost to
the Borough. All materials and methods used to repair the
sewer shall meet with the approval of the Borough's Engineer.
2. Manhole Testing.
A. All manholes shall be tested for water infiltration. The contractor
shall furnish all labor, materials, water, tools, equipment and
accessories necessary to perform the required tests. All tests shall
be made in the presence of and to the complete satisfaction of the
Borough.
B. The manhole shall be thoroughly cleaned and all openings sealed to
the satisfaction of the Borough. All pipe openings in the base and
the wells shall be plugged with plugs properly designed to provide
a watertight seal.
(1) Vacuum Test. Manholes shall be tested by applying a negative
(vacuum) pressure measured in pounds per square inch, as
calculated by the following formula:
(D / 2) + 1
Where D = Depth of the manhole in feet
Example: D = 9.6 feet
Minimum Test Pressure = (9.6 / 2) + 1 = 5.8 psig
The manhole shall be considered acceptable if the air
infiltration does not increase the negative (vacuum) pressure
by more than one psig in the time as calculated by the
following formula:
Six minutes - (D x 10) seconds
Where D = Depth of manhole to the next even foot
Example: depth of manhole = 8.35 feet. Then D = nine
Minimum time allowed for pressure increase of one psig
= six minutes - (9 x 10) seconds = four minutes 30
seconds
(2) Water Test.
(a) The Borough may permit the testing of manholes by filling
with water.
§ 515 FOREWORD § 515
FWD:449
(b) After the manhole has been properly cleaned and sealed, it
shall be completely filled with water. To allow for the water
absorbed by the manhole, the manhole to be tested shall
be completely filled with water for a minimum period of 12
hours prior to the test.
(c) At commencement of the test, the manhole shall be filled
with water to a point level with the top of the manhole. The
amount of exfiltration shall be determined from the loss in
water level converted into gallons per day. The manhole
being tested shall be considered "acceptable" when there
is no loss in water level for a period of two hours.
(d) If any manhole fails to meet the testing requirements, the
contractor shall determine at his own expense the source
or sources of leakage.
(e) The contractor shall repair or replace all defective
material and/or workmanship and shall conduct such
additional retests as required to demonstrate that the
manhole meets the requirements, at his own expense and
at no additional cost to the Borough. All materials and
methods used to repair the man-holes shall meet with the
approval of the Borough's Engineer.
3. Hydrostatic Tests for Force Mains.
A. Pressure Test.
(1) After the pipe has been laid and backfilled as specified, all
newly laid pipe, shall be subjected to a hydrostatic pressure of
150 pounds per square inch, or 150% of the normal working
pressure, whichever is greater.
(2) Where any section of a main is provided with concrete reaction
backing, the hydrostatic pressure test shall not be made until
at least five days have elapsed after the concrete reaction
backing was installed. If high early strength cement is used in
the concrete reaction backing, the hydrostatic pressure test
shall not be made until at least two days have elapsed.
B. Duration of Pressure Tests. The duration of each pressure test shall
be at least two hours or as determined by the Engineer.
C. Procedures. Each section of pipe shall be slowly filled with water
and the specified test pressure, based on the elevation of the lowest
point of the line or section under test and corrected to the elevation
of the test gauge, shall be applied by means of a pump connected to
the pipe in a manner satisfactory to the Borough's Engineer. The
pump, pipe connections, and all necessary apparatus, including
gauges, shall be furnished by the contractor and are subject to
§ 515 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 515
FWD:450
§ 516. Backflow Preventors. [Ord. 751, 4/21/1996, § F]
All sanitary sewer lateral connections shall be fitted with a backflow
preventor approved by the Borough Engineer. The backflow preventor shall
be located outside of the Borough's right-of-way between the unit(s) and
the right-of-way line. The backflow preventor shall be owned and become
the responsibility of the individual property owner(s) upon installation and
satisfactory testing by the Borough Engineer.
approval by the Engineer. The contractor will make all taps into the
pipe, and furnish all necessary assistance for conducting the tests.
D. Expelling Air Before Test. Before applying the specified test
pressure, all air shall be expelled from the pipe. If permanent air
vents are not located at all high points, the contractor shall make
the necessary taps at such points before the test is made. After the
test has been completed the contractor shall remove and plug the
taps or leave them in place at the direction of the Engineer.
E. Examination Under Pressure. Any cracks or defective pipes,
fittings, or valves discovered in consequence of this pressure test,
shall be removed and replaced by the contractor with sound
material, and the test shall be repeated until satisfactory to the
Engineer.
F. Test pressure Variations. Test pressures shall not vary by more than
five psi for the duration of the test.
G. Saturation of Cement Lining. It is good practice to fill the pipeline
to be tested 24 hours in advance of the test to allow the cement
lining of the pipe to become saturated.
H. Test Failure. Should the test pressure not meet the requirements
specified above, the contractor shall, at his own expense, locate,
repair and replace the defective joints, pipe or fittings until the
pressure is maintained within the specified allowance.
§ 515 FOREWORD § 516
FWD:451

Part 6
PENALTIES
§ 601. Penalty. [Added by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than
$200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 30 days. The costs shall include, without limitation, any court filing
fees, and the effective date of the notice that a violation continues after due
notice has been served, in accordance with the terms and provisions hereof,
shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 601
FWD:453
Chapter 19
SIGNS AND BILLBOARDS
Chapter 20
SOLID WASTE
§ 601 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 601
FWD:454
Part 1
RECYCLING PROGRAM AND MUNICIPAL WASTE COLLECTION
§ 101. Definitions. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 1]
Any capitalized term, if not defined in this Part, shall have the meaning as
from time to time set forth in the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations which are
incorporated into this Part by reference. In addition, as used in this Part,
the following terms shall have the following meanings:
ACT 97 — The Solid Waste Management Act, Act of July 7, 1980, P.S. 380,
No. 97, as now or hereafter amended.
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.
ALUMINUM — All food and beverage cans made of the light in weight,
ductile and malleable metallic substance or element commonly known as
aluminum. This description excludes aluminum foil, trays, plates and
miscellaneous aluminum products.
BATTERY BAGS — Bags which LCSWMA makes available to generators
of Municipal Waste and which shall be used as disposal containers for
batteries which are generated in households.
CLEAR GLASS — Clear food and beverage containers made of glass, of one
gallon or less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle and transparent
or partially transparent substance produced by fusion of silica and silicates
or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and substances
usually included in the manufacture of glass.
COLORED GLASS — Green or brown food and beverage containers made of
glass, of one gallon or less capacity, and comprised of the hard, brittle and
transparent or partially transparent substance produced by fusion of silica
and silicates or sand containing soda and lime and/or other chemicals and
substances usually included in the manufacture of glass.
COMMENCEMENT DATE — The date upon which the current and
subsequent municipal contract collection services begin.
COMMINGLED — Designated recyclable materials (i) which have been
segregated from regulated municipal waste, but which have not been
separated into different types of recyclable materials and (ii) which have
been placed in a recycling container for the purpose of collection.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITIES — Events that are sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals including, but not limited to, fairs, bazaars, socials,
picnics and organized sporting events attended by 200 or more individuals
per day.
COMPOSTING — The process by which solid organic waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled aerobic or anaerobic conditions to yield a
humus-like product.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:455
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE — A portion of municipal waste
resulting from the construction or demolition of buildings and other
structures including wood, plaster, drywall and wall board, metals, asphaltic
substances, bricks, block and unsegregated concrete. The term also
includes street sweepings and non-friable asbestos waste. The term does
not include the following if they are separated from other waste and used
as clean fill:
CONTRACTOR — The person providing municipal contract waste and
designated recyclable materials collection services under the municipal
contract.
CORRUGATED CARDBOARD — Unbleached, unwaxed kraft paper that is
formed into layers with a fluted medium and manufactured into shipping
boxes and related products.
CURBSIDE — The correct location for the placement of refuse containers
and recycling containers for the purpose of collection by the contractor,
which shall be (i) adjacent to the residential unit and (ii) no more than five
feet from the public street used by collection vehicles.
DESIGNATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those source separated
recyclable materials designated in § 106 of this Part.
EXISTING CONTRACT — Any municipal contract for the storage, collection,
transportation, processing or disposal of regulated municipal waste or
designated recyclable materials generated or located within the Borough
which (i) was legally entered into prior to the effective date of this Part and
(ii) when entered into was legally enforceable.
EXTRA REFUSE CONTAINERS — Refuse containers which are in excess of
the number of refuse containers per collection site limit in the municipal
contract.
EXTRA SERVICE TAG — A label affixed to containers and items which may
be required for the collection by the contractor of extra refuse containers,
tires, over-sized items and white goods according to the Borough's rules and
regulations.
FACILITY — Any specific site designated by LCSWMA (or approved by
LCSWMA) as the specific place or site to which solid waste or source
separated recyclable materials, or any portion of solid waste or source
separated recyclable materials, must or may be delivered; or in the absence
of a specific site being designated by LCSWMA, any approved site for
the delivery of any category of solid waste or source separated recyclable
materials.
Uncontaminated soil, rock, stone, gravel, brick, block, concrete and
used asphalt.
(1)
Waste from land clearing, grubbing and excavation including trees,
brush, stumps and vegetative material.
(2)
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 101
FWD:456
FARM — A tract of land containing 10 or more acres which is used for
agricultural purposes, which agricultural activities provide the major and
primary source of income to the residents of the tract.
GENERATOR — A person who produces or creates any solid waste.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial or other
wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply treatment plant or
air pollution control facility and other discarded material including solid,
liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material resulting from municipal,
commercial, industrial, institutional, mining or agricultural operations, and
from community activities, or a combination of these factors which, because
of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious
characteristics may:
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Desktop generated paper limited to white
ledger, copy paper and computer printout (CPO).
HOUSEHOLD HAZARDOUS WASTE — A portion of municipal waste that
would be considered hazardous under Act 97 but for the fact that it is
produced in quantities smaller than those regulated as hazardous waste
under Act 97 and is generated by persons not otherwise covered as
Hazardous Waste Generators by Act 97. Household hazardous waste
includes the following materials and other materials of a similar nature:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or
morbidity in either an individual or the total population.
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or the
environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of
or otherwise managed.
The term does not include (i) coal refuse as defined in the Coal Refuse
Disposal Control Act (52 U.S.C.A. §§ 30.51-30.62); (ii) treatment
sludges from coal mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is
being carried on under and in compliance with a valid permit issued
under the Clean Streams Law (35 P.S. §§ 691.1691.1001); (iii) solid or
dissolved material in domestic sewage; (iv) solid dissolved materials
in irrigation return flows; (v) industrial discharges which are point
sources subject to permits under § 402 of the Federal Water Pollution
Control Act (33 U.S.C.A. § 1342); or (vi) source, special nuclear, or byproduct
material as defined by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42
U.S.C.A. §§ 2011-2394).
(2)
(1) Antifreeze.
(2) Batteries.
(3) Chlorinated hydrocarbons.
(4) Fluorescent light bulbs and other mercury-containing devices.
(5) Gasoline and kerosene.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:457
LCSWMA — The Lancaster County Solid Waste Management Authority,
a municipal authority organized and existing under the Municipality
Authorities Act, as amended.
LCSWMA FACILITY — Any facility owned or operated by or on behalf of
LCSWMA.
MANIFEST — A form supplied by LCSWMA to be completed and signed
by each person who collects or transports solid waste or source separated
recyclable materials and which specifies, inter alia, (i) the source, type,
quantity and delivery point for the solid waste or source separated
recyclable materials; (ii) the applicable license number and (iii) other
pertinent information.
MIXED PAPER — Generally refers to paper of various grades, colors,
finishes, and coatings mixed together.[Added by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/
2018]
MULTIFAMILY UNIT — A property with five or more residential units
including, without limitation, apartment complexes, condominium
complexes, retirement homes and mobile home parks, excluding farms.
Condominiums on the same lot, but in separate ownership shall be treated
as one multifamily unit and cannot be separated for billing purposes.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT — The agreement between the Borough and a
permitted collector under which collection services are to be provided to
residential units for municipal contract waste and for designated recyclable
materials.
MUNICIPAL CONTRACT WASTE — Those portions of regulated municipal
waste which are to be collected and disposed of under this municipal
contract. Municipal contract waste consists exclusively of refuse and
oversized refuse items.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Elizabethtown.
MUNICIPALITY'S POLICIES AND PROCEDURES — The rules and
regulations adopted and revised from time to time by the Borough which
(6) Grease and rust solvents.
(7) Oven, toilet and drain cleaners.
(8) Paints, rust preventatives, stains and wood preservatives.
Pesticides, fungicides, herbicides, insecticides, rodenticides, roach and
ant killers.
(9)
(10)Photographic and pool chemicals.
(11)Thinners, solvents and furniture strippers.
(12)Transmission and brake fluids.
(13)Used oil or other hydrocarbon based lubricants.
(14)Wood, metal, rug and upholstery cleaners and polishes.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 101
FWD:458
govern and pertain to (i) the Borough's recycling program and (ii) the onsite
collection or storage of regulated municipal waste within the Borough.
NEWSPRINT — Paper which has been used for the production of daily,
weekend and special edition publications commonly known as newspapers.
NONPROCESSABLE WASTE — A portion of municipal waste consisting
of materials which cannot be handled by LCSWMA's normal collection,
processing or disposal methods or which are greater than six feet in any
dimension. Nonprocessable waste includes, without limitation, large auto
parts; machinery; boats; recreational vehicles; etc.[Amended by Ord. No.
987, 9/20/2018]
NONRESIDENTIAL UNITS — All commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments, all community activities and all farms, excluding residential
units and multifamily units.
OPEN BURNING — A fire outside of any building in which any material is
burned in the open or in a receptacle other than a grill used for the purpose
of outside barbecues, the air contaminants from which are emitted directly
into the outdoor atmosphere and not directed thereto through a flue.
OTHER BURNING — The disposal of any waste, including leafy and woody
waste in any burn container whether outside or inside.
OVERSIZED REFUSE ITEMS — Refuse which will not fit into refuse
containers, but which is not nonprocessable waste, including furniture (no
sleeper sofas), carpet (up to 48 inches in length, rolled and tied), scrap
metal (pieces up to 48 inches in length) and the like, but excluding tires and
white goods. (Oversized refuse items are items that can be easily lifted by
two people).[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/2018]
PERMITTED COLLECTOR — A person who is in possession of all pertinent
permits and licenses which may be required by (i) the Borough and (ii)
LCSWMA, for the collection, storage or disposal of solid waste or recyclable
materials.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
governmental entity or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever which
is recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
PLASTICS — Recyclable plastics consist of containers with a neck, such as
water and soda bottles, food jars and tea, milk or detergent jugs, which are
primarily made of resins PET and HDPE.[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/
20/2018]
PROPERTY OWNER — The person or legal entity named in Lancaster
County real estate tax assessment records as the person or legal entity to
whom or to which tax bills are mailed.
PUTRESCIBLE WASTE — A portion of municipal waste consisting of organic
waste materials which due to biological decomposition are, or have a
tendency to be, rotten, foul or odorous, including dead animals and spoiled
foods, but not including sludge.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:459
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Any material which would be regulated
municipal waste but for source separation and which will be processed into
raw materials or products which are beneficially reused.
RECYCLING — The separation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, yard waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed of or processed as solid waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of solid waste and creation and recovery of
reusable materials.[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/2018]
RECYCLING CONTAINER — For residential units, a receptacle which is
constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass having handles of adequate
strength for lifting. With respect to residential units, the weight of a
container and its contents shall not exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity
exceed 32 gallons; for multifamily units and nonresidential units, a
receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal or fiberglass and has
handles of adequate strength for lifting.[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/
2018]
REFUSE — That portion of regulated municipal waste except:
REFUSE CONTAINER — A receptacle which is constructed of plastic, metal
or fiberglass having handles of adequate strength for lifting and having
a tight-fitting lid capable of preventing entrance into the container by
vectors or a polyethylene bag which is specifically designed for storage
and collection, is protected against animal damage and overloading so as
to prevent littering or attraction of insects or rodents and has a holding
strength capable of withstanding normal stresses until it is collected. With
respect to residential units, the weight of a refuse container and its contents
shall not exceed 30 pounds nor shall its capacity exceed 32
gallons.[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/2018]
REGULATED MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any solid waste generated or collected
within the Borough which is garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities,
and any sludge meeting the definition of residual waste or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air pollution control facility. The term does
not include designated recyclable materials or unacceptable waste.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT — Any single family detached, semidetached or
townhouse dwelling, or a dwelling unit within a multifamily building
containing four or fewer dwelling units, excluding farms. When used in this
Part or the Municipality's Policies and Procedures, the term "residential
(1) Construction/demolition waste.
(2) Nonprocessable waste.
(3) Putrescible waste.
(4) Household hazardous waste.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 101
FWD:460
unit" shall also refer to any multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that
requests and receives approval from the Borough to use the collection
services provided under the municipal contract.
RESIDUAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, other discarded material or
other waste including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous materials
resulting from industrial, mining and agricultural operations and any sludge
from an industrial, mining or agricultural water supply treatment facility,
wastewater treatment facility or air pollution control facility, provided that
it is not hazardous. The term does not include (i) coal refuse as defined in
the Coal Refuse Disposal Control Act or (ii) treatment sludges from coal
mine drainage treatment plants, disposal of which is being carried on under
and in compliance with a valid permit issued under the Clean Streams Law.
SCAVENGING — The removal of designated recyclable materials in
violation of § 111 of this Part.
SINGLE STREAM — A system where recyclable materials, commonly fibers
and glass, metal and plastic containers, are collected and processed
together.
SOLID WASTE or WASTE — Any waste including, but not limited to,
municipal, residual or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid
or contained gaseous materials.
SOURCE SEPARATE or SOURCE SEPARATION — The process of
separating, or the separation of, designated recyclable materials from other
solid waste at the location where generated for the purpose of recycling.
STEEL CANS — The ferrous metal food or beverage containers commonly
known as tin cans.
TIRES — Any pneumatic rubber automobile, truck or farm implement tire.
UNACCEPTABLE WASTE — The following types of solid waste are
unacceptable waste unless approved by LCSWMA on a case-by-case basis:
WHITE GOODS — A portion of regulated municipal waste consisting of
large appliances including the following: clothes washers, clothes dryers,
(1) Chemotherapeutic waste.
Drums, barrels, buckets and paint cans unless lids have been removed
and interiors are cleaned and free of any residue.
(2)
(3) Explosives and ordnance materials.
Gas cylinders, unless empty and delivered separate from other solid
waste.
(4)
(5) Hazardous waste.
(6) Infectious/pathological waste.
(7) Radioactive materials.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 101
FWD:461
dishwashers, freezers, refrigerators, stoves, ovens, hot water heaters, air
conditioners, dehumidifies, furnaces and electrical heaters.
WOODY WASTE — Branches, tree limbs or other waste wood, but excluding
firewood burned for aesthetic or heating purposes inside any structure.
YARD WASTE — All garden residues, leaves, shrubbery and tree
trimmings.[Amended by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/2018]
§ 102. Mandatory Recycling. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 2]
All persons within the Borough shall source separate designated recyclable
materials generated by such person or generated within a residential unit,
multifamily unit or nonresidential unit occupied by such person.
§ 103. Onsite Collection and Disposal. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 3]
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit, multifamily unit or
nonresidential unit with the Borough shall ensure that regulated municipal
waste and designated recyclable material generated at such residential
unit, multifamily unit or nonresidential unit are collected and disposed of in
accordance with this Part, the Municipality's Policies and Procedures and
LCSWMA Rules and Regulations.
§ 104. Residential Units. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 4]
Collection services for municipal contract waste and for designated
recyclable materials shall be provided to residential units by the contractor.
Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall prepare
designated recyclable materials and municipal contract waste for collection
in accordance with the Municipality's Policies and Procedures. With respect
to regulated municipal waste which is not municipal contract waste,
persons who own or occupy residential units shall elect to provide proper
onsite collection and disposal by either (i) themselves delivering such
materials to a facility of (ii) utilizing a permitted collector to collect and
deliver such materials to a facility. Each person who owns or occupies a
residential unit shall dispose of municipal contract waste and designated
recyclable materials on a weekly basis.
§ 105. Multifamily Units and Nonresidential Units. [Ord. 843, 12/
18/2003, § 5]
1. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit or multifamily
unit shall provide proper collection and disposal for regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials by using a
permitted collector to collect and deliver such materials to a facility.
With respect to municipal contract waste and designated recyclable
materials, a person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit
may request Borough approval to receive the services under the
municipal contract, provided that all units in the building shall be
included and shall participate.
§ 101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 105
FWD:462
§ 106. Designated Recyclable Materials. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 6;
as amended by Ord. 888, 9/20/2007, Art. 1; and by Ord. No. 987, 9/
20/2018]
§ 107. Approved Haulers. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 7]
2. Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit or nonresidential
unit approved to receive services under the municipal contract shall
comply with the Municipality's Policies and Procedures established for
residential units and notwithstanding the provisions of § 106(2) and (3)
of this Part, shall source separate the recyclable materials designated
in § 106(1).
3. Each person who owns a multifamily unit or nonresidential unit that
does not receive services under the municipal contract shall:
A. Provide recycling containers at easily accessible locations for
source separation of designated recyclable materials.
B. Provide written instructions to all persons occupying each
multifamily unit and nonresidential unit to ensure that all
designated recyclable materials are source separated.
C. Provide collection and delivery of source separated designated
recyclable materials at a frequency of not less than once per
month.
1. Each person who owns or occupies a residential unit shall source
separate the following recyclable materials: (i) clear glass, (ii) colored
glass, (iii) aluminum, (iv) steel cans, (v) plastic, (vi) corrugated
cardboard, (vii) tires, (viii) white goods, and (ix) yard waste.
2. Each person who owns or occupies a multifamily unit shall source
separate the following recyclable materials: (i) clear glass, (ii) colored
glass, (iii) aluminum, (iv) steel cans, (v) plastic, (vi) tires, (vii) white
goods, (viii) yard waste and (ix) corrugated cardboard.
3. Each person who owns or occupies a nonresidential unit shall sourceseparate
the following recyclable materials: (i) clear glass, (ii) colored
glass, (iii) aluminum, (iv) steel cans, (v) plastic, (vi) corrugated
cardboard, (vii) tires, (viii) white goods, (ix) yard waste and (x) highgrade
office paper. [Amended by Ord. No. 995, 12/19/2019]
4. Residential units, multifamily units and nonresidential units shall
source separate all items which LCSWMA has determined through
action of the LCSWMA Board to be recyclable through source
separation.
1. With respect to (i) municipal contract waste and (ii) designated
recyclable materials, no person other than the contractor shall collect,
transport, store, process or dispose of such contract waste. With
respect to (i) regulated municipal waste other than municipal contract
§ 105 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:463
waste which is generated at residential units and (ii) regulated
municipal waste or designated recyclable materials generated at multifamily
units or nonresidential units, no person other than a permitted
collector shall collect, store, process or dispose of such waste. Each
permitted collector that collects or transports regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials generated in any residential
unit, nonresidential unit or multifamily unit shall complete monthly
LCSWMA manifests reporting the amount of regulated municipal waste
and designated recyclable material collected in the Borough.
2. No person who generates, owns or possesses designated recyclable
materials or regulated municipal waste shall, by contract for collection
services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in the collection, storage,
processing or disposal of such waste by any person other than (i) the
contractor with respect to municipal contract waste or designated
recyclable materials generated at residential units, and (ii) a permitted
collector with respect to (a) regulated municipal waste other than
municipal contract waste generated at residential units and (b)
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials
generated at multifamily units or nonresidential units.
3. No permitted collector who collects or disposes of designated
recyclable materials or regulated municipal waste shall, by municipal
contract for such services or otherwise, cause, permit or assist in the
storage, collection, processing or disposal of designated recyclable
materials in a manner which treats such materials as regulated
municipal waste, or which is otherwise inconsistent with source
separation or recycling. Any delivery of designated recyclable material
to a LCSWMA facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and
Regulations shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements of this § 107.
4. Notwithstanding the provisions of § 107(1) and (2) above, any person
who occupies a residential unit may deliver to a facility the regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials which are
generated at such person's residence. If a person who occupies a
residential unit transports the regulated municipal waste and
designated recyclable materials to a facility, this person shall report and
provide official documentation on a monthly basis of the regulated
municipal waste and designated recyclable materials that were
transported. Failure to comply with these provisions shall result in the
person being billed in arrears by the Borough and will be subject to the
appropriate fines and costs of collection.
5. All regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials
generated or collected in the Borough shall be delivered directly to a
facility in accordance with the LCSWMA Rules and Regulations and
without any intervening transfer, unloading, processing, sorting,
salvaging, scavenging or reuse of any portion of any load of such
regulated municipal waste and designated recyclable materials from
the time of its collection until the time of its delivery to the facility.
§ 107 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:464
§ 108. Illegal Dumping and Open Burning. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003,
§ 8]
§ 109. Leaves, Yard Waste and Woody Waste. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003,
§ 9; as amended by Ord. 888, 9/20/2007, Art. 1; and by Ord. No. 987,
9/20/2018]
Leaves, yard waste and woody waste shall be collected for recycling a
designated number of times per year in accordance with the municipal
contract.
§ 110. Collection Service Fees. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 10; as
amended by Ord. 945, 2/21/2013]
Fees for services provided by the Borough shall be charged to the owner
of each property within the Borough. The amount of fees and the schedule
for payment of fees shall be as adopted by resolution from time to time by
Borough Council. The Municipality's Policies and Procedures may provide
for the amount of annual fees or interest and due interest and penalties
for late payments and provisions for municipal liens and attorney's fees for
unpaid collection service fees.
§ 111. Scavenging. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 11]
From the time of placement for collection of any designated recyclable
materials, all such designated recyclable materials shall be the property
of the generator or the permitted collector who has contracted to provide
onsite collection, as provided in the municipal contract. It shall be a
violation of this Part for any person, other than such permitted collector,
to collect or pick up, or cause to be collected or picked up, any such
designated recyclable materials.
§ 112. Existing Contracts. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 12]
6. Each permitted collector shall collect and deliver, separately to a
LCSWMA facility battery drop-off location, all battery bags placed at
curbside by residential units.
1. No person shall store, process or dispose of any regulated municipal
waste or designated recyclable materials except at a facility.
Notwithstanding the foregoing or § 106, yard waste may be composted
to the extent and in the manner provided in the Municipality's Policies
and Procedures on the property on which such yard waste was
generated.
2. No person shall process or dispose of any waste or designated
recyclable materials through open burning or other burning.
1. Nothing in this Part shall be construed to impair the obligations of any
existing contract.
§ 107 FOREWORD § 112
FWD:465
§ 113. Authorization of Borough. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 13]
The Borough shall have the power to issue the Municipality's Policies and
Procedures governing all matters set forth in this Part and any other related
matters deemed to be51 necessary or convenient by the Borough. The
Municipality's Policies and Procedures shall be effective when issued in
writing and signed by the Council President of the Borough. The Borough
shall have the power to establish record and reporting requirements and
standards and procedures for the issuance, administration and revocation of
licenses, as deemed necessary, including without limitation, (i) application
procedures, fees, standards and conditions for licenses, (ii) the fixing of a
monetary bond, with or without surety, to secure the compliance by any
permitted collector with any such requirements, standards or procedures,
and (iii) any other matters deemed necessary or convenient by the Borough.
In the event of suspension or revocation of any license which is issued by
the Borough or LCSWMA, the person whose collection permit is suspended
or revoked shall refund to each customer any prepaid fees.
§ 114. Unlawful Activity. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 14]
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate, or cause or permit or assist
in the violation of, any provision of this Part or any provision of the
Municipality's Policies and Procedures. All unlawful conduct shall also
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 115. Penalty and Public Safety Official Notice and Quick Ticket
Procedures. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 15; as amended by Ord. 945, 2/
21/2013; and by Ord. No. 987, 9/20/2018]
2. No renewal or modification of any existing contract, and no new
contract for the storage, onsite collection, processing or disposal of
regulated municipal waste or designated recyclable materials, shall be
entered into after the effective date of this Part unless such renewal or
modification unless such renewal or modification or new contract shall
conform to the requirements of this Part and the Municipality's Policies
and Procedures.
3. No contract which is entered into, renewed, extended, modified or
assigned after the effective date of this Part shall provide for onsite
collection services to be performed after the commencement date for
contract waste or designated recyclable materials generated at
residential units. This provision shall not apply to the contract between
the Borough and the contractor. With respect to any contract which
violates this § 112(3), such contract shall be deemed void and the
hauler that is a party to such contract (i) shall reimburse to the
applicable residential units any funds which have been paid for such
onsite collection services and (ii) shall not collect or attempt to collect
any funds for such onsite collection services.
51.Editor's note: Ord. 843 reads: ". . . matters be necessary or convenient by . . ."
§ 112 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 115
FWD:466
§ 116. Persons Liable. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 16]
For purposes of the obligations established by this Part or the Municipality's
Policies and Procedures, and for purpose of any fine, penalty, imprisonment
or other sanction, the terms "person," "residential unit," "multifamily unit"
and "nonresidential unit" shall (i) include officers and directors of any
corporation or other legal entity having officers and directors and (ii) refer
to, and impose joint and several liability upon, both (a) the persons residing
in or occupying any such residential, multifamily or nonresidential units and
(b) the owner, landlord, condominium owner's association and/or agent of
an owner, landlord or condominium owner's association of such premises.
1. Penalty. In addition to civil procedures for collection available to the
Borough, any person or persons violating any provision of this Part or
any provision of the resolution referred to in § 110 as part of the
Municipality's Policies and Procedures shall, upon conviction thereof in
a summary proceeding, be sentenced for each violation to pay a fine of
not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution. The
costs of prosecution shall include, without limitation, any court filing
fees and the expenses incurred by the Borough for its employees to
collect any such sums as well as attorney fees incurred by the Borough,
and in default of the payment of such fine and costs to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each violation of any provision
of this Part or any provision of the resolution and the Borough's Policies
and Procedures, and each day that such a violation shall exist, shall
constitute a separate violation and offense.
2. Public safety official notice and Quick Ticket procedures. The Code
Compliance Official is authorized to issue public safety official notices
for Solid Waste Code violations and Quick Tickets for violations,
including, but not limited to, improper storage and/or placement of
refuse and recycling containers, untimely placement of refuse and
recycling containers, use of oversized refuse and/or recycling
container(s), additional refuse placed curbside not marked with an
extra service tag, and additional oversized refuse items placed for
curbside collection. The Code Compliance Official may issue a Quick
Ticket in addition to or in lieu of issuing a notice of violation. The Code
Compliance Official shall serve the ticket by mail, personally delivering
the ticket to the property owner or property management office or
company responsible for said property in violation or by affixing the
ticket to the property where the violation exists. The Code Compliance
Official may use more than one form to serve the ticket to the violator.
The Quick Ticket penalties for the above-referenced violations shall be
payable within 15 days. Repeat offenders shall be subject to additional
penalties. Failure to pay the Quick Ticket within 15 days may result in a
summary citation being issued through the local Magisterial District
Judge's office. The Borough Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown
shall approve Quick Ticket forms and penalty amounts by resolution.
Appeals of this section shall be made pursuant to Chapter 5, § 113, of
the Borough of Elizabethtown Code of Ordinances.
§ 115 FOREWORD § 117
FWD:467
§ 117. Injunctive Relief. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 17]
In addition to any other remedy provided in this Part, the Borough may
institute proceedings to restrain any violation of, or to require compliance
with, this Part and/or the Municipality's Policies and Procedures.
§ 118. Concurrent Remedies. [Ord. 843, 12/18/2003, § 18]
The penalties and remedies set forth in this Part are in addition to, not
in lieu of, any fines, penalties or remedies provided in the Municipality's
Policies and Procedures. The existence or exercise of any remedy shall
not prevent the Borough from exercising any other remedy (i) provided
under (a) this Part or (b) the Municipality's Policies and Procedures, or (ii)
available at law or equity.
§ 117 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 118
FWD:468
Chapter 21
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 118 FOREWORD § 118
FWD:469

Part 1
CONSTRUCTION AND REPAIR OF CURBS AND SIDEWALKS
§ 101. Responsibility of Property Owners. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 1]
The owner or owners of all lots fronting or abutting upon any public street
or alley shall construct, lay, set and maintain in good repair and condition,
satisfactory to Borough Council, the respective sidewalks and curbs in front
of or alongside their respective lots, according to the elevations, grade,
width, height and slope which are now or hereafter established by the
Borough, and of the materials and specifications hereinafter prescribed.
§ 102. General Provisions. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 3]
1. Notification and Permits. A permit must be obtained prior to any curb or
sidewalk construction. The owner or contractor should notify the
Borough: after the string line has been set to proper line and grade;
after setting the forms and before placing of concrete and after forms
have been removed prior to backfilling. The owner/contractor is
responsible for notifying all utility companies prior to the start of work.
2. Line and Grade. Curbs and sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with approved development and/or Borough plans and
specifications and to lines and grades established by the Borough.
[Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
3. Safety. The contractor shall leave the work area clean and neat at the
end of each day. All excess excavated material shall be removed from
the site daily, or as directed by the Borough. All work started must be
completed within seven consecutive calendar days, unless otherwise
approved by the Borough. Appropriate barricades shall be placed
around the work area in such a manner as to protect both pedestrian
and vehicular traffic while potential hazards to both pedestrian and
vehicular traffic exist or as directed by the Borough. Such barricades
shall be properly lighted during night hours or as directed by the
Borough. All work zone traffic control shall be per the current edition of
PennDOT Publication 213, Temporary Traffic Control Guidelines, or as
approved by the Borough. Any road closure and subsequent detour
route(s) must be submitted to the Borough for approval at least 48
hours in advance of the proposed construction. All traffic control
devices required for road closure and detour routes shall be the
responsibility of the contractor. [Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/
2019]
4. Obstructions. Where existing structures such as light standards, utility
poles, fire hydrants and the like are within the limits of curbs or
sidewalk construction, a premolded expansion joint, not less than 1/2
inch in width, shall be placed completely around said obstruction for
the full depth of the concrete and brick. Furthermore, expansion joint
material shall be placed to form a square, 12 inches from each side of
§ 101 FOREWORD § 102
FWD:471
§ 103. Construction Methods. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 4; as amended
by Ord. 722, 4/16/1992, § 1]
the obstruction. No obstruction other than those listed above shall be
permitted to be placed within a sidewalk or curb without approval from
the Borough. [Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
5. Downspouts. All downspout roof leaders to be located within the area of
the sidewalk and curb shall be placed under the sidewalk in three-inch
diameter, minimum, Schedule 40 PVC pipe, or as approved by the
Borough. Construct in accordance with the detail shown on Exhibit A.52
A two-inch curb reveal shall remain between the downspout invert and
the finished street surface unless otherwise approved by the Borough.
[Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
6. Street Signs. The property owner's contractor is responsible for
knowing the location of existing street signs before construction begins.
Where existing street signs are within the limits of sidewalk
construction, a four-inch polyvinylchloride (PVC) pipe sleeve shall be
installed by the property owner's contractor. This pipe sleeve shall
extend the entire depth of the concrete. In addition, the sleeve shall be
installed so that the edge of the sign being installed will be even with
the sidewalk side (back) of the curb. This installation shall not interfere
with compliance with the then-current United States Americans With
Disabilities Act, as amended, PennDOT design standards and
specifications, as amended, or regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
The contractor shall contact the Borough in the event of questions
about the installation of sign sleeves. In the event that a stop sign or
other traffic control sign is involved, temporary provisions shall be
made to keep such sign erect and visible to motorists. No sign sleeves
shall be installed within the limits of the curb. [Amended by Ord. No.
991, 4/18/2019]
7. Handicap Ramps. A minimum of one ramp shall be provided at each
corner of the intersection. Curb ramps shall have a minimum width of
four feet at the street surface unless otherwise approved by the
Borough. All ramps shall comply with the United States Americans With
Disabilities Act (refer to 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.) and all regulations
adopted pursuant thereto and shall comply with the construction
details in PennDOT Publication 72M, Standards for Roadway
Construction, in effect at the time of installation. [Amended by Ord.
No. 991, 4/18/2019]
8. Monuments. No monuments or property corners shall be covered or
disturbed by the construction of a sidewalk or curb. Where existing
monuments are either above or below the projected finished grade, the
Borough shall be notified to approve the resetting of said monuments
prior to construction.
52.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 102 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:472
1. Sidewalks.
A. Where existing sidewalks extend from the building line to the curb
or are of a greater width than provided below, any repair or
construction shall be completed in accordance with the existing
width of the sidewalk.
B. The whole width of any paved portion of the sidewalk area from the
building line to the curb shall be graded according to the
established grade.
C. All concrete sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four
inches of concrete.
D. Excavations for sidewalks shall be made to the required depth, and
a layer of crushed stone not less than four inches thick shall be
placed and thoroughly compacted prior to the laying of the
sidewalk.
E. Where a sidewalk is placed adjacent to the curb, there shall be an
expansion joint placed between them for the entire length.
F. On a sixty-foot wide street, where sidewalks are being built for the
first time, 10 feet shall be set apart on either side for a forty-foot
wide cartway, of which 10 feet, four feet shall be sidewalks, 5 1/2
feet shall be lawn strip between the sidewalk and curb, and 1/2 foot
shall be curb.
G. On a fifty-six-foot side street, where sidewalks are being built for
the first time, eight feet shall be set apart on either side of a fortyfoot-
wide cartway, of which eight feet, four feet shall be sidewalk,
3 1/2 feet shall be lawn strip between the sidewalk and the curb,
and 1/2 foot shall be curb.
H. Where planting of a grass strip is provided, it shall be planted with
grass and shall at all times be kept closely trimmed. No planting of
trees or shrubs within the grass strip shall be permitted.
I. Wherever possible, property owners shall maintain a uniform
design for curb and sidewalk replacement within the block. If a
grass strip exists between the curb and sidewalk, the grass strip
should be preserved when the sidewalk is replaced, particularly
when the majority of sidewalks within a block contain grass strips.
J. Sidewalks shall have a uniform fall of 1/4 inch to the foot from the
building line toward the curb. The grass strip between the sidewalk
and the curb, if any, shall conform to the same slope.
K. Expansion joint material must be placed no more than 20 lineal
feet, the beginning and end of the radius, a change in horizontal
alignment or property lines. Construction joints must be placed at a
maximum distance of five lineal feet. Construction joints may be
hand-tooled or saw-cut to a depth of 1/2 inch.
§ 103 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:473
L. Sidewalks across private driveways shall be constructed without
any step or break in grade from the abutting sidewalks. The
sidewalk across the private driveway may be constructed of
concrete or asphalt as approved by the Borough.
M. Mudjacking, Concrete Raising, or Slabjacking. Mudjacking is
allowed for correction of certain defects, such as a settled panel. It
is not permitted if the panel is cracked or damage is being caused
by a tree root. If mudjacking is unsuccessful, the sidewalk shall be
replaced. A permit and inspection are required if sidewalk defects
are corrected using mudjacking. [Added by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/
2019]
N. Grinding. Grinding/cutting is allowed for correction of certain
defects, such as trip hazard removal. Grinding of trip hazards with
a vertical displacement of over one inch is not allowed. Trip
hazards shall be removed by cutting a slope that is less than the
ADA-compliant slope for a ramp (8.33%). (Example: a panel which
is raised 1/2 inch, the grinding shall extend six inches, at a
minimum, onto the raised panel.) Slope shall be planar and smooth
with no surface irregularities. Grinding is not allowed if damage is
caused by a tree root. If grinding/cutting is unsuccessful, the
sidewalk shall be replaced. A permit and inspection are required if
sidewalk defects are corrected using grinding/cutting. [Added by
Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
O. Patching. Patching of sidewalk is not permitted. [Added by Ord.
No. 991, 4/18/2019]
2. Curbs.
A. Curbs to be installed shall be constructed of concrete with a six
inch dressed surface on top, an eight inch exposed surface or
reveal along the street side, which shall likewise be dressed and
extend a minimum of 14 below the street surface and have an eight
inch base. The exposed surface or reveal on the street side shall
include a one inch batter from the street surface to the top of the
curb. Portions of curb which are replaced between two good
sections shall have the same exposed surface or reveal as the
existing curb.
B. Construction joints shall be placed at a maximum of 15 lineal feet.
The construction joints may be hand-tooled or saw-cut to a
minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches. The construction joint shall
traverse the top of the curb and continue down the face of the curb
a minimum of 10 inches on the street side. Expansion joint material
may be substituted for construction joints.
C. Expansion joint material shall be placed in curbs at the end of each
workday, at the beginning and end of a radius, at a change in
horizontal alignment or property line.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:474
D. Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the material
upon which the curb is to be constructed shall be compacted to a
firm, even surface. Where the subgrade is soft or spongy, a layer of
crushed stone not less than four inches thick shall be placed under
the curb.
E. Street excavation for curb installation shall be parallel to the
finished curb a minimum of 12 inches and a maximum of 24 inches
from the face of the curb and shall be saw cut in a straight line. All
material excavated from the street shall be replaced with PennDOTapproved
2A stone or its equivalent, and mechanically compacted
to within six inches of the finished road surface. [Amended by
Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
F. A depressed curb shall be constructed across every private
driveway by the owner or owners. The curb shall remain at least
one inch above the finished street surface.
G. Patching. Patching of curbs is not permitted. [Added by Ord. No.
991, 4/18/2019]
3. Brick Sidewalks.
A. Property owners may install brick paving in place of concrete
sidewalk as provided for in this § 103.
B. Construction of brick sidewalks shall consist of a four-inch layer of
crushed 1B or 2B stone, compacted, a three-and-one-half-inch layer
of concrete base, a one-inch mortar pad and a layer of brick. Empty
or sand-filled joints may be used following the brick layer. A
construction detail of brick sidewalk is shown on Exhibit A.53
[Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
C. Where the brick paving abuts a curb, expansion joints should be
provided and [installed in accordance with § 104].
D. Replacement of a portion or all of an existing sidewalk must be
done using the construction methods and material specifications
contained throughout this Part.
E. Handicap ramps which are adjacent to or an extension of brick
sidewalk must be constructed of concrete as required by this Part.
F. Where a property owner desires to replace only a portion of an
existing brick sidewalk, the replacement portion shall be installed
in accordance with the construction methods contained herein.
G. A design that combines both brick and concrete must be approved
by the Borough Council.
53.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:475
H. The transition between brick paving and concrete sidewalk shall be
smooth.
4. Standard Rolled Curb.
A. Prior to a street resurfacing project, owners of properties with
existing rolled curb that is in good condition will not be required to
replace their curbs. Properties that have deteriorated rolled curb
will be required to replace the deteriorated sections with rolled
curb.
B. The following are recognized by the Borough as streets with
existing rolled curb:
(1) Conoy Avenue. From Lime to 175 feet east of Iris Circle.
(2) Hillside Avenue. From Watercress to Lime.
(3) Iris Circle.
(4) Lime Street. From Hillside Avenue to Conoy Avenue.
(5) Oak Street. From 134 feet west of Watercress Lane to Lime
Street.
(6) Overlook Circle.
(7) Spring Garden Street. From 136 feet west of Watercress to 80
feet east of Sunrise Boulevard.
(8) Sunrise Boulevard. From 80 feet north of Spring Garden Street
to Conoy Avenue.
(9) Watercress Lane. From Hillside Avenue to Summit Street.
C. Prior to repaving, the Borough will "mill" off approximately one
inch of road surface on the street side of the curb. Once the street
is milled, the new paving will be placed level with the existing curb
grade as part of the resurfacing project.
D. Standard rolled curb shall be installed in accordance with Exhibit
A.54 [Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
E. Construction joints shall be placed at a minimum of 10 lineal feet.
The construction joints may be hand tooled or saw cut to a
minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches. The construction joint shall
traverse the top of the curb and continue down the face of the curb
a minimum of 1 1/2 inches on the street side. Expansion joint
material may be substituted for construction joints.
54.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:476
F. Expansion joint material shall be placed in curbs at the end of each
workday, at the beginning and end of a radius, at a change in
horizontal alignment or property line.
G. Excavation shall be made to the required depth and the material
upon which the curb is to be constructed shall be compacted to a
firm, even surface. Where the subgrade is soft or spongy, a layer of
crushed stone not less than four inches thick shall be placed under
the curb.
H. Street excavation for curb installation shall be parallel to the
finished curb a minimum of 12 inches and a maximum of 24 inches
from the face of the curb and shall be saw cut in a straight line. All
material excavated from the street shall be replaced with PennDOTapproved
2A stone or its equivalent, and mechanically compacted
to within six inches of the finished road surface.55 [Amended by
Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
5. Standard Slanted Curb. [Added by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
A. Prior to a street resurfacing project, owners of properties with
existing slanted curb that is in good condition will not be required
to replace their curbs. Properties that have deteriorated slanted
curb will be required to replace the deteriorated sections with
slanted curb.
B. Standard slanted curb shall be installed according to the
dimensions shown on Exhibit A.56
C. Construction joints shall be placed at a minimum of 10 lineal feet.
The construction joints may be hand tooled or saw cut to a
minimum depth of 1 1/2 inches. The construction joint shall
traverse the top of the curb and continue down the face of the curb
a minimum of 1 1/2 inches on the street side. Expansion joint
material may be substituted for construction joints.
D. Expansion joint material shall be placed in curbs at the end of each
workday, at the beginning and end of a radius, at a change in
horizontal alignment or property line.
E. Excavation shall be made to the required depth, and the material
upon which the curb is to be constructed shall be compacted to a
firm, even surface. Where the subgrade is soft or spongy, a layer of
crushed stone not less than four inches thick shall be placed under
the curb.
55.Editor's Note: Former Subsection I, which stated that a depressed curb shall be
constructed across every private driveway by the owner or owners and shall remain at
least one inch above the finished street surface, which immediately followed this
subsection, was repealed by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019.
56.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 103 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:477
§ 104. Supplemental Regulations. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 5]
F. Street excavation for the curb installation shall be parallel to the
finished curb no more than two feet from the face of the curb and
shall be jackhammered or saw cut in a straight line. All material
excavated from the street shall be replaced with 2A modified stone
or its equivalent and compacted to within three inches of the
finished road surface.
1. Material Specifications. All materials shall conform to PennDOT Form
408, latest edition. All sidewalks and curbs shall be constructed of
3,000 pound concrete with a 4% to 6% air entrainment ingredient and a
maximum slump of three inches, constructed level on stone backfill
with a minimum thickness of four inches. The use of calcium chloride is
prohibited from the concrete used for repair or construction. Where slip
forms are used a maximum slump of 1 1/2 inches shall be permitted.
High early concrete must be used when slip forming. No concrete shall
be placed when the air temperature is below 40° F. Curing compound
may be applied to retain moisture to allow for the complete hydration of
the concrete. No material such as asphalt, macadam or blacktop shall
be substituted for these specifications.
2. Forms. Forms shall be of wood or metal, straight, free from warp, and of
sufficient strength to resist the pressure of the concrete without
springing. If of wood, they shall be two inch planks, surfaced on the
inside and the top. Forms shall be of a depth equal to the depth of the
concrete. A front and back form shall be used for curb except where a
good concrete sidewalk, which is not removed, abuts the new curb.
Forms shall be accurately set to line and grade in such a manner as to
prevent settlement or displacement.
3. Finishing. All forms must be removed within 24 hours after the concrete
has been placed, and minor defects shall be filled with mortar
composed of one part Portland cement and two parts fine aggregate.
The top and face of the curb from the top of 10 inches below or to the
top of the street surface, when in place, shall be finished while the
concrete is still green by rubbing the surface with a carborundum
stone, soft brick or wood blocks and water until smooth, even surface is
produced. All joints in the curb shall be promptly opened from top to
bottom and edges adjacent to the joints shall be sharp and clean cut.
Sidewalks shall be finished after pouring before the concrete sets.
4. Curbing. Concrete curbs and sidewalks shall be protected from
rainstorms with paper, burlap, canvas, or similar materials. Curing
compound may be applied to retain moisture in concrete to allow
complete hydration of the cement. Plastic, burlap, straw, or other types
of moisture bearer must be used to maintain concrete wet during the
drying process for at least seven days after pouring, if curing compound
is not used. No concrete shall be placed when the temperature is below
40° F. To help prevent spalling and deterioration of concrete surface
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:478
§ 105. Authorization for Construction of Curbs and Sidewalks other
than Specified Herein. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 6]
Borough Council may, by resolution, authorize the construction of curbs
and sidewalks other than as specified herein upon written request from the
property owner.
§ 106. Mandatory Installation of Curb and Sidewalk. [Ord. 693, 1/
19/1989, § 7; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
from winter damage, a concrete hardener may be applied 28 days after
concrete is poured.
5. Backfilling and Sealing. After the concrete has cured sufficiently, spaces
adjacent to the curb and sidewalk shall be refilled with acceptable
material in layers of not more than four inches in depth. Each layer
shall be thoroughly compacted to the required elevation. The final layer
of back fill shall consist of topsoil previously stripped, or new topsoil,
and shall be properly seeded. On the roadway side of all curbs, upon
completion of curb installation, the contractor shall contact the
Borough. The Borough will assess trench restoration needs and mark
for restoration. The contractor shall saw cut as marked. All material
between the saw cut and curb shall be removed to a depth of 12 inches.
Excavated area will be filled with six inches compacted depth PennDOTapproved
2A stone; four inches compacted depth 25 mm base asphalt 0
< .3 ESALs; and two inches compacted depth 9.5 mm wearing asphalt 0
< .3 ESALs; or as specified by the Borough. Both edges of the
bituminous surfacing material shall be sealed with a thin coating of
AC-20 sealant or its equivalent. [Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/
2019]
6. Expansion Joints. Where a sidewalk abuts the curb, or a building, wall
or other permanent structure, a premolded expansion joint 1/2 inch in
thickness shall be placed between the curb and sidewalk for the full
length of such permanent structure. The slabs shall be constructed in
twenty-foot maximum lengths with premolded expansion material
having a minimum thickness of 1/2 inch separating slabs transversely.
[Amended by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
7. Scoring. For sidewalks, scoring shall be done transversely at evenly
spaced intervals of not more than five feet. The depth shall be 1/5 the
thickness of concrete and in no case less than 1/2 inch deep. For curbs,
scoring shall be done at no greater than fifteen foot intervals. The
scoring shall be done transversely and extend continuously down the
face of the curb 10 inches. The score shall be 1 1/2 inches deep.
Expansion joints may be substituted for scoring.
8. Blacktop Curb and Sidewalks. Where no curb and sidewalk currently
exists, blacktop curb and/or sidewalk may be installed by special
permission from Borough Council. [Added by Ord. No. 991, 4/18/
2019]
§ 104 FOREWORD § 106
FWD:479
§ 107. Exemptions. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 8; as amended by Ord.
937, 2/16/2012; by Ord. 941, 9/20/2012]
The following streets and alleys shall be exempt from the regulations
detailed in § 106, "Mandatory Installation of Curbs and Sidewalks":
1. Curb and Sidewalk Replacement. Prior to the bituminous concrete
overlay on any State highway route, within the Borough, the Borough
shall require, upon 120 days written notification to the property owner,
that a curb be replaced that does not have a normal life expectancy of
more than five years. Prior to the bituminous concrete overlay on any
State highway route, the Borough may require, upon 120 days written
notification to the property owner, that a sidewalk be replaced that does
not have a normal life expectancy of more than five years.
2. Curb and Sidewalk Replacement-Nonstate Highway Route. Prior to a
bituminous concrete overlay, the Borough shall require, upon 120 days
written notification to the property owner, that a curb and sidewalk be
replaced that does not have a normal life expectancy of more than five
years or does not have sufficient curb reveal in the opinion of the
Borough Engineer to provide pedestrian protection or adequately
control stormwater within the street.
3. The Borough Manager shall determine which curb and sidewalk meet
the specifications required above and notify the respective owner of
necessary action.
4. General Powers. Borough Council at any time may require installation
of curb and/or sidewalk in any area of the Borough where curb and/or
sidewalk is missing, deteriorated or does not have a life expectancy of
more than five years, or does not have sufficient curb reveal in the
opinion of the Borough Engineer to provide pedestrian protection or
adequately control stormwater within the street.
A. Entire length of Groff Avenue is exempt from installation of sidewalk.
B. Entire length of Ridge Road is exempt from installation of sidewalk.
C. Hampden Road from Ridge Road east to a point 824 feet is exempt from
installation of sidewalk.
D. East Washington Street from Spruce Street to Mount Joy Street is
exempt from installation of curb and sidewalk.
E. Entire length of Woodland Avenue is exempt from installation of curb
and sidewalk.
F. West Summit Street from Poplar Street to Peace Alley is exempt from
installation of sidewalk.
G. Entire length of Hess Avenue is exempt from installation of curb and
sidewalk.
§ 106 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:480
§ 108. Central Business District. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 9; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 109. Permits Required. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 10; as amended by
Ord. No. 991, 4/18/2019]
Prior to the laying or repair of either curbs or sidewalks by property
owners, a property owner shall apply for a permit to the Borough to do
so according to the guidelines mentioned herein. The Borough shall issue
the permit without charge if the application conforms to the ordinances of
the Borough. All required inspections associated with the permit must be
completed. The laying or repair of curb and sidewalk without obtaining a
permit is prohibited.
§ 110. Failure to Comply. [Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 11]
Whenever the owner or owners of any property in the Borough shall fail to
comply with any of the above requirements, the Borough Council may cause
notice to be served upon such owner or owners, their agent or tenant, in
the manner prescribed by law, setting forth specifically in what respect such
owner or owners have failed to comply with any of the above requirements
and what work such owner or owners are required to do in order to effect
H. Entire length of North Wilson Avenue is exempt from installation of
curb and sidewalk.
I. Entire length of Kiwanis Boulevard is exempt from installation of curb
and sidewalk.
J. All alleys existing prior to the effective date of this Part are exempt from
installation of curb and sidewalk.
K. All cul-de-sacs existing prior to the effective date of this Part or detailed
on an approved subdivision plan, are exempt from installation of
sidewalk.
L. Locust Street from Snyder Avenue to Park Street is exempt from
installation of curb and sidewalk.
M. South Chestnut Street from Ridge Road to Groff Avenue is exempt from
installation of sidewalk.
1. Borough Council may, from time to time, adopt by resolution a master
plan for physical improvements in the Central Business District. The
master plan shall supersede the regulations contained herein for the
Central Business District as outlined in Chapter 27.
2. Property owners are responsible for the curb and sidewalk for the width
of their property. If brick paving section exists, Borough Council will
maintain and replace, when necessary, the brick portion of the
sidewalk. The Borough Council will also maintain, repair or replace the
street trees and grates within the Central Business District.
§ 107 FOREWORD § 110
FWD:481
such compliance. In the event of the failure or neglect of any such owner
or owners to comply with the terms and conditions of such notice within
20 days from the date of service of such notice in the case of new work or
within 10 days from the date of service thereon in the case of repair work,
the Council shall cause such work to be done at the cost of the owner or
owners of such property, and the cost thereof and 10% additional, together
with all charges and expenses, shall be collected from such owner or owners
by the Borough, which may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the
same by action in assumpsit, as Council may direct.57
57.Editor’s Note: Former § 111, Violations and Penalties (Ord. 693, 1/19/1989, § 12, as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001, which immediately followed this Section, was repealed
by Ord. 957, 5/15/2014.
§ 110 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 110
FWD:482
Part 2
TUNNELING AND EXCAVATIONS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 612, 8/15/1978]
The following words and phrases, when used in this Part, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this § 201, except in those instances where
the context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any person who makes application for a permit.
BOROUGH — Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for immediate
action to protect or safeguard life and/or property.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm, association, utility or
corporation.
PUBLIC UTILITY — Any utility company licensed by the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission.
STREET — The entire right-of-way of a public street, highway, alley, road or
easement within the Borough limits.
§ 202. Permit Required. [Ord. 612, 8/15/1978]
§ 203. Application for Permit. [Ord. 612, 8/5/1978; as amended by
Ord. 647, 7/21/1983, § I]
1. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Borough Manager, at
least three working days prior to the start of work, on the form
prescribed by the Borough and shall describe the person, partnership,
firm or corporation doing the actual excavating work and the name of
the person, partnership, firm or corporation to tunnel under or to make
any opening or excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk or to
construct or install sewer, water, gas or any other utility lines or any
structure in the streets of or within any public right-of-way of the
Borough of Elizabethtown, unless and until a permit therefor has been
secured from the Borough Manager for each separate undertaking,
such permit and the application therefor to be in the form prescribed by
the Borough and for the purposes enumerated therein.
2. Any person working in the vicinity of a Borough street who in any
manner disturbs such street or who in any manner causes damage to a
street shall be required to obtain a permit and correct the damage in
accordance with Borough standards. Street opening permits shall not
be required for persons excavating adjacent to the curb for the express
purpose of installing or replacing curbs and/or sidewalks, provided that
a curb or sidewalk permit has been obtained prior to such work.
1. Applications for such permits shall be made to the Borough Manager at
least three days prior to the start of work on the form prescribed by the
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:483
§ 204. Fees. [Ord. 612, 8/15/1978; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/
2001]
Borough and shall describe the person, partnership, firm or corporation
doing the actual excavating work and the name of the person,
partnership, firm or corporation for whom or which the work is being
done and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply
with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done and to
permit inspection during the restoration and repair so as to determine
conformance with Borough standards.
2. The application for the permit shall indicate the location of said opening
or excavation, include a plan of said opening or excavation, define the
probable length, width and depth thereof, specify a time when said
opening or excavation shall begin and end, or the time when the same is
to remain open, and such further information as the Borough may
require.
3. Emergency breaks or leaks may be repaired and a permit therefor
secured within the next working day, and such permit shall be
retroactive to the date when the work was begun. A person performing
street openings for an emergency must verify the emergency nature of
the circumstances in writing to the Borough within five days after such
emergency.
4. Applicants shall file a letter, prepared on a form furnished by the
Borough, properly executed by the applicant's designated officials
verifying that the applicant is insured against claims for personal injury
as well as against claims for property damage which may arise from or
out of the performance of the excavation work, whether such
performance is by the applicant or anyone directly employed by him.
Such insurance shall include protection against liability arising from
completed operations, underground utility damage and collapse of any
property. Liability insurance for bodily injury shall be in an amount not
less than $300,000 for each person and 300,000 for each accident and
for property damage in an amount not less than $100,000. Failure of
any applicant to file this letter certifying insurance coverage shall be
sufficient reason for denying a permit. The applicant shall save and hold
the Borough harmless from any and all damages and liability by reason
of personal injury or property damage arising either directly or
indirectly from the work to be performed under the provisions of this
Part, irrespective of the cause of such injury or damage.
1. The charge for said permit, shall be in accordance with certain amounts
as established from time to time by resolution; provided, however, that
a minimum fee shall also be established from time to time by resolution.
2. Said fee shall cover the costs of issuing the permit and of inspecting the
work.
§ 203 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 205
FWD:484
§ 205. Notification and Required Action Prior to Street
Reconstruction or Resurfacing. [Ord. 612, 8/15/1978]
§ 206. Excavation and Restoration Procedures. [Ord. 612, 8/15/
1978]
1. When the Borough or the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
proposes to reconstruct or resurface any street, the Borough shall first
serve notice of such improvements to all persons owning property
abutting the street about to be improved and to all public utility
companies operating in the Borough. Within 90 calendar days from
receipt of such notice, all notified persons shall complete or cause to be
completed all necessary repairs and replacements of utility mains,
service connections and/or laterals existing under the street and
designated curb and sidewalk areas. Notified persons shall also
complete or cause to be completed all new installations under the street
and designated curb and sidewalk areas required for use within a fiveyear
period thereafter. All repairs, replacements and new installations
shall be in first-class condition so that the same cannot be reasonably
expected to require repairs or replacement within a period of at least
five years thereafter.
2. Upon failure of any of the notified persons to comply with the notice
from the Borough to place the same in first-class condition as
hereinbefore provided, the Borough may cause existing utility mains,
service connections and/or laterals to be placed in first-class condition
or to be entirely removed if not used or necessary for public
convenience, whereupon the Borough shall be entitled to collect the
cost of such renewals, repairs, caulking, removal or other work from
the responsible person or persons, either by invoicing the person or
persons or, in the case of water or sewer house connections, by filing
municipal liens therefor against the abutting properties benefited by
such conditions.
3. Nothing herein contained shall forbid the installation of new pipes,
conduits or other services or structures or the repair, replacement or
removal of those already existing in or under the portions of such
highways improved as aforesaid, by tunneling beneath paving in
accordance with this Part and under the supervision of the Borough or
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, upon obtaining a
permit therefor from the Borough and upon payment to the Borough of
the fees prescribed by the provisions of this Part for making a surface
opening in the highway of the same dimensions.
1. Safety Devices Required. It shall be the duty of any person, partnership,
firm or corporation to whom a permit is issued or by whom any opening
or excavation is made, as aforesaid, to provide and maintain proper and
adequate guards, barriers and lights to prevent accidents, and they
shall assume all risks and be liable for all damages by reason of the
openings and excavations and by reason of any failure to properly fill
§ 205 FOREWORD § 206
FWD:485
the hole or trench and maintain the disturbed surface in a safe
condition.
2. Excavation and Backfill Regulations.
A. It shall be unlawful to make any excavation or tunnel in any way
contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor.
Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of
adjoining ground or structures.
B. No injury shall be done to any pipes, cables, conduits or structures
in the making of such excavations or tunnels, and notice shall be
given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables, conduits
or structures which are or may be endangered or affected by the
making of any such excavation or tunnel, before such pipes, cables,
conduits or structures shall be disturbed and before any work shall
commence.
C. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any trees or
shrubs or the roots thereof.
D. All work shall be confined to the public right-of-way, and in no case
shall excavated material be cast beyond the curb or on sidewalks or
lawns. Where working space is limited, the Borough may require
material excavated from the trench to be hauled from the area and
then brought back after the pipe or structure has been installed.
E. The Borough may limit the amount of open trench if, in its
judgment, it is necessary for safety, movement of traffic, proper
drainage or any other cause whatsoever.
3. Excavation. Before trenching begins, the existing paving shall be cut to
neat lines equidistant from the center line of the trench by means of
equipment suitable for such work, and the edges of the pavement shall
be protected and maintained throughout the course of construction
until the permanent paving is completed. If the pavement edges are not
maintained to the satisfaction of the Borough Manager, the pavement
shall be recut just prior to the permanent pavement replacement.
Pavement cutting may be done with either a saw or an air compressor.
However, the Borough reserves the right to require a saw if cutting with
an air compressor is unsatisfactory. All openings shall be square or
rectangular in shape.
4. Backfill.
A. All excavation in trenches shall be backfilled to the original ground
surface or to the subgrades specified for paving restoration. The
backfill shall begin as soon as is practical after the pipe or other
construction has been placed and shall be carried on as rapidly as
the protection of the balance of the work will permit. Depositing
backfill shall be done so that the shock of falling material will not
injure the pipe, structure or adjacent structures.
§ 206 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 206
FWD:486
B. Backfill material to a height not to exceed 12 inches above the top
of the pipe may be suitable, trench-excavated clean earth backfill
material, free from stones. This backfill material shall be deposited
in the trench simultaneously on both sides of the pipe for the full
width of the trench, in increments not exceeding six inches, and
shall be hand tamped to fill completely all spaces under and
adjacent to the pipe. The remaining trench-excavated material
shall be removed from the job site. The trench shall then be backfilled
with No. 2RC aggregate, meeting the requirements of
§ 703.3(D) of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form
408. Compaction of the 2RC backfill shall be done with a
mechanical tamper up to the bottom elevation of the pavement
structure in lifts of uniform layers not to exceed six inches after
compaction, and each lift shall be compacted over the full width of
the excavated area. Backfill shall be compacted to at least 90% of
Standard Proctor Density at optimum moisture content. All
compaction shall be accomplished at a moisture content within,
plus or minus, 2% of the optimum.
C. Special compaction shall be done around all valves, hydrants and
other structures and utilities by the use of pneumatic tampers,
plate tampers or plate vibrators with lifts not to exceed that
previously stated.
D. If unsatisfactory backfilling is suspected, the Borough may cause
samples to be taken at any location and depth of trench and tests to
be performed to determine whether compaction operations are
sufficient to meet the density and optimum moisture requirements
specified above. All costs of samples and tests shall be at the
expense of the applicant.
5. Pavement Restoration.
A. After the trench has been properly backfilled as hereinbefore
required, permanent-type paving restoration shall be installed as
follows:
(1) Prior to the placement of the base course, the existing base
and surface shall be sawed or cut back six inches on either side
of the trench to neat straight lines parallel to the curb or to the
edge of the pavement. Generally, the pavement restoration
shall be of consistent width. Where the width of paving must be
widened or decreased, it shall be done by boxing to give neat
perpendicular lines. A tack coat of Type E-1 bituminous
material meeting the requirements of § 460 of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408 shall be
applied to the cut surfaces. The base course, consisting of
either a crushed aggregate base course or a bituminous
concrete base course shall then be placed.
§ 206 FOREWORD § 206
FWD:487
(a) If the crushed aggregate base course is used, said base
course shall have a thickness at least as thick as the
existing base course, but in no case shall the base course
be less than eight inches compacted thickness of No. 4
aggregate tied in with No. 1 aggregate screenings,
meeting the requirements of § 310 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408. Following the
placement of the base course, a prime coat of bituminous
material meeting the requirements of § 461 of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Form 408
shall be required. After the prime coat has cured, a
bituminous binder course shall be placed, such binder
course to have a thickness at least as thick as the existing
binder course, but in no case shall the binder course be
less than 1 1/2 inches compacted thickness. The
completed surface of the binder course shall not be less
than the required compacted thickness of the wearing
course below the surface of the adjacent pavement. A
bituminous wearing course as hereinafter described shall
then be placed.
(b) If a bituminous concrete base course is used, said base
course shall consist of a minimum of five inches compacted
thickness of bituminous concrete base course meeting the
requirements of § 305 of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408. The completed surface of the
base course shall not be less than the required compacted
thickness of the wearing course below the surface of the
adjacent pavement. A bituminous wearing course as
hereinafter described shall then be placed.
(2) A bituminous concrete wearing course of ID-2A material shall
then be placed. The thickness of said wearing course shall be
at least as thick as the existing bituminous wearing course, but
in no case shall the wearing course be less than 1 1/2 inches
compacted thickness. A seal coat of bituminous material
meeting the requirements of § 470 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408 shall then be applied
at the edges of the wearing surface.
(3) Permanent paving restoration shall be performed immediately
after trenches have been acceptably backfilled. Where
permanent-type paving restoration is not permitted because of
weather limitations on placement of bituminous concrete, as
defined in § 401.3(a) of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation Form 408, temporary paving shall be required.
Temporary paving shall consist of a layer of Type 2P-B
bituminous stockpile patching material having a minimum
thickness after compaction of two inches, and the top surface
shall be flush with the surface of the adjacent paving. All
§ 206 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 206
FWD:488
§ 207. Remedy for Substandard Work; Borough Acceptance. [Ord.
612, 8/15/1978; as amended by Ord. 647. 7/21/1983]
temporary paving shall be continuously maintained by the
applicant until it is replaced by the permanent paving. When
the conditions permit the placement of the permanent paving,
the temporary paving shall be removed, and the permanent
paving shall be placed as required herein.
B. Construction and compaction of all bituminous pavement shall be
in accordance with the requirements of § 401.3 of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Form 408.
C. The pavement restoration shall be maintained by the applicant for
a period of two years from the date of acceptance by the Borough.
6. Curb and Sidewalk Cuts. Where curb and sidewalks must be removed,
they shall only be removed in sections extending from expansion joint to
expansion joint. Replacement shall be according to Borough ordinances
and specifications.
1. Improper Completion of Work: Assessment of Costs; Payment.
A. If the work in opening or in filling or maintaining the surface shall
not be promptly done or shall be unskillfully, improperly or
incompletely done, the Borough may cause the same to be done in
the manner it deems proper, and the expense thereof, including any
overhead expenses, shall be charged to the person, partnership,
firm or corporation by whom the opening or excavation was made,
together with 25% additional to cover administrative expenses.
B. No permit shall be issued to any person, partnership, firm or
corporation in default under this § 207 until the costs and penalty
herein provided are paid, and no further permit shall be granted to
any person, partnership, firm or corporation unless and until the
openings or excavations already caused by him have been properly
filled and the surface maintained, as aforesaid, in a safe condition
and at the proper grade, of which the Borough Engineer or other
person designated by the Borough shall be the judge.
C. The Borough shall invoice the permittee for all costs incurred by
the Borough in the performance of remedial work.
2. Acceptance by Borough. Upon completion and restoration of the area of
work, the applicant shall notify the Borough in writing of said
completion. The Borough shall then inspect the area of work for final
acceptance. If accepted, the Borough shall promptly invoice the
applicant for said work. If rejected, the Borough shall notify the
applicant immediately, stating the reasons for rejection and detailing
the remedy for substandard work.
§ 206 FOREWORD § 208
FWD:489
§ 208. Degradation Fee. [Ord. 612, 8/15/1978; as amended by Ord.
647, 7/21/1983; by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. Any applicant who wishes to open a street within five years from the
time a street has been either resurfaced or reconstructed may obtain a
street-opening permit to excavate a street for nonemergency purposes,
provided that a street degradation fee is applied and paid in full prior to
the acquisition of the street-opening permit.
2. The "degradation fee" is defined as a fee paid by the permittee to the
Borough to defray a percentage of the costs for repairs to streets
resulting from the depreciation of streets associated with street
openings.
3. A degradation fee schedule shall be established from time to time by
resolution.58
58.Editor’s Note: Former § 209, Violations and Penalties (Ord. 612, 8/15/1978, as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001, which immediately followed this Section, was repealed by Ord. 957,
5/15/2014.
§ 208 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 208
FWD:490
Part 3
REMOVAL OF SNOW AND ICE
§ 301. Definitions. [Ord. 371, 8/19/1958; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
As used in this Part, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated,
unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
BUSINESS HOURS — Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
business day.
CARTWAY — Portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — Natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — Portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a cartway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET or HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 302. Responsibility for Removal of Snow and Ice from Sidewalks.
[Ord. 371, 8/19/1958; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord.
957, 5/15/2014]
Every property owner of a building or lot of land shall be responsible for
the removal of snow and/or ice from a public sidewalk (as defined in § 401),
clearing a path of at least 30 inches in width, including the access to a
public street or alley.
§ 303. Responsibility for Removal from Roofs. [Ord. 371, 8/19/1958;
as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 12 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
B. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand, cat litter or other abrasive
material to be put on the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe and
shall, as soon thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path
in said sidewalk of at least 30 inches in width.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:491
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of
snow and ice on said building or other structure which is liable to fall on
any sidewalk, roadway, or other public way. Such work shall be completed
within a reasonable time, but not later than 12 hours after the cessation of
any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain.
§ 304. Depositing of Snow and Ice Restricted. [Ord. 371, 8/19/1958;
as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway or loading
and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow
and ice may be mounded by the Borough on public cartways incident to the
cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to the clearing of sidewalks
in business districts.59
59.Editor’s Note: Former § 305, Penalties (Ord. 371, 8/19/1958, as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001, which immediately followed this Section, was repealed by Ord. 957, 5/15/2014.
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 304
FWD:492
Part 4
OBSTRUCTION OF SIDEWALKS BY VENDORS
§ 401. Applicability. [Ord. 350, 8/19/1958; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
The provisions of this Part shall not apply to the sale, storage or display of
newspapers or periodicals.
§ 402. Restrictions on Sidewalk Sales. [Ord. 350, 8/19/1958; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful for any vendor of groceries, fruits or produce or any kind
of food-stuffs or merchandise, except peddlers duly licensed or authorized
and farmers, to store, display, exhibit or sell his said wares on public
highways, including the sidewalk or cartway, or any portion thereof, or to
make use of the sidewalk or cartway or any portion thereof, as a place for
salesmen, clerks or customers to stand while transacting business or in any
way to obstruct the sidewalk or cartway or any portion thereof, and prevent
the free use of the same by the general public.
§ 403. Illegal to Obstruct Sidewalks. [Ord. 350, 8/19/1958; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
It shall be unlawful to put or place any box, boxes, barrels, merchandise,
overnight delivery receptacles, trash receptacles (except for Borough
facilities) or other articles that obstruct the free use of any sidewalk upon
any of the sidewalks, except articles temporarily placed thereon for the
purpose of loading or unloading, removing or storing away.
§ 404. Center Square and the Central Business District. [Ord. 350,
8/19/1958; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. All public service organizations, nonprofit groups, fraternal and
community organizations, school related clubs, church affiliated groups
and other similar organizations are encouraged to use the public areas
of the square and downtown.
2. Any groups wishing to use the electrical service available must contact
the Borough office, Monday through Friday, 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m., at
least 48 hours in advance of the scheduled activity.
3. All merchants are requested to keep all displayed merchandise within
the sidewalk area adjacent to the building unless an organized activity
sponsored by the Chamber of Commerce and Merchants Committee is
scheduled.
4. Private advertisements in the form of yard sales, garage sales, real
estate notices and open houses and other private advertisement are not
permitted in the Central Business District or Center Square. At the
§ 401 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:493
request of public utilities, and for safety concerns, no banners may be
erected across any street in these areas.
5. All damage resulting from use of the square by approved groups must
be reported to the Borough Office on the next working day.
6. All entertainment activities must provide a designated path, sufficient
for use by pedestrians.60
60.Editor’s Note: Former § 405, Penalties (Ord. 350, 8/19/1958, as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001, which immediately followed this Section, was repealed by Ord. 957, 5/15/2014.
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:494
Part 5
STANDARDS FOR STREET DESIGN, IMPROVEMENT AND
MAINTENANCE
§ 501. General. [Ord. 667, 2/11/1988, § 1]
The standards and requirements contained in this Part shall apply as
minimum design standards for subdivision and/or land developments.
§ 502. Street System. [Ord. 667, 2/11/1988, § 2]
§ 503. Design Standards. [Ord. 667, 2/11/1988, § 3; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord. 858, 5/19/2005]
1. Proposed streets shall be properly related to the road and highway
plans of the State, County and Borough. Streets shall be designed to
provide adequate vehicular access to all lots or parcels and with regard
for topographic conditions, projected volumes of traffic and further
subdivision possibilities in the area.
2. The street system of the proposed subdivision or land development
shall be designed to create a hierarchy of street functions which
includes collector and local streets.
3. The street system of a proposed subdivision or land developments shall
be designed so as to minimize street intersections and pedestrianvehicular
conflict points.
4. Proposed local streets shall be designed so as to discourage through
traffic and excessive speeds. However, the subdivider or land developer
shall give adequate consideration to provisions for the extension and
continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining
properties.
5. Streets shall be designed in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan,
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance [Chapter 22] and other related ordinances and regulations in
effect in the Borough.
1. Private Streets. Private streets are prohibited unless they meet the
design standards of these regulations. Plans which propose a private
street shall be accompanied by an agreement which shall be recorded
with the final plan. This agreement shall establish the conditions under
which the street will be constructed and maintained, as well as
conditions controlling an offer of dedication and shall stipulate:
A. That the street shall be constructed and maintained to conform to
the specifications of this Part.
B. That the owners of the abutting lots will include with any future
offer for dedication sufficient monies, as estimated by the Borough,
to restore the street to conformance with the prevailing standards.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 503
FWD:495
C. That an offer for dedication of the street shall be made only for the
street as a whole.
D. The method of assessing maintenance and repair cost.
E. That an agreement by the owners of 51% of the front footage
thereon shall be binding on the owners of the remaining lots.
2. Arrangement. Streets shall be designed with consideration to both
existing and planned streets. All streets shall be arranged to conform as
closely as possible to the original topography. Streets which serve as
connector routes to population centers shall be connected with streets
of similar function, to form continuation thereof. Streets shall be laid
out to provide convenient and safe access to the property. The rigid
rectangular street pattern need not be adhered to, the use of
curvilinear streets and cul-de-sacs may be provided when their use will
result in a more desirable layout. Where a development abuts an
existing or proposed major street, the Borough may require the use of
reverse frontage lots or such other treatment that will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduce the number of intersections
with the major street and separate the local and through traffic. Any
new street proposing a connection between two existing state roads
shall be designed as a collector street and shall be designated as a
limited-access collector street. Access to a limited-access collector
street shall be only by means of a local street or a service street due to
the anticipated increased traffic using such a street; no individual
driveway access shall be permitted.
3. Street Provisions for Future Development. Where appropriate, areas
shall be reserved for future street usage in conjunction with the
development of adjacent tracts. Areas reserved for future street usage
will not be required to be improved. However, these areas shall be
reserved for street improvements to be provided by the developer of the
adjacent tract. Wherever there exists a dedicated or platted area
reserved for future street usage along the boundary of a tract being
developed, the adjacent street shall be extended into the proposed
project provided this use is not adverse to the manmade or natural
features of the site.
4. Half Streets. Half or partial streets (less than the required right-of-way
or cartway width) will not be permitted. All plans shall be designed to
provide for the entire required right-of-way and cartway.
5. Vertical Alignments. Vertical street alignments shall be measured along
the centerline. The minimum grade of all streets shall be 0.75% and the
maximum grade shall be 10%.
A. Vertical curves shall be used in changes in grade exceeding 1%.
The minimum lengths (in feet) of vertical curves shall be 15 times
the algebraic difference in grade. For example, if a 3% upgrade is
followed by 4% downgrade, the algebraic difference in grade is
§ 503 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 503
FWD:496
seven (+3 — (-4) = 7); the minimum length of the vertical curve
would then be 105 feet (15 x 7 = 105).
B. Where the approaching grade exceeds 7% on any or all streets at a
four way street intersection or the terminating street at a three way
intersection, a leveling area shall be provided on the street(s) with
such excessive grade. Such leveling area(s) shall have a maximum
grade of 4% for a minimum length of 75 feet measured from the
intersection of the centerlines.
6. Horizontal Alignments. Horizontal street alignments shall be measured
along the centerline. Horizontal curves shall be used at all angles in
excess of 2°. Single, long-radius curves shall be used rather than a
series of curves with varying radii and/or a series of short curves
separated by short, straight segments. The minimum horizontal curve
radius for streets shall be 150 feet, except as provided below.
A. Perimeter Streets. Plans with street locations along the perimeter
of a property shall be required to show building setback lines and
clear sight triangles within the adjacent properties. The applicant
shall obtain permission from the adjacent landowner for the
establishment of the clear sight triangle and setback lines.
B. Cartway Alignment. The centerline of the street cartway shall
correspond with the centerline of the street right-of-way.
C. Collector streets designated as limited-access collector streets
shall be designed with a minimum horizontal radius of 1,000 feet.
Any street which provides a connection between two state roads
shall be designated as limited-access collector streets.
7. Extension of Existing Streets. The extension of existing streets which
are presently constructed with a cartway different from the standards
of this Part shall be provided with a transition area, the design of which
is subject to Borough approval.
8. Street Intersections.
A. Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets are prohibited.
B. The distance between the centerline of streets opening onto the
opposite sides of existing or proposed streets shall be no less than
150 feet between centerlines, measured along the centerline of the
street being intersected.
C. Intersections with major streets shall be located not closer than
1,000 feet, measured from centerline to centerline, along the
centerline of the major street being intersected.
D. Right angle intersections shall be used whenever possible. No
street shall intersect another at an angle of less than 75°.
§ 503 FOREWORD § 503
FWD:497
E. The cartway edge at street intersections shall be rounded by a
tangential arc with a minimum radius of 20 feet for local streets
and 30 feet for intersections involving major streets. The right-ofway
radii at intersections shall be substantially concentric with the
edge of the cartway.
9. Sight Distance at Street Intersections.
A. There shall be provided and maintained at all intersections a clear
sight triangle with a line of sight between points 100 feet from the
intersection of the street centerlines. Clear sight triangles shall be
indicated on all plans. No building or other obstruction that would
obscure the vision of a motorist shall be permitted within these
areas.
B. Proper sight distance shall be provided with respect to both
horizontal and vertical road alignments at all intersections. The
sight distance measured from the centerline of the intersecting
street with the right-of-way of the intersected street, four feet
above grade, shall be a minimum of 300 feet.
C. All streets intersecting a State Route shall be subject to the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and the
Borough.
10. Cul-de-sac Streets. Cul-de-sacs are prohibited.
11. Service Streets (Alleys). Service streets are permitted only where
required to provide direct driveway access to arterial streets.
Additional use of service streets may be permitted by waiver provided
that the applicant produces evidence satisfactory for the need and
provided these are not the primary means of access.
A. Where permitted, service streets shall have a minimum of 20 feet.
However, where service streets serve parcels on only one side, the
Borough may permit a paved surface of not less than 12 feet.
B. No part of any dwelling, garage or other structure shall be located
within 16 feet of the centerline of a service street.
C. Dead end service streets should be avoided, but where this proves
impossible, dead end service streets shall be terminated with a
paved, circular turnaround with a minimum radius to the outer
pavement edge of 40 feet.
12. Driveways. Driveways shall be so located as to provide reasonable sight
distances at intersections with streets. Driveway locations shall be
delineated on all land development plans. Subdivision plans may
delineate locations or include a notice of conformity to this
specification.
§ 503 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 503
FWD:498
§ 504. Improvement Standards.
13. Dead End Streets. Dead end streets, other than approved cul-de-sacs,
shall be prohibited except as stubs to permit future street extension
into adjoining tracts.
14. New Street Right-of-way and Cartway Widths. The minimum street
rights-of-way and cartway widths for new streets shall be as follows:
A. Arterial Street. Provides for intercommunity travel, carrying large
volumes of traffic and connecting the Borough with major
population or commercial centers. Right-of-way width shall be the
greater of 100 feet or as specified by the Pennsylvania Department
of Transportation based upon the projected average daily traffic
and speed limit. Cartway width shall be the greater of 44 feet or as
specified by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
B. Collector Street. Provides for intracommunity travel carrying
significant volumes of traffic. Right-of-way width shall be 60 feet.
Cartway width shall be 36 feet.
C. Local Street. Provides access to residential land. Right-of-way
width shall be 50 feet. Cartway width shall be 34 feet.
D. Service Street (Alley). A service street shall have a cartway width of
20 feet. There is no right-of-way width for a service street.
E. Provisions for additional cartway width may be required by the
Borough in specific cases for public safety and convenience.
1. All street paving must conform to the following specifications and as
delineated in the typical street cross-section included in this Part.
2. All curb and sidewalk shall be installed in accordance with Ord. 693,
[Part 1], as may be amended from time to time.
3. Stone Base Course. A minimum of six inch crushed stone aggregate
base course shall be applied. Stone shall be 3A modified or preapproved
equal.
4. Bituminous Concrete Overlay. A minimum of six inch bituminous
concrete base course (BCBC). In addition, a minimum of 1 1/2 inch
bituminous concrete wearing course shall be applied. Wearing course
shall be of ID-2A material. All materials shall be in conformance with
the latest edition of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Manual Form 408 (PennDOT — Form 408).
5. Underdrain. Underdrain pipe, in conformance with PennDOT — Form
408, shall be installed one foot from the curb line in a trench at least 12
inches wide by 18 inches deep. The trench shall be filled with 1B stone
aggregate.
6. Crown. Minimum crown shall be 1/4 inches per foot.
§ 503 FOREWORD § 504
FWD:499
§ 505. Street Maintenance. [Ord. 667, 2/11/1988, § 5]
The Borough may, at its discretion, require the subdivider or land developer
to provide a maintenance guarantee or other approved performance
guarantee to guarantee maintenance and repair of any improvement for
a period of one year after construction thereof, or until acceptance of
improvements has been promulgated by the Borough.
7. All work procedures shall conform to the requirements stated in
PennDOT Form 408.
§ 504 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 505
FWD:500
Part 6
PENALTIES
§ 601. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 957, 5/15/2014]
Any person, firm, corporation or any legal entity who shall violate any
provisions of this Chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a
fine of not less than $200 nor more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment
for a term not to exceed 30 days. The costs of prosecution shall include
without limitation any court filing fees and the expenses incurred by the
Borough for its employees to collect any such sums as well as attorney
fees incurred by the Borough. After 12 hours have elapsed following the
cessation of any fall of snow, sleet or freezing rain and a violation has been
committed hereunder, each ensuing twenty-four-hour time period during
which a violation of the provisions of this Chapter continues shall be
deemed a separate offense and shall be prosecutable as such.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 601
FWD:501
Chapter 22
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
§ 601 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 601
FWD:502
Part 1
SHORT TITLE, PURPOSE, AUTHORITY AND JURISDICTION
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 101]
This Chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Elizabethtown
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance."
§ 102. Purpose. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 102]
This Chapter has been designed and adopted to provide uniform standards
and procedures for the regulation of subdivision and land development
within the Borough of Elizabethtown. The purpose of such regulation is to
provide for the harmonious development of the Borough by:
§ 103. Authority. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 103]
§ 104. Jurisdiction. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 104]
A. Assisting in the orderly, efficient and integrated development of land in
accordance with the Comprehensive Plan of 1978.
B. Assuring the coordination and conformance of subdivision and land
development plans with the public improvement plans of the Borough.
C. Coordinating proposed streets and other proposed public
improvements with those existing.
D. Assuring equitable and uniform handling of subdivision and land
development plans by providing uniform standards and procedures.
E. Assuring the efficient and orderly extension of community facilities and
services at minimum cost and maximum convenience.
F. Assuring that documents prepared as part of a land ownership transfer
fully and accurately describe the parcel of land being subdivided and
the new parcel(s) thus created.
G. Assuring the greater health, safety, convenience and welfare of the
citizens of the Borough of Elizabethtown.
1. The Borough Council shall have the authority to approve or disapprove
all preliminary and final subdivision or land development plan
applications as required herein.
2. The Borough Planning Commission is hereby designated as the agency
which shall review and make recommendations of all subdivision and
land development plan applications as required herein.
1. This Chapter shall apply to all subdivision and land development plans
submitted after the effective date of this Chapter.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 104
FWD:503
§ 105. Exemptions. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; as added by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
Chapter:
2. This Chapter shall apply to all subdivision and land development plans,
previously approved in accordance with any law or regulation then
applicable, the development of which has not been completed in
accordance with the terms of such approval within five years of such
approval.
3. No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land in
the Borough of Elizabethtown shall be effected; no street, sanitary
sewer, storm sewer, water main, or other facilities in connection
herewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or dedicated for public
use or travel, or for the common use of occupants of buildings thereon
unless and until a final subdivision or land development plan has been
approved by the Borough Council and publicly recorded in the manner
prescribed herein; nor otherwise in strict accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter.
4. No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect or alter any
building upon land in a subdivision or land development may be issued;
and no building may be erected or altered in a subdivision or land
development, unless and until a final subdivision or land development
plan has been approved by the Borough Council and recorded, and until
the improvements required in connection therewith have been either
constructed or guaranteed in a manner prescribed herein.
5. All subdivision and land development plans are subject to the zoning
regulations as they apply to use and density requirements, setbacks,
height, parking and other such features.
A. The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or single
family dwelling semi-detached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or,
§ 104 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 105
FWD:504
Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. General. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 201]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this Chapter, have the meaning indicated below. Words used
in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include
the singular. The word "person" indicates a corporation, an unincorporated
association, a partnership or any other entity, as well as an individual. The
word "buildings" includes structures and shall be construed as if followed by
the words "or a part thereof." The word "street" includes "highway," "road,"
"avenue" and "lane." The word "watercourse" includes "drain," "ditch" and
"stream." The word "may" is permissive; the words "shall" and "will" are
mandatory.
§ 202. Specific Terms. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 202; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — Property bounded on one side by a street, and other three sides,
by a street, railroad right-of-way, waterway, unsubdivided area or other
definite barrier.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this Chapter to render final adjudications.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
BUILDING — Any enclosed or open structure, other than a boundary wall
or fence, occupying more than four square feet of area and/or having a roof
supported by columns, piers, or walls.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY — A detached, subordinate building, the use of
which is customarily incidental and subordinate to that of the principal
building, which is located on the same lots as that occupied by the principal
building.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building which is enclosed within exterior walls
or fire walls, which is built, erected, and framed of component structural
parts, which is designated for housing, shelter, enclosure and support of
individuals, animals, or property of any kind, and which is a main structure
on a given lot.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:505
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — A line within a lot, designated on a plan as the
minimum required distance between any structure and the adjacent street
centerline.
CARTWAY — The surface of a street, drive or alley available for vehicular
traffic.
CHANNEL — A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and
banks which confine and conduct continuously or periodically flowing water.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at a street
intersection defined by a line of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street centerlines.
COMMISSION — The Borough of Elizabethtown Planning Commission or,
as authorized, the Commission's staff.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The official public document prepared in
accordance with the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247
of 1968, as amended, consisting of maps, charts, and textual material,
that constitutes a policy guide to decisions about the physical and social
development of a municipality.
CROSSWALK — A right of way, municipally or private owned, intended to
furnish access for pedestrians.
CUT — An excavation. The difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade. Also,
the material removed in excavation.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for
general public use.
DEED — A written instrument whereby an estate in real property is
conveyed.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this Chapter to do so, either
by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the court of common
pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Borough of
Elizabethtown lies.
DETENTION BASIN — A reservoir which temporarily contains storm water
runoff and releases it gradually into a watercourse or storm water facility.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
A. The Borough Council;
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:506
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this Chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DOUBLE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot with front and rear street frontage.
DRAINAGE FACILITY — Any ditch, gutter, culvert, storm sewer or other
structure or basin designed, intended or constructed for the purpose of
diverting surface waters from or carrying surface waters off streets, public
rights-of-way, parks, recreational areas or any part of any subdivision, land
development or contiguous land areas.
DWELLING TYPES —
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or,
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to
the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
C.
APARTMENT — A room or suite of rooms in a multiple family structure
which is arranged, designed, used or intended to be used as a
housekeeping unit for a single family.
A.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multiple family dwelling of up to three
stories in height designed for rental or condominium ownership of each
housekeeping unit.
B.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DWELLING — A building containing three or more
dwellings each accommodating one family.
C.
MULTIPLE FAMILY DEVELOPMENT — Two or more buildings
containing multiple family dwellings which are constructed upon the
same tract of land.
D.
QUADRAPLEX — A building containing four dwellings, each sharing
two common party walls which are constructed upon the same tract of
land.
E.
RESIDENTIAL CONVERSION UNIT — A building which has been
altered to accommodate one or more dwelling units provided that such
alteration is confined to the already existing structural shell and that
such alteration may not include an extension of the sides or an increase
in the height of the existing structure.
F.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:507
EASEMENT — A right-of-way granted for limited use of private land for a
public or quasi-public or private purpose, and within which the owner of the
property shall not have the right to make use of the land in a manner that
violates the right of the grantee.
EAWA — The Elizabethtown Area Water Authority or any agency successor
thereto.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer registered by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
EROSION — The removal of surface materials by the action of natural
elements.
FLOODPLAIN — The area of inundation which functions as a storage or
holding area for floodwater to a width required for a five-hundred-year
flood. The location of the floodplain shall be established in accordance with
§ 610.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a stream, plus any adjacent floodplain area,
that must be kept free of encroachment in order that the five-hundred-year
flood level will not increase 1/2 foot in flood height. (See figure below.)
A = FLOOD ELEVATION AFTER ENCROACHMENT
B = FLOOD ELEVATION BEFORE ENCROACHMENT
FLOODWAY FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain which could be
completely obstructed without increasing the water surface elevation of the
five-hundred-year flood more than 1/2 foot at any point.
FLOOD PROOFING — Any combination of structural and/or nonstructural
provisions, additions, changes or adjustments to structures or contents
SINGLE FAMILY ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSES) — Three or more
dwelling units each accommodating one family and attached side by
side through the use of a party wall with side yards adjacent to each
end unit.
G.
SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling unit accommodating a
single family and having two side yards.
H.
SINGLE FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — Two dwelling units each
accommodating one family which are attached side by side through the
use of a party wall with each dwelling unit having one side yard.
I.
TWO FAMILY DETACHED — Two dwelling units each accommodating
one family which are located one over the other with the building
having two side yards.
J.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:508
which are designed or adapted primarily to reduce or eliminate flood
damage to those structures or contents. Flood proofing shall be in
accordance with U.S. Army Corps of Engineers report entitled "EP
1165-2-314; Flood Proofing Regulations".
IMPROVEMENTS — Physical changes to the land, including but not limited
to, grading, paving, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and drains, improvements
to existing watercourses, sidewalks, street signs, monuments, water supply
facilities and sewage disposal facilities.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal, beneficial, equitable owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any conditions), a lessee (if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the right of the landowner), or
another person having a proprietary interest in land.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two Or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or,
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, lease-holds, condominiums, building groups or
other features;
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single family detached dwelling or
single family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or,
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:509
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property line of a lot (as shown
on the plan), excluding space within all streets and within all permanent
drainage easements, but including the areas of all other easements.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MONUMENT — A stone or concrete monument with a flat top at least four
inches in diameter or square. It is recommended that the bottom sides or
radius be at least two inches greater than the top to minimize movements
caused by frost. The monument should contain a copper or brass dowel and
be at least 30 inches in length.
MPC — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, the Act of July 31,
1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted by the Act of December
21, 1988, P.L. 1329, No. 170, as amended, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."
OFFICIAL MAP — An official map prepared in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended.
PENNDOT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation or any
agency successor thereto.
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough Council to guarantee that the proper construction of
improvements be made by the developer as a condition for the approval
of the final plan, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements and other
similar collateral or surety agreements.
PLAN —
FINAL PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision and/or land
development plan, including all supplementary data specified in this
Chapter.
A.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:510
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this Chapter.
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, whether
Federal, State or local, and including any corporation created by law for the
performance of certain specialized governmental functions, and the school
district.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. §§ 271 et
seq.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Elizabethtown. Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication shall
not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
LOT ADD-ON PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision plan including
all supplementary data specified in this Chapter.
B.
MINOR SUBDIVISION PLAN — A complete and exact subdivision plan
including all supplementary data specified in this Chapter.
C.
PRELIMINARY PLAN — A subdivision and/or land development plan
including all required supplementary data specified in this Chapter,
showing approximate locations.
D.
SKETCH PLAN — An informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale,
indicating salient existing features of a tract and its surroundings,
with the general layout of a proposal prepared in accordance with this
Chapter.
E.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and,
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:511
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RETENTION BASIN — A reservoir designed to retain stormwater runoff
with its primary release of water being through the infiltration of said water
into the ground.
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOT — A lot with front and rear street frontage,
where vehicular access is prohibited to and from the higher density street.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, pedestrian way, or for other public or private use.
RUNOFF — The surface water discharge and rate of discharge of a given
watershed after a full rain or snow that does not enter the soil but runs off
the surface of the land.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which soil or other surface material is
accumulated or deposited by wind, water, or gravity.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT DATA — The plan information, designed
in accordance with this Chapter, which identifies design and construction
details for managing the quantity and quality of stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Those controls and
measures (e.g., storm sewers, berms, terraces, bridges, dams, basins,
infiltration systems, swales, watercourses, and floodplains) used to effect a
stormwater management program.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of road visible to the driver of a passenger
vehicle at any given point in the road when viewing is unobstructed by
traffic.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private. Streets are
further classified according to the functions they perform:
ARTERIAL STREET — A street serving a large volume of comparatively
high-speed and long-distance traffic, including all facilities classified
as main and secondary highways by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
A.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street which, in addition to providing access
to abutting properties, intercepts local streets to provide a route giving
access to community facilities and/or other collector and arterial streets
(streets in industrial and commercial subdivisions shall generally be
considered collector streets).
B.
LOCAL STREET — A street used primarily to provide access to abutting
properties.
C.
§ 202 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 202
FWD:512
STREET, PRIVATE — A street not offered for dedication or whose dedication
was not accepted by the Borough of Elizabethtown.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development: Provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where in the judgment of the Borough
engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
Chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
SURVEYOR — A surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SWALE — A wide shallow ditch which gathers or carries surface water.
TRANSFERABLE DEVELOPMENT RIGHTS — The attaching of development
rights to specified lands which are desired by the Borough to be kept
undeveloped, but permitting those rights to be transferred from those
lands so that the development potential which they represent may occur
on other lands within the Borough of Elizabethtown where more intensive
development is deemed by the Borough of Elizabethtown to be appropriate.
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not been
graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a building.
WATERCOURSE — A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek
or swale, whether natural or man-made, for gathering or carrying surface
water.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use
of groundwater and surface-water resources within the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
HALF (PARTIAL) STREET — A street, generally parallel and adjacent
to a property line, having a lesser right-of-way width than normally
required for improvement and use of the street.
D.
MARGINAL ACCESS STREET — A local street, parallel and adjacent
to a major street (but separated from it by a reserve strip) which
provides access to abutting properties and control of intersections with
the major street.
E.
SERVICE STREET (ALLEY) — A minor right-of-way providing secondary
vehicular access to the side or rear of two or more properties.
F.
§ 202 FOREWORD § 202
FWD:513

Part 3
PLAN PROCESSING PROCEDURES
§ 301. General Statement. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 301]
Whenever a subdivision or land development is desired to be effected in
the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a plan of
the layout of such proposal shall be prepared, filed and processed with the
Borough Planning Commission and Borough Council in compliance with the
requirements of this Chapter.
§ 302. Sketch Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 302]
§ 303. Preliminary Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 303; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
A preliminary plan is required for applications which propose new streets,
all land development plans, and subdivision plans of seven or more lots. All
other plans may be submitted as final plans as required herein.
1. Prior to the filing of a subdivision or land development plan for review
and approval, the applicant is encouraged to submit a sketch plan to the
Planning Commission for advice on the requirements necessary to
achieve conformity with the standards of this and other applicable
Borough ordinances, as well as, to alert the applicant to other factors
which must be considered in the design of the subdivision or land
development.
2. The plan shall be clearly labeled "SKETCH PLAN" and should include
sufficient information to clearly indicate the character and extent of the
proposed subdivision or land development and its relationship to
existing conditions and facilities within the area in which it is to be
located. It is recommended that sketch plan submissions include a map
covering sufficient area to establish the location of the site and an
informal plan of any existing or proposed streets, buildings, lot
arrangement, utilities, significant natural features and other elements
within the subdivision or land development including topographic
contours.
3. At this stage, the Commission shall assist the applicant in determining
whether or not the site is located in an identified flood hazard area, in
which case, applicable floodplain management regulations shall be
complied with. The applicant shall also be advised of the accessibility of
public sewerage and public water to the development site.
4. Such discussions and sketch plan review will be considered as
confidential between the developer and Commission. Submission of a
sketch plan shall not constitute formal filing of a plan with the
Commission.
A. Submission of Preliminary Plan.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:515
(1) The applicant, at least 14 calendar days prior to the meeting of the
Planning Commission at which consideration is desired, shall file
with the Borough Manager nine paper copies and one electronic
copy of the preliminary plan containing the data required by this
chapter.
(2) In addition to filing with the Borough Planning Commission, the
applicant shall concurrently submit such plans to the Lancaster
County Planning Commission for review and report and to the
Borough Engineer for review and comment. The Planning
Commission will not make a recommendation and the Borough
Council will not act on the preliminary plan until the County report
is received or until the time period for receiving such report has
expired.
(3) All preliminary plans shall be prepared in accordance with the
provisions of Part 4 of this Chapter.
B. Distribution.
(1) The Borough Planning Commission shall distribute the preliminary
plans in the following manner:
(a) Borough staff: two copies.
(b) Planning Commission: five copies.
(c) Borough Council: two copies.
(2) If the subject site of the preliminary plan abuts a State highway, the
applicant shall submit one additional copy to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation.
C. Review of the Preliminary Plan.
(1) At their next regularly scheduled meeting, the Planning
Commission shall review the plan content in respect to
completeness. If the plan submission is found to be complete in
accordance with the requirements of this Chapter, the submission
shall be accepted with said acceptance to constitute official plan
filing by the applicant as of that meeting date, and the Commission
may proceed with plan review.
(2) If the plan documentation is found to be incomplete in respect to
the requirements of this Chapter, the Planning Commission shall
suspend review and the plan shall not be considered as being
officially filed. Within five business days thereafter, the applicant
shall be notified of the additional information required.
(3) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to
determine its conformance with the standards contained in this
Chapter and other applicable Borough ordinances, and shall
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:516
§ 304. Final Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 304; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
The following procedure shall be followed in the submission and processing
of final plans for proposed subdivisions and land developments.
require or recommend such changes and modifications as it deems
necessary.
(4) Act or recommendation of the Planning Commission which involves
engineering consideration shall be subject to review and comment
by the Borough Engineer, which shall be incorporated and
separately set forth with the analysis and recommendations of the
Commission to the Borough Council.
D. Planning Commission Action. The Planning Commission shall render a
decision on the preliminary plan within 60 days after the plan filing date
and submit copies of the plan documents and their recommendations to
the Borough Council for action.
E. Borough Council Action. The Borough Council will act upon preliminary
plans and render decisions within the time limits and in the manner
required by the MPC.
F. Preliminary Approval.
(1) Approval of the preliminary plan constitutes approval of the
proposed subdivision of land development in respect to the general
design, the approximate dimensions, and other planned features.
Preliminary approval binds the developer to the general scheme of
the plan as approved. Preliminary approval does not authorize the
recording, sale or transfer of lots or the installation of
improvements.
(2) Preliminary approval shall expire within five years after being
granted unless, due to extenuating circumstances an extension is
requested by the applicant and approved by the Borough Council.
Requests for extensions shall be submitted to the Borough
Manager 30 days prior to any prevailing expiration date.
(3) Following preliminary plan approval, the applicant shall submit to
the Borough Office two final paper copies and one final electronic
copy of the approved preliminary plan documenting any and all
revisions.
A. Submission of the Final Plan.
(1) The applicant shall, not later than five years after the date of
approval of the preliminary plan, submit nine paper copies and one
electronic copy of the required final plan documentation to the
Borough Manager at least 14 calendar days prior to the meeting of
the Planning Commission at which consideration is desired. Such
§ 303 FOREWORD § 304
FWD:517
§ 305. Final Plan Recordation. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 305; as
amended by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
documentation shall include all specifications and data required
under this Chapter.
(2) In addition to filing with the Borough Planning Commission, the
applicant shall concurrently submit such plans to the Lancaster
County Planning Commission for review and report and to the
Borough Engineer for review and comment; provided, however,
that if the procedures of the Lancaster County Planning
Commission require any certification from the Borough as part of
this submission, the applicant may submit such plan to the
Lancaster County Planning Commission after receipt of the
certification from the Borough. The Planning Commission will not
make a recommendation and the Borough Council will not act on
the final plan until the County report is received or until the time
period for receiving such report has expired or until the Borough
has been provided with confirmation that the applicant has
submitted the plan to the Lancaster County Planning Commission if
the applicant requires a certification from the Borough and cannot
submit the plan concurrently to the Lancaster County Planning
Commission.
(3) All final plans shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions
of Part 4 of this Chapter. Final plan submission may constitute only
that portion of the approved preliminary plan which the applicant
proposes to record and develop at the time, provided that such
portion conforms with all of the requirements of this Chapter. In
such cases, the applicant shall submit a tentative schedule for the
development of the balance of the tract.
B. Distribution. The final plan copies shall be distributed in the manner set
forth in § 303B of this Part 3.
C. Review of the final plan. The Borough Planning Commission shall
review the final plan in the same manner as set forth for review of
preliminary plans in § 303.
D. Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall submit its
recommendations and copies of the final plan to Borough Council for
action within the time periods required by the MPC.
E. Borough Council action. The Borough Council will act upon final plans
and render decisions within the time limits and in the manner required
by the MPC.
1. Upon approval and certification of a final plan, the applicant shall
record the plan in the office of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
Should the applicant fail to record the final plan within 90 days of the
Borough Council's final plan approval, the Council action on the plan
§ 304 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 305
FWD:518
§ 306. Minor Subdivision Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 306]
In the case where six or fewer lots are proposed to be subdivided from a
tract of land, the Borough Council, in response to a written request by the
applicant, may waive the submission of a preliminary plan provided such
proposal abuts an existing street and no new streets are involved. In such
case, the applicant shall submit a final plan as detailed in this Chapter.
§ 307. Lot Add-On Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 307]
In the case where land is being transferred to be combined with an adjacent
parcel involving fewer than three principal structures, for the sole purpose
of increasing the lot size of an adjacent contiguous lot, the Borough Council,
in response to a written request by the applicant, may waive the submission
of a preliminary plan provided such proposal abuts an existing street and
no new streets are involved. In such case, the applicant shall submit a final
plan as detailed in this Chapter.
§ 308. Modifications. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 308; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
shall be null and void unless the Council grants a waiver by extending
the effective time period of the approval.
2. The final plan shall be filed with the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds before proceeding with the sale of lots.
3. The final plan shall be recorded with the Lancaster County Recorder of
Deeds before proceeding with construction of any improvements and
before issuance of any permits under the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter
27] or the Uniform Construction Code.
4. No subdivision or land development plan may be recorded unless it
bears the endorsement of the Borough Planning Commission and
Borough Council.
5. Recording of the final plan, after approval of the Borough Council, shall
have the effect of an irrevocable offer to dedicate all streets and other
areas designated for public use shown thereon unless reserved by the
developer as hereinafter provided. The approval of Council shall not
impose any duty upon the Borough concerning maintenance or
improvement of any such dedicated street, or public use, until the
Council shall have accepted the same by ordinance or resolution.
6. The developer may place a notation on the final plan to the effect that
there is no offer of dedication to the public of certain designated uses,
areas or streets, in which event the title to such areas shall remain with
the owner, and the Borough Council shall assume no responsibility for
improvements or maintenance thereof, which fact shall also be noted on
the final plan.
§ 305 FOREWORD § 308
FWD:519
1. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this Chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this Chapter is
observed.
2. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this Chapter
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
3. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
4. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 308 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 308
FWD:520
Part 4
PLAN REQUIREMENTS
§ 401. General Statement. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 401]
The following information is to be shown on or submitted with subdivision
and land development plans by the applicant.
§ 402. Sketch Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 402]
The scale and sheet size of sketch plans shall be as required for preliminary
plans in §§ 403(1) and 403(4). The sketch plan shall show or be
accompanied by the following data, legible in every detail and drawn to
scale, but not necessarily containing precise dimensions:
§ 403. Preliminary Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 403; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Preliminary subdivision and land development plans shall be prepared by an
engineer or surveyor. The preliminary plan shall show, or be accompanied
by, or be prepared in accordance with the following:
A. Name and address of the developer (if applicable) and landowner.
B. Name of the individual and/or the firm that prepared the plan.
C. Location map with sufficient information to enable the Commission to
locate the property.
D. North arrow.
E. Written and graphic scales.
F. Existing tract boundaries accurately labeled with the name(s) of
adjacent landowner(s) and adjacent plan(s) of record.
G. Name of the municipality or municipalities in which the project is
located, including the location of any municipal boundary line(s) if
located within the vicinity of the tract.
H. Significant topographical and manmade features (e.g. bodies of water,
quarries, floodplains, tree masses, structures).
I. Proposed street, parking, building and lot layout.
J. Proposed land use; if several land uses are proposed, the location of
each land use shall be indicated.
K. Statement explaining the methods of water supply and sewage disposal
to be used.
A. Drafting Standards.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:521
(1) The plan shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of 10 feet, 20
feet, 50 feet or 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Dimensions shall be in feet and decimals; bearings shall be in
degrees, minutes and seconds. Lot line descriptions shall read in a
clockwise direction.
(3) The survey shall not have an error of closure greater than one foot
in 10,000 feet.
(4) The sheet size shall be no smaller than 18 inches by 22 inches and
no larger than 34 inches by 44 inches. If the plan is prepared in two
or more sections, a key map showing the location of the sections
shall be placed on each sheet. If more than one sheet is necessary,
each sheet shall be the same size and numbered to show the
relationship to the total number of sheets in the plan (e.g. Sheet 1
of 5).
(5) Plans shall be legible in every detail.
B. Location and Identification.
(1) The proposed project name or identifying title.
(2) The municipality in which the project is to be located. (If the tract
of land is located in the vicinity of a municipal boundary line, the
location of the boundary shall be shown.
(3) The name and address of the owner of the tract (or his authorized
agent), the developer/subdivider, and the firm that prepared the
plans.
(4) The file or project number assigned by the firm that prepared the
plan, the plan date and the date(s) of all plan revisions.
(5) A north arrow, a graphic scale, and a written scale.
(6) The entire existing tract boundary with bearings and distances. (If
a landowner is going to retain a single lot with a lot area in excess
of 10 acres, the boundary of that lot may be identified as a deed
plotting and may be drawn at any legible scale; if the retained lot
has a lot area of 10 or less acres, it must be described to the
accuracy requirements of this Chapter.
(7) The district and lot size and/or density requirements of the
prevailing zoning ordinance or a note that a zoning ordinance does
not exist.
(8) The location of existing lot line markers along the perimeter of the
entire existing tract.
(9) A location map, drawn to scale, relating the subdivision to at least
two intersections of road centerlines, including the approximate
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:522
distance to the intersection of the centerlines to the nearest
improved street intersection.
C. Existing Features.
(1) Existing contours at a minimum vertical interval of two feet for land
with average natural slope of 4% or less and at a minimum vertical
interval of five feet for more steeply sloping land. Contours shall be
accompanied by the location of the bench mark and a notation
indicating the datum used. Contours plotted from the United States
Geodetic Survey will not be accepted.
(2) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names
and plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans for
adjacent projects.
(3) Within 200 feet of the subject tract, the location of all existing legal
rights-of-way for public or private streets or drives, railroads,
public or private sewer mains, aqueducts, water mains and feeders,
fire hydrants, electric transmission lines, gas transmission lines, oil
transmission lines, watercourses, storm drainage facilities, and
other significant features.
(4) Within the subject tract, the locations, names and dimensions of
existing streets and alleys, location and sizes of existing sanitary
sewers and storm drains, domestic water locations, locations and
sizes of utilities, all buildings, floodplains, watercourses and
approximate locations of all tree masses.
D. Plan Information.
(1) Location, width and approximate grade of all proposed streets,
alleys, rights-of-way and easements, including cartway and right-ofway
widths.
(2) Layout of lots, lot numbers, proposed lot lines with approximate
dimensions and lot areas.
(3) Playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
(4) Location of any proposed site improvement such as curbs,
sidewalks, drives, street trees, fire hydrants and other relevant
data.
(5) Block and lot numbers in consecutive order (e.g. Block "A", Lots
one through 10; Block "B", Lots 11 through 22).
(6) In the case of land developments, the location and configuration of
proposed buildings, parking compounds, streets, access drives,
driveways, and all other significant planned facilities.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:523
(7) Total number of lots, units of occupancy, density and proposed land
use (if a multiple land use is proposed, an indication of the location
of each land use).
(8) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purpose for which easements or rights-of-way will be or have been
established.
(9) Building setback lines, with distances from the street centerline.
(10) Identification of buildings to be demolished.
(11) Typical street cross-section for each proposed street and typical
cross-section for any existing street which will be improved as part
of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire rightof-
way width.
(12) Street centerline profile for each proposed street shown on the
preliminary plan.
(13) The preliminary design of the proposed sanitary sewer mains,
water supply mains, and storm water management facilities. In
addition to the design calculations, assumptions, and supporting
data, a general plan shall include the approximate size, vertical
location, and horizontal location of all facilities.
(14) A statement on the plan indicating any proposed zoning
amendment or variance, if applicable.
(15) A statement on the plan indicating any existing or proposed
waivers granted by the Council.
(16) Proposed street names.
E. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
(1) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the entire
landholdings, a sketch of the future street system of the
unsubmitted part shall be furnished. The street system of the
submitted part will be considered in light of adjustments and
connections with future streets in the part not submitted.
(2) Where applicable, a plan revision module for land development
shall be the responsibility of the applicant and shall be prepared in
accordance with the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The completed module
shall accompany the preliminary plan submission.
(3) Where the subdivision and/or land development lies partially or
completely within any identified floodplain area or district or where
such activities border on any identified floodplain area or district,
the preliminary plan shall include the following information:
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:524
§ 404. Final Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 404; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001; by Ord. 872, 5/18/2006, Arts. I-III; and by Ord.
897, 7/17/2008]
Final subdivision and land development plans shall be prepared by an
engineer or surveyor. The final plan shall show, be accompanied by, or
prepared in accordance with the following:
(a) The location and elevation of proposed roads, utilities and
building sites, fills, flood or erosion protection facilities.
(b) The five-hundred-year flood elevations along with reference
material and/or calculations in a form and/or method
acceptable to the Borough Engineer.
(c) Areas subject to special deed restrictions.
(d) Contours at intervals of two or five feet depending upon the
slope of the land and identify accurately the boundaries of the
floodplain areas or districts.
(4) Certificate, signature and seal of the engineer or surveyor to the
effect that the survey and/or plan are correct.
(5) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
F. Filing Fee. The preliminary plan shall be accompanied by a check or
money order drawn to Elizabethtown Borough in an amount specified
on the fee schedule, adopted by resolution of the Borough Council.
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for a final
plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(A) of this Chapter.
B. Location and Identification. The same standards shall be required for a
final plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(B) of this Chapter.
C. Existing Features.
(1) Existing contours, if a preliminary plan was required and the
contours identified with the preliminary plan were altered, at a
minimum vertical interval of two feet for land with average natural
slope of 4% or less and at a minimum vertical interval of five feet
for more steeply sloping land. Contours shall be accompanied by
the location of the bench mark and a notation indicating the datum
§ 403 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:525
used. Contours plotted from the United States Geodetic Survey will
not be accepted. This information may be provided on separate
sheets and is not subject to recording with the final plans.
(2) The names of all immediately adjacent landowners and the names
and plan book record numbers of all previously recorded plans for
adjacent projects.
(3) Within the area immediately contiguous to the subject tract, the
locations, names and dimensions of existing streets and alleys, the
locations and sizes of existing storm drainage facilities, floodplains,
and all buildings.
D. Plan Information.
(1) Complete description of the centerline and the right-of-way line for
all new streets. This description shall include distances and
bearings with curve segments comprised of radius, tangent, arc,
and chord.
(2) Lot lines, with accurate bearings and distances, and lot areas for all
parcels. Curve segments shall be comprised of arc, chord, bearing
and distance. Along existing street rights-of-way the description
may utilize the existing deed lines or road centerlines; along all
proposed street rights-of-way, the description shall be prepared to
the right-of-way lines.
(3) Block and lot numbers in consecutive order (e.g. Block "A", Lots 1
through 10; Block "B", Lots 11 through 22).
(4) In the case of land development plans, the location and
configuration of proposed buildings, parking compounds, streets,
access drives, driveways, and all other significant facilities.
(5) Total number of lots, units of occupancy, density, and proposed land
use (if a multiple land use is proposed, an indication of the location
of each land use).
(6) Playgrounds, public buildings, public areas and parcels of land
proposed to be dedicated or reserved for public use.
(7) Location of any proposed site improvements such as curbs,
sidewalks, drives, street trees, fire hydrants and other relevant
data.
(8) All existing property lines, easements and rights-of-way and the
purposes for such easements, and the purpose for which easements
or rights-of-way will be or have been established.
(9) Building setback lines, with distances from the street centerline.
(10) Identification of buildings to be demolished.
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:526
(11) Typical street cross-section for each proposed street and a typical
crosssection for any existing street which will be improved as part
of the application. Each cross-section shall include the entire rightof-
way width.
(12) Final vertical and horizontal alignment for each proposed street,
sanitary sewer, storm sewer, and water distribution system. All
street profiles shall show at least the existing (natural) profile along
the centerline, proposed grade at the centerline, and the length of
all proposed vertical curves for streets. All water distribution,
storm sewer, and sanitary sewer systems shall provide manhole
locations and size and type of material. This information may be
provided on separate sheets and is not subject to recording with
the final plans.
(13) Source of title to the land included within the subject application,
as shown by the books of the Lancaster County Recorder of Deeds.
(14) Final street names.
(15) Location and material of all permanent monuments and lot line
markers, including a note that all monuments and lot line markers
are set or indicating when they will be set.
(16) In the case of land development plans, a grading plan. The grading
plan shall include finished grades and ground-floor elevations. This
information may be provided on separate sheets and is not subject
to recording with the final plans. The plan shall comply with all
provisions of the Elizabethtown Borough Stormwater Management
and Earth Disturbance Ordinance of 2006 and as may be amended
from time to time.61
(17) Identification of any waivers granted by the Council.
(18) The following stormwater management data for all plans, which
shall be designed in accordance with the Elizabethtown Borough
Stormwater Management and Earth Disturbance Ordinance of
2006 and as may be amended from time to time.62 This information
may be provided on a sheet with other data or on separate sheets
and need not necessarily be recorded with the final plan. In the
case of any dispute in the methodology used in the design of any
stormwater management plan and/or in the presentation of such
information, the Borough Council shall make the final
determination on the design criteria, methodology, and form of
presentation.
(a) All calculations, assumptions, criteria and references used in
the design of the stormwater management facilities, the
61.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management.
§ 404 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:527
establishment of existing facilities' capacities, and the pre- and
post-development peak discharges.
(b) All plans and profiles of the proposed stormwater management
facilities, including the horizontal and vertical location, size,
and type of material. This information shall be to a detail
required for construction of the facilities.
(c) For all basins, a plotting or tabulation of the storage volumes
and discharge curves with corresponding water-surface
elevations, inflow and outflow hydrographs.
(d) For all basins which hold two acre-feet or more of water and
have an embankment that is six feet or more in height, soil
structure and characteristics shall be provided. An engineer
shall prepare plans and data. These submissions shall provide
design solutions for the frost-heave potential, spring-swell
potential, soil-bearing strength, water infiltration, soil setting
characteristics, fill and backfilling procedures, and soil
treatment techniques as required to protect the improvements
for adjacent structures.
(e) All erosion and sedimentation control measures, temporary as
well as permanent, including the staging of earth-moving
activities, in sufficient detail to clearly indicate their function.
The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall meet all
requirements of the DEP Erosion and Sedimentation Control
Manual. The applicant shall demonstrate that the applicant has
submitted the erosion and sedimentation control plan to the
Conservation District for review.
(f) The guidelines for lot grading within subdivisions. This
information shall identify the direction of stormwater runoff
flow within each lot and the areas where stormwater flows will
be concentrated.
(g) Finished first-floor elevations for all residential units shall be
shown on the plan.
(h) A note on the plan indicating any area that is not to be offered
for dedication, along with a statement that the Borough is not
responsible for maintenance of any area not dedicated to and
accepted for public use and that no alteration to swales or
basins or placement of structures shall be permitted within
easements.
(i) Designation of limits of on-site watershed areas, including a
map which shows the off-site watershed areas.
(j) Description of any ownership and maintenance program, in a
recordable form, that clearly sets forth the ownership and
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:528
maintenance responsibilities for all temporary and permanent
stormwater management facilities, including the following:
1) Description of the method and extent of the maintenance
requirements.
2) When maintained by a private entity, identification of an
individual, corporation, association, or other entity
responsible for ownership and maintenance.
3) When maintained by a private entity, a copy of the legally
binding document, in recordable form, which provides that
the Borough shall have the right to:
a) Inspect the facilities at any time.
b) Require the private entity to take corrective measures
and assign the private entity reasonable time periods
for any necessary action.
c) Authorize maintenance to be done and lien the cost of
the work against the properties of the private entity
responsible for maintenance.
4) Establishment of suitable easements for access to
stormwater management facilities.
E. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
(1) Notification from the Department of Environmental Protection that
approval of the Sewer Facility Plan Revision (Plan Revision Module
for Land Development) or supplement has been granted.
(2) Certificate, signature and seal of the engineer to the effect that the
survey and/or plan are correct.
(3) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, to the
effect that the subdivision or land development shown on the plan
is the deed of the owner, that all those signing are all owners of the
property shown on the survey and plan, and that they desire the
same to be recorded as such. This must be dated following the last
change or revision of said plan.
(4) A certificate of dedication of streets and other public property.
(5) A note to be placed on the plan indicating any area that is not to be
offered for dedication, if applicable.
(6) The submission of a controlling agreement in accordance with the
provisions of this Chapter when an application proposes to
establish a street which is not offered for dedication to the public
use.
§ 404 FOREWORD § 404
FWD:529
(7) Proposed protective covenants in conjunction with the land, if any.
(8) A final erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to the rules
and regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and evidence that any required erosion and
sedimentation control permit has been issued, if applicable.
(9) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the following information shall be required as part
of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
(a) Report on how the floodplain areas are determined and what
effect the proposed improvements will have on the floodplain.
The report shall include any references, design criteria, and/or
calculators which are needed by the Borough Engineer to
verify the flood elevations.
(b) The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings,
structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed within
any identified floodplain area or district. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two feet and identify accurately
the boundaries of the floodplain areas, and shall be verified by
the Borough Engineer.
(c) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the
Department of Environmental Protection and any other
Commonwealth agency where any alteration or relocation of a
stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition, documentation
shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or
relocation. The Department of Community Affairs and the
Federal Insurance Administrator shall also be notified by the
applicant whenever any such activity is proposed.
(10) Any other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or reports as may
be required by the Borough Council or Borough Planning
Commission in the enforcement of this Chapter. The Lancaster
County Planning Commission Certificate (Appendix No. 4 or other
certificate language as may be approved by the Lancaster County
Planning Commission) must also be placed on the plan.
(11) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
§ 404 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 404
FWD:530
§ 405. Minor Subdivision Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 405; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
Minor subdivision plans shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor and
shall include the following information:
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
F. Filing Fee. The final plan shall also be accompanied by a check or
money order drawn to Elizabethtown Borough in an amount specified
on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough Council.
G. Reports. The applicant shall provide the same reports as required to be
submitted with a preliminary plan as set forth in § 403E(3) and shall
also provide:
(1) A final hydrologic report as required by the Stormwater
Management and Earth Disturbance Ordinance of 2006 and as may
be amended from time to time.63
(2) A stormwater management and declaration of easement in the form
required by the Stormwater Management Ordinance.
H. If the final plan proposes an enlargement of an existing lot, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the proposed deed to transfer the land
and a copy of the proposed deed with a perimeter description for the lot
as enlarged.
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for a minor
subdivision plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(A) of this
Chapter.
B. Location and Identification. The same standards shall be required for a
minor subdivision plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(B) of
this Chapter.
C. Plan Information. The same standards shall be required for a minor
subdivision plan as specified for a final plan in § 404(D) of this Chapter.
D. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
(1) Certificate, signature and seal of the engineer or surveyor to the
effect that the survey and/or plan are correct.
(2) Notification from the Department of Environmental Protection that
approval of the sewer facility plan revision (plan revision module
for land development) or supplement has been granted, or notice
from the Borough Engineer that a plan revision or supplement is
not necessary.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management.
§ 404 FOREWORD § 405
FWD:531
(3) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgement of deeds and signed by the landowner, to
the effect that the subdivision or land development shown on the
plan is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those signing are
all the owners of the property shown on the survey and plan, and
that they desire the same to be recorded as such.
(4) Proposed protective covenants in conjunction with the land, if any.
(5) A final erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to the rules
and regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and evidence that any required erosion and
sedimentation control permit has been issued, if applicable.
(6) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
floodplain area, the following information shall be required as part
of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
(a) The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings,
structures, roads, and public utilities to be constructed within
any identified floodplain area or district. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two feet and identify accurately
the boundaries of the floodplain areas, and shall be verified by
the Borough Engineer.
(b) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the
Department of Environmental Protection and any other
Commonwealth agency where any alteration or relocation of a
stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition, documentation
shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or
relocation. The Department of Community Affairs and the
Federal Insurance Administrator shall also be notified by the
applicant whenever any such activity is proposed.
(7) Any other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or reports as may
be required by the Borough Council or Borough Planning
Commission in the enforcement of this Chapter.
(8) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
§ 405 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 405
FWD:532
§ 406. Lot Add-On Plan. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 406; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
Lot add-on plans shall be prepared by an engineer or surveyor and shall
include the following information:
E. Filing Fee. The minor subdivision plan shall also be accompanied by a
check or money order drawn to Elizabethtown Borough in an amount
specified on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough
Council.
F. If the final plan proposes an enlargement of an existing lot, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the proposed deed to transfer the land
and a copy of the proposed deed with a perimeter description for the lot
as enlarged.
A. Drafting Standards. The same standards shall be required for a lot addon
plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(A) of this Chapter.
B. Location and Identification. The same standards shall be required for a
lot add-on plan as specified for a preliminary plan in § 403(B) of this
Chapter.
C. Plan Information. The same standards shall be required for a lot add-on
plan as specified for a final plan in § 404(D) of this Chapter.
D. Certificates, Notifications and Reports.
(1) Certificate, signature and seal of the engineer or surveyor to the
effect that the survey and/or plan are correct.
(2) Notification from the Department of Environmental Protection that
approval of the sewer facility plan revision (plan revision module
for and development) or supplement has been granted, or notice
from the Borough Engineer that a plan revision or supplement is
not necessary.
(3) A statement, duly acknowledged before an officer authorized to
take acknowledgment of deeds and signed by the landowner, to the
effect that the subdivision or land development shown on the plan
is the act and the deed of the owner, that all those signing are all
the owners of the property shown on the survey and plan, and that
they desire the same to be recorded as such.
(4) Proposed protective covenants in conjunction with the land, if any.
(5) A final erosion and sedimentation control plan pursuant to the rules
and regulation of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and evidence that any required erosion and
sedimentation control permit has been issued, if applicable.
(6) When any portion of the tract proposed for subdivision or land
development is located within an identified flood district or
§ 405 FOREWORD § 406
FWD:533
floodplain area, the following information shall be required as part
of the final plan and shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor:
(a) The exact location and elevation of all proposed buildings,
structures, roads and public utilities to be constructed within
any identified floodplain area or district. All such maps shall
show contours at intervals of two feet and identify accurately
the boundaries of the floodplain area and shall be verified by
the Borough Engineer.
(b) Submission of the final plan shall also be accompanied by all
required permits and related documentation from the
Department of Environmental Protection and any other
Commonwealth agency where any alteration or relocation of a
stream or watercourse is proposed. In addition, documentation
shall be submitted indicating that all affected adjacent
municipalities have been notified of the proposed alteration or
relocation. The Department of Community Affairs and the
Federal Insurance Administrator shall also be notified by the
applicant whenever any such activity is proposed.
(7) Any other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or reports as may
be required by the Borough Council or Borough Planning
Commission in the enforcement of this Chapter.
(8) If water is to be provided by means other than private wells owned
and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to
the Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a
certified public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot
owners, or by a municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of
a Certificate of Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public
Utility Commission or an application for such certificate, a
cooperative agreement or a commitment or agreement to serve the
area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable.
E. Filing Fee. The lot add-on plan shall also be accompanied by a check or
money order drawn to Elizabethtown Borough in an amount specified
on the fee schedule adopted by resolution of the Borough Council.
F. If the final plan proposes an enlargement of an existing lot, the
applicant shall provide a copy of the proposed deed to transfer the land
and a copy of the proposed deed with a perimeter description for the lot
as enlarged.
§ 406 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 406
FWD:534
Part 5
IMPROVEMENT GUARANTEE
§ 501. Completion of Improvements or Guarantee thereof
Prerequisite to final Plat Approval. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; § 502; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this Chapter
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this Chapter have been installed
in accordance with this Chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this Chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough of Elizabethtown financial
security in an amount sufficient to cover the costs of such
improvements or common amenities including basins and other related
drainage facilities, recreational facilities, open space improvements, or
buffer or screen plantings which may be required.
2. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council, shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer.
3. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough of Elizabethtown may approve, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld, Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending
institution irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow
accounts in such lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable
financial security for the purposes of this Section.
4. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
Federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
Commonwealth.
5. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 501
FWD:535
6. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough of Elizabethtown may adjust the
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
the completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of
the ninetieth day after either the original date scheduled for completion
or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment,
the Borough or Elizabethtown may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security equals
said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the developer in
accordance with this subsection.
7. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough
of Elizabethtown, upon the recommendation of the Borough engineer,
may refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the
applicant or developer and the Borough of Elizabethtown are unable to
agree upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in this
Commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Borough of Elizabethtown
and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by the third
engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final
estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the
services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough of
Elizabethtown and the applicant or developer.
8. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
9. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to
improvements in future section or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
10. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
§ 501 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 501
FWD:536
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution
of an amount as estimated by the Borough engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
11. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this Section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
12. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough of Elizabethtown,
financial security to assure proper completion and maintenance thereof
shall be posted in accordance with the regulations of the controlling
public utility or municipal authority and shall not be included within the
financial security as otherwise required by this Section.
13. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this Section, the Borough of Elizabethtown shall not
condition the issuance of building, grading or other permits relating to
the erection or placement of improvements, including buildings, upon
the lots or land as depicted upon the final plat upon actual completion
of the improvements depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if
said financial security has been provided, occupancy permits for any
building or buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the
improvement of the streets providing access to and from existing public
roads to such building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise
permanently passable condition, as well as the completion of all other
improvements as depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot
or lots or beyond the lot or lots in question if such improvements are
§ 501 FOREWORD § 501
FWD:537
§ 502. Release from Improvement Bond. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985,
§ 503; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/
2008
necessary for the reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or
buildings.
14. All forms of improvement guarantees, as listed herein, shall contain
language acceptable to the Borough insuring that the respective
guarantee is automatically renewable, and shall not expire or terminate
without the expressed prior written approval of the Borough.
1. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
2. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
3. If the Borough Council or the Borough engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
4. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
5. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
engineer.
6. Where herein reference is made to the Borough engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
§ 501 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 502
FWD:538
7. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough of
Elizabethtown for the reasonable and necessary expense incurred for
the inspection or improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted
by resolution of the Borough Council and as from time to time amended.
Such expense shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary
and customary fees charged by the Borough engineer or consultant for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or
consultant to the Borough of Elizabethtown when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
A. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough of Elizabethtown that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Borough of
Elizabethtown shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application or any approval or permit related to
development due to the applicant's request over disputed engineer
expenses.
B. If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough of
Elizabethtown and the applicant cannot agree on the amount of
expenses which are reasonable and necessary, then the applicant
and the Borough of Elizabethtown shall jointly, by mutual
agreement, appoint another professional engineer licensed as such
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to review the said expenses
and make a determination as to the amount thereof which is
reasonable and necessary.
C. The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
D. In the event that the Borough of Elizabethtown and applicant
cannot agree upon the professional engineer to be appointed within
20 days of the billing date, then, upon application of either party,
the President Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial
district in which the Borough of Elizabethtown is located (or if at
the time there be no President Judge, then the senior active judge
then sitting) shall appoint such engineer, who, in that case, shall be
neither the Borough engineer nor any professional engineer who
has been retained by, or performed services for, the Borough of
Elizabethtown or the applicant within the preceding five years.
E. The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
§ 502 FOREWORD § 502
FWD:539
the decision is less than the original bill by 1,000 or more, the
Borough of Elizabethtown shall pay the fee of the professional
engineer, but otherwise the Borough of Elizabethtown and the
applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the fee of the appointed professional
engineer.
8. No improvement shall be considered complete until the developer shall
submit to the Borough one Mylar and two prints of the as-constructed
plan, at the same size and scale of the approved plans, showing the
following:
A. Actual location of all concrete monuments and/or markers which
were found or set at all angle breaks, points of curvature and
tangents around the perimeter of the total tract. When the outside
perimeter of a tract falls within or along an existing road right-ofway,
then the right-of-way of that roadway shall be monumented at
the above-referenced points.
B. Actual location of all iron pins or drill holes in curbs for all
individual lot lines.
C. Actual cul-de-sac radius.
D. Actual horizontal location of cartway center line versus right-ofway
center line should be indicated by dimension.
E. Actual horizontal location of floodplain by elevation and dimension
from property line.
F. Actual horizontal location and cross-section of swales and
accompanying easements.
G. Actual horizontal location and vertical location of stormwater
management facilities, including type and size of drainage pipes.
H. Detention Basin.
(1) Actual contours of the detention basin.
(2) Actual outlet structure details, including type, size and inverts
of outlet pipes.
(3) Actual elevation of the embankment and emergency spillway.
(4) Table showing the stage/storage/discharge curve for the
constructed conditions.
9. If an improvement has been dedicated to the Borough, such
improvement shall not be considered complete until the developer has
presented a deed of dedication in a form acceptable to the Borough
Solicitor, has presented a title insurance policy or certificate of title
demonstrating good and marketable title, and has paid any fees
required to process the acceptance of the dedication.
§ 502 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 503
FWD:540
§ 503. Dedication of Improvements. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 504]
All improvements shall be deemed to be private improvements and only
for the benefit of the specific project until such time as the same have
been offered for dedication and formally accepted by the Borough Council
by formal document. No responsibility of any kind with respect to
improvements shown on the final plan shall be transferred until the
improvements have been formally accepted.
§ 504. Remedies to Effect Completion of Improvements. [Ord. 663,
6/20/1985; as added by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this Chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
§ 503 FOREWORD § 504
FWD:541

Part 6
DESIGN STANDARDS
§ 601. Application. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 601; as amended by Ord.
897, 7/17/2008]
1. The standards and requirements contained in this Chapter shall apply
as minimum design standards for subdivisions and/or land
developments within the Borough. In addition, subdivisions and/or land
developments shall be designed to comply with the requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], the Stormwater Management
Ordinance [Chapter 27], and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation, as applicable.
2. All proposed subdivisions and/or land developments shall be designed,
laid out, arranged, constructed and coordinated with all presently
existing facilities and improvements which serve the tract proposed to
be developed, including but not limited to the (a) transportation
network, (b) sewer collection, conveyance and treatment facilities, (c)
water supply and distribution facilities, and (d) stormwater
management facilities, as necessary to accommodate prospective
traffic, provide adequate sewer and water service, promote proper
stormwater management, facilitate fire protection, prevent flooding
and conform to the Comprehensive Plan, including any urban growth
boundary, the Official Map, and any regulations or plans adopted in
furtherance thereof. All proposed subdivisions and/or land
developments shall also be designed, laid out, arranged, constructed
and coordinated to ensure that abutting properties will continue to
have safe and convenient access in accordance with the standards of
this Chapter or, if such properties do not presently have such access, to
have access at least equal to the level existing prior to the proposed
subdivision and/or land development. The applicant shall submit
studies and reports with the preliminary plan and the final plan which
shall clearly identify any assumed, proposed and required
improvements to existing facilities. If an applicant submits a study,
report or plan which contains improvements assumed to be installed by
others and compliance with the design standards in this Chapter is
based upon the completion of such assumed improvements, the design
standards of this Chapter shall not be considered as met unless the
applicant presents evidence that a governmental entity has budgeted
funds and/or has entered into contracts for the assumed improvements
or unless a plan for another development which proposes the
installation of such improvements has been approved and recorded.
A. Whenever the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27] provides that the use
proposed by the applicant for subdivision and/or land development
approval shall constitute a use by special exception or a conditional
use, the applicant shall obtain such special exception or conditional
use approval from the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council,
as applicable, prior to the submission of the preliminary plan. The
§ 601 FOREWORD § 601
FWD:543
§ 602. Blocks and Lots. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 602]
plan shall be designed and developed in accordance with any
conditions which the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as
applicable, has imposed upon such approval.
B. Whenever the applicant proposes to develop a subdivision and/or
land development in a manner that would require a variance from
any requirements of the Zoning Ordinance [Chapter 27], the
applicant shall obtain such variance from the Zoning Hearing
Board prior to the submission of the preliminary plan. The plan
shall be designed and developed in accordance with any conditions
which the Zoning Hearing Board has imposed upon the grant of
such variance or variances.
C. Whenever all or a portion of the land contained within an
application for subdivision or land development approval
constitutes all or a portion of land included in a prior subdivision or
land development plan approved by the Borough or the County
Planning Commission and recorded in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds in and for Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, the plan shall
comply with all conditions, restrictions and notes imposed on the
prior approval and/or included upon the recorded subdivision or
land development plan. The applicant shall identify all prior
recorded subdivision and/or land development plans of which all or
a portion of the land contained in the plan was a part and all
conditions, restrictions and notes which affect the current
application. Failure to identify all applicable conditions,
restrictions and notes of record on prior plans constitutes a
violation of this Chapter. The applicant shall submit with the
application for preliminary plan approval a statement identifying
the prior plans reviewed; the conditions, restrictions and notes
which would impact development in accordance with the plan for
which approval has been requested; and an explanation of the
manner in which the proposed plan has been designed to comply
with such conditions, restrictions and notes. This information shall
be signed by the applicant or the applicant's engineer or landscape
architect.
1. The configuration of blocks and lots shall be based upon the lot area
requirements, salient natural features, existing man-made features and
the proposed type of structure. Lot configurations should provide for
flexibility in building locations, while providing safe vehicular and
pedestrian circulation.
2. Residential Blocks. All blocks in a residential subdivision shall have
maximum length of 1,600 feet.
3. Nonresidential Blocks. Blocks in nonresidential areas may vary from
the requirement of § 602(2) when required by the nature of the use.
§ 601 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 602
FWD:544
§ 603. Building Setback Lines. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 603]
§ 604. Easements. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 604]
Easements for sanitary sewer facilities, stormwater drainage facilities,
public utilities or pedestrian access shall meet the standards listed below.
Adequate provisions shall be made for traffic circulation and
satisfactory fire protection.
4. Lot and Parcel Configuration.
A. Whenever practical, side lot lines shall be radial to street lines.
B. In order to avoid jurisdictional problems, lot lines shall, whenever
feasible, follow Borough boundaries rather than cross them.
C. All lots shall front on a street, except a service street.
D. Double frontage lots are prohibited except where provided as
reverse frontage lots. Reverse frontage lots are only permitted
when a reduction of driveway intersections along a street with a
high volume of vehicular movements is desired. All reverse
frontage shall include an identification of the frontage for use as a
road access.
1. A building setback line shall be provided along each street. The area in
front of the building setback line shall be preserved from structural
development.
2. In the case of corner lots, the setback from each adjacent street shall
apply.
A. To the fullest extent possible, easements shall be adjacent to property
lines.
B. Nothing shall be placed, planted, set or put within the area of an
easement that would adversely affect the function of the easement or
conflict with the easement agreement.
C. The applicant shall reserve easements where storm water or surface
water drainage facilities are existing or proposed, whether located
within or beyond the boundaries of the property.
D. All easements shall clearly identify who has the right-of-access and
responsibility of maintenance.
E. In existing structures, the excessive use of easements, as determined by
Borough Council upon recommendation from the Planning Commission,
shall be sufficient grounds for denying the approval of a preliminary or
final plan. Excessive use of easements may be defined as those
easements which may eventually create undesirable conditions for
future property owners.
§ 602 FOREWORD § 605
FWD:545
§ 605. Survey Monuments and Markers. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985,
§ 605]
§ 606. Streets. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 606]
1. Permanent stone or concrete monuments shall be accurately placed
along at least one side of each street at the beginning and end of all
curves and at all angles.
2. Markers shall be set at all points where lot lines intersect curves and/or
other property lines.
3. Monuments shall be of concrete or stone, with a flat top having a
minimum width or diameter of four inches and a minimum length of 30
inches. Concrete monuments shall be marked with a 3/4 inch copper or
brass dowel; stone or precast monuments shall be marked on the top
with a proper inscription and a drill hole. Markers shall consist of iron
pipes or steel bars at least 30 inches long and not less than 3/4 of an
inch in diameter.
4. All monuments and markers shall be placed by a registered engineer or
surveyor so that the scored or marked point shall coincide exactly with
the point of intersection of lines being monumented or marked.
5. All existing and proposed monuments and lot lines markers shall be
delineated on the final plan.
1. General Requirements. The following general requirements and
minimum standards shall be followed on all subdivision and land
development applications:
A. Improper Width. Where a subdivision abuts an existing street of
improper width or alignment, the Borough may require the
dedication of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the
alignment.
B. Resubdivision. If the lots in the development are large enough for
resubdivision, or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided, suitable
access and street openings for such an eventuality shall be
provided.
C. Clear Sight Triangle. There shall be provided and maintained at all
intersections a clear sight triangle with a line of sight between
points 100 feet from the intersection of the street centerlines. Clear
sight triangles shall be indicated on all plans. No building or other
obstruction that would obscure the vision of a motorist shall be
permitted within these areas.
D. Driveways. Driveways shall be so located as to provide reasonable
sight distances at intersection with streets. Driveway location shall
be determined on all land development plans. Subdivision plans
§ 605 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 606
FWD:546
§ 607. Curbs and Sidewalks. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 607; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Curbs and sidewalks, on both sides of each street, shall be required in any
subdivision or land development. Curbs and sidewalks shall be designed
and installed in conformance with the standards contained in the Borough
of Elizabethtown Curb and Sidewalk Ordinance, No. 693, as amended
[Chapter 21, Part 1].
§ 608. Stormwater Management and Floodplain Controls. [Ord. 663,
6/20/1985, § 608; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord.
872, 5/18/2006, Art. IV]
All subdivision and land development applications shall include stormwater
management data. All stormwater management, collection, conveyance and
floodplain considerations shall be accomplished and data prepared and
supplied in accordance with the provisions of the Elizabethtown Borough
Stormwater Management and Earth Disturbance Ordinance of 2006, and as
may be amended from time to time, and the Elizabethtown Borough Zoning
Ordinance.64
§ 609. Erosion and Sedimentation. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; § 609; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord.872, 5/18/2006, Art.
V]
may delineate location or include a notice of conformity to this
specification.
2. Design Standards. Design standards for all streets are contained in the
Borough of Elizabethtown Street Improvement and Maintenance
Ordinance, No. 667, as amended [Chapter 21, Part 7]. All streets
planned in any subdivision or land development shall conform to these
standards.
3. Improvement Standards. All street improvements, paving and
construction of subdivisions and land developments shall conform to
the Borough of Elizabethtown Street Improvement and Maintenance
Ordinance, No. 667, as amended [Chapter 21, Part 7].
1. All development applications which involve grading or excavation shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 102 of the Rules and
Regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection, as amended. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
secure approval from the Department of Environmental Protection.
Approval of plans by the Commission or Borough Council shall not be
construed as approval under such regulations.
2. An erosion and sedimentation control plan must be prepared for a
single lot or more where subdivision, land development or other earth
64.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management, and Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 606 FOREWORD § 609
FWD:547
§ 610. Floodplain. [Ord. 663. 6/20/1985, § 610]
All subdivision and land development plans shall be submitted in
accordance with, and reviewed by the Planning Commission and Borough
Council to insure conformity with, the Borough of Elizabethtown Floodplain
Ordinance, No. 608, as amended [Chapter 8].
§ 611. Landscaping. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 611; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
moving activity is proposed. The plan must be in accordance with the
rules and regulations of the Department of Environmental Protection
noted above and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law, Act 222, as
amended.
3. Such erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the
Borough Engineer and Lancaster County Conservation District for
review as part of the preliminary and final plan applications.
4. All provisions of the Elizabethtown Borough Stormwater Management
and Earth Disturbance Ordinance of 2006, and as may be amended
from time to time, shall be complied with in conjunction with any
development application.65
1. Existing Wooded Areas. Existing wooded areas shall be protected to
prevent unnecessary destruction. Trees with a caliper of six inches or
more as measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet above existing grade, shall
not be removed unless they are located within the proposed cartway or
sidewalk portion of the street right-of-way, or within 15 feet of the
foundation area of a proposed building. In areas where trees are
retained, the original grade level shall be maintained if possible, so as
not to disturb the trees.
2. Where existing trees are removed along the street right-of-way,
supplemental planting, in the form of appropriate street trees, shall be
introduced. Such trees shall be planted at intervals of between 50 feet
and 100 feet and preferably in random patterns.
3. Replacement trees shall be of a minimum trunk caliper of two inches at
a height of six inches above finished grade.
4. Street Trees. Street trees are required to be planted between every 50
and 100 feet in random patterns in all subdivision and land
development plans, except minor subdivision and lot add-on plans.
5. Trees shall be planted between the street right-of-way line and the
building set-back line. The tree growth shall not interfere with the
street cartway, sidewalk or any utility line.
65.Editor's Note: See Ch. 17, Stormwater Management.
§ 609 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 611
FWD:548
§ 612. Specific Traffic Control and Access Requirements. [Ord. 663,
6/20/1985, § 612; as amended by Ord. 863, 10/20/2005, § 2; and by
Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
The following specific traffic control and access requirements shall be met
for developments which produce 100 peak-hour directional trips:
6. Ground Cover. Ground cover shall be provided on all areas of the
project to prevent soil erosion. All areas which are not covered by
paving, stone or other solid material shall be protected with a
vegetative growth.
A. If any traffic signals are to be installed, the distance between any new
and/or existing signals shall be at least 1,000 feet, unless it can be
demonstrated that adjacent traffic signals can operate sufficiently at
lesser distances.
B. Design of proposed development access points shall take into
consideration the horizontal and vertical grades of the existing road
network in the traffic study area to permit safe and convenient access
to the site as defined in the latest PennDOT standards and regulations.
The developer shall demonstrate that each access point is located so as
to provide the optimum safe and convenient access given the horizontal
and vertical grades of the existing road network. The developer shall
present all engineering data necessary to demonstrate that its
proposed access point or points meet this standard. If the developer
desires to locate an access point at a location which does not provide
the optimum safe and convenient access given existing conditions, the
developer shall demonstrate that the developer shall take action
necessary to provide equally safe and convenient access. All
modifications required to meet these regulations will be the
responsibility of the developer.
C. The developer shall demonstrate, by using the latest PennDOT
standards and regulations, that the proposed use will not create traffic
patterns and movements which will jeopardize the traveling public.
(1) Stacking of sufficient length shall be provided in all traffic lanes on
the site and on abutting roadways to ensure that there shall be no
blockage of through traffic. The design and length of the stacking
lanes shall be justified and supported by the queuing analysis
required as part of the traffic study.
(2) Street and/or access drives to and within the site shall be designed
in a manner that blockage of through traffic by vehicles attempting
to enter or exit on these streets or access drives will not occur.
(3) Acceleration, deceleration and turning lanes within the site and on
the abutting roadways shall be of sufficient lengths to accomplish
their intended use.
§ 611 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:549
D. If reduction of the speed limit, installation of traffic control devices,
limitation of parking or turning movements or similar measures are
required to mitigate traffic impacts upon Borough or State highways,
the applicant shall present traffic studies performed in accordance with
PennDOT regulations and Publication No. 201, Engineering and Traffic
Study Regulations. The erection or the installation of such traffic
control devices shall be in accordance with PennDOT regulations. If the
enactment of an ordinance is necessary to effectuate the traffic
regulations or the installation of the traffic control device, the applicant
shall reimburse the Borough for all expenses in the preparation and
enactment of the necessary ordinance.
E. No street or access drive shall be located in a manner which would limit
access to or exiting from abutting properties gaining access from the
existing street with which a proposed street or access drive will
intersect, unless the developer provides such lots with alternate access
from the proposed street system or internal circulation system of the
proposed development in a manner acceptable to each affected lot
owner. It shall be the burden of the applicant to demonstrate that such
access is acceptable to all owners of an affected lot. For the purpose of
this provision, limitation of access shall include the limitation of turning
movements into or exiting the abutting property or properties gaining
access from the existing street, whether by traffic regulations,
installation of barriers to prevent turning movements, installation of
additional traffic lanes in front of a property, or difficulties or delays
resulting from increased traffic flows.
F. Where new intersections are being established to serve as access to the
proposed development, these intersections must be designed to at least
operate at Level of Service C or better.
G. For access points to the proposed development and any major
intersections on abutting streets where traffic signal control may be
required or is being proposed, a traffic signal warrant analysis shall be
performed in accordance with the requirements of PennDOT
Publication 201 or any future PennDOT regulations governing
installation of traffic signals. A left-turn lane and/or a right-turn lane
shall be provided by the developer if the traffic signal warrant analysis
or any traffic signal permit issued by PennDOT requires such turning
lane(s). The developer shall additionally provide an analysis to
determine the type of signal phasing required. All costs associated with
any traffic signal proposed by the developer shall be borne by the
developer, and the Borough shall not execute any traffic signal permit
application if the execution of the application will require the Borough
to assume any costs whatsoever.
H. Emergency traffic signal preemption shall be addressed and provided
as required by PennDOT regulations and as requested by emergency
service providers.
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 612
FWD:550
§ 613. Sanitary Sewage and Water Supply. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985,
§ 613; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 897, 7/17/
2008]
I. Additional left and right turning lanes shall be provided to address the
existing roadway site conditions and access to the proposed
development at the cost of the developer where the traffic study
indicates that such turning lanes are necessary or desirable for safe and
convenient access into the site or exiting the site on to the abutting
roadway or for the functioning of the intersection of an existing street
and proposed street or access drive.
J. An agreement between the Borough and the developer shall be
provided with regard to operating expenses and maintenance of
proposed traffic signals.
K. Additional through lanes and lane transitions of sufficient length shall
be provided along all abutting streets to allow smooth traffic flow from
the proposed streets and/or access drives to existing traffic lanes, thus
minimizing congestion, delays and or blockage of through traffic within
the proposed improvement area. The design and length should be
justified and supported by the queuing analysis required as part of the
traffic study.
L. Sidewalks shall be provided along the property frontage and within the
development.
1. Sanitary Sewage Disposal. The applicant shall provide publicly owned
sanitary sewage disposal to each lot consistent with the Borough of
Elizabethtown Sewer Connection Ordinance, No. 683, as amended.
2. When the Borough Council, in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, Act 537, as amended, determines the necessity
for a sewer facilities plan revision (plan revision module for land
development), or supplement, the Council shall require that notice of
approval from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection be submitted as a condition of final plan approval.
3. Water Supply. The applicant shall provide publicly owned water supply
to each lot consistent with Chapter 26, Water, and with the regulations,
requirements, and design standards of EAWA. The applicant shall
provide evidence that EAWA has approved any water system extension
and that the applicant has provided EAWA financial security to secure
the completion of any water system extension.
4. Wherever a public water supply system is provided, fire hydrants shall
be installed within 600 feet of all existing and proposed structures,
measured by way of accessible streets, as specified by the Middle
Department Association of Fire Underwriters and the local fire
company.
§ 612 FOREWORD § 614
FWD:551
§ 614. Street Names and Street Signs. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 614]
§ 615. Street Lights. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 615]
§ 616. Dedication of Park and Recreation Land. [Ord. 863, 10/20/
2005, § 1]
All residential subdivisions and land developments shall be provided with
park and recreation land which shall be dedicated to the Borough. The
developer may request that the Borough not require the dedication of
land, and any such request shall be accompanied by an offer to pay a
fee in lieu of dedication of the land, computed in accordance with the
regulations provided herein, an offer to construct recreational facilities and/
or an offer to privately reserve land for park or recreation purposes. All
offers or dedication, payment of fees in lieu of dedication, construction of
recreational facilities, and offers to privately reserve land shall comply with
all of the following criteria:
1. Proposed streets which are in alignment with others already existing
and named shall bear the name of the existing street.
2. In no case shall the name of a proposed street duplicate an existing
street name in the Borough, or in the postal district, irrespective of the
use of the suffix "street," "road," "avenue," "boulevard," "court" and the
like.
3. All street names shall be subject to the approval of Borough Council.
4. Street signs shall be provided at the intersection of all streets by the
applicant. The type, height and design shall be approved by the
Borough Council.
1. Street lights shall be provided with the construction of all new streets.
A plan for street lights, approved by the local utility company, shall be
provided by the applicant upon submission of final subdivision or land
development plans.
2. Street lights shall be provided at locations designated by the local
utility company, consistent with current policy, at all street
intersections and all other locations considered necessary for safety
reasons as approved by Borough Council.
A. The land reserved for park, recreation and open-space usage shall be a
single lot which shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter
relating to the length to depth ratios and which shall be accessible to
the public. No more than 15% of the minimum lot size calculated in this
Section shall consist of floodplain, wetlands, or other features which
shall render the land undevelopable. Areas of floodplain, wetlands, or
other features which shall render the land undevelopable may be
included within the open space lot if such land is above the minimum
area required. No stormwater management facilities designed to retain
or detain water from other portions of the development shall be
§ 614 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 616
FWD:552
permitted on such land reserved for park, recreation and open space
usage.
B. A minimum of 0.25 acre of land shall be reserved as park or
recreational land for each residential lot created in a subdivision or
each dwelling unit created in a land development. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, in all cases the minimum area of land reserved as park and
recreation land shall be equal to the minimum lot size in the district in
which the subdivision or land development is located.
C. The developer may request that Council permit the provision of park
and recreation land other than through public dedication of land as set
forth above. The developer shall set forth, in writing, the means by
which he will fulfill this requirement which may include the payment of
a fee in lieu of dedication of all or a portion of the amount of land
required to be dedicated, construction of recreational facilities, the
private reservation of land, or any combination of dedication, fees,
construction of recreational facilities, or private reservation.
D. When so requested by the developer, the Borough may accept a fee in
lieu of dedication because size, shape, location, access, topography or
other physical features render it impractical for the developer to
dedicate land for recreational areas as required by this Section. Such
fee in lieu of payments shall be payable to the Borough prior to the
recording of each final phase of the plan, based on each phase's
percentage of the total number of dwelling units.
(1) If the developer proposes a fee in lieu of dedication, said fee shall
be computed and paid in accordance with policies adopted by
Council. The amount of a fee in lieu payment shall be fair market
value of the land required to be dedicated under § 616(B) above.
The developer shall provide the Borough with all information
necessary to determine fair market value of the land, including, but
not limited to, a copy of the agreement of sale or real estate
transfer tax affidavit of value if the developer is equitable owner or
has purchased the land within the past two years or an appraisal of
the property by an MAI appraiser acceptable to the Borough. Fair
market value shall be computed by dividing the total price of the
tract by the number of acres within the tract and then multiplying
that number by the amount of land required to be dedicated. At the
option of the developer, the developer may elect to pay the per lot
or dwelling unit fee in lieu of dedication established by resolution of
Council.
(2) Any developer who feels aggrieved by the price established by the
Borough shall have the right to secure a second appraisal of the
property by an MAI appraiser acceptable to the Borough. The two
prices shall be averaged, with the result being the amount owed
being what the developer shall be required to pay.
§ 616 FOREWORD § 616
FWD:553
§ 617. Emergency Access Requirements. [Ord. 897, 7/17/2008]
All subdivisions or land developments containing 50 or more dwelling units
or nonresidential buildings containing 20,000 or greater square feet of
gross floor area shall be provided with at least two separate and distinct
means of access for the subdivision or land development.
(3) Fee in Lieu Funds Disposition. Monies received from developers
shall be placed in a capital reserve fund. Fees received from
developers shall be administered and expended as required and
authorized by the MPC.
E. If the developer proposes to construct recreational facilities, the
developer shall present a sketch plan of such facilities and an estimate
of the cost of construction.
F. If the developer proposes the private reservation of land, the developer
shall provide for the maintenance of such land through either the
inclusion of such land as common elements of a condominium or the
creation of a home-owners' association. Such documentation shall be
recorded, shall provide that the land cannot be further developed and
shall give the Borough the rights to maintain the land as set forth in
MPC Article VII dealing with the maintenance of common open space in
planned residential developments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
developer may request that the Borough approve transfer of the land to
an organization dedicated to the conservation of natural resources with
deed restrictions preventing further development acceptable to the
Borough Solicitor.
G. The developer shall enter into an agreement with the Borough setting
for the fees to be paid, the facilities to be constructed or the land to be
privately reserved and the method of its maintenance. All such
agreements shall be in a form satisfactory to the Borough Solicitor.
A. Access may be provided through the location of two or more public or
private streets, each of which intersects with an existing public street.
Such public or private streets shall meet all the requirements of this
Chapter concerning design and construction.
B. Access for a land development may be provided through two or more
driveways into the land development. Such driveways shall be
separated by a distance of at least 150 feet and shall comply with all
requirements of this Chapter.
C. If the applicant is unable to provide access to the subdivision or land
development through two or more public or private streets, each of
which intersects with an existing public street, or two or more
driveways which intersect with one or more existing public streets, an
emergency access shall be provided.
§ 616 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 617
FWD:554
(1) The emergency access shall be improved so that emergency
vehicles may safely transverse it and shall be indicated on the
plans.
(2) The emergency access shall be accessible to the providers of
emergency services within the Borough. Applicants proposing to
provide emergency access shall submit evidence of such approval.
(3) The emergency access may be located so that access to the
subdivision or land development is gained from a public street at a
location unsuitable for regular access with an existing public
street.
(4) The emergency access may be located so that access is gained from
an adjacent tract. For example, a subdivision or land development
adjoining a parking lot of another use may provide emergency
access through a point with a break chain. Applicants with plans
indicating emergency access through an adjoining private tract
shall provide evidence that the adjoining property owner has
consented to such emergency access location.
§ 617 FOREWORD § 617
FWD:555

Part 7
SOLAR ACCESS PROVISIONS
§ 701. General Statement. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 701]
In an effort to promote energy efficient subdivision and land development
techniques that facilitate the use of alternative renewable energy sources
such as solar energy and to reduce the dependence on nonrenewable
energy sources, the Borough Council herein offers an alternative to the
standard subdivision and land development provisions contained in this
Chapter.
§ 702. Definitions. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 702]
BUILDING ORIENTATION — Refers to the relationship of a building's
longest axis to true south. Optimal building orientation occurs when the
building's longest axis is east to west (90° from true south), with variations
of up to 25° from the east/west axis being acceptable.
SHADOW ANALYSIS — A graphic representation of shadows cast by mature
landscaping, screening, and structures plotted with regard to topography,
slope, and direction at 9:00 a.m., noon, and 3:00 p.m. on the date of the
winter solstice.
SOLAR ENERGY — Radiant energy (direct, diffuse or reflected) received
from the sun at wavelengths suitable for conversion into thermal, chemical,
or electrical energy.
SOLAR ENERGY COLLECTOR — Any device, structure or part of a device
or structure which is used primarily to transform solar energy into thermal,
chemical, or electrical energy, including any space or structural component
specifically designed to retain heat derived from solar energy.
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — A complete design or assembly consisting of
a solar energy collector, an energy storage facility (where appropriate) and
components for the distribution of transformed energy to the extent that
they cannot be used jointly with a conventional energy system. Passive
solar energy systems which use the natural properties of materials and
architectural components to collect and store solar energy without using
any external mechanical power are included in this definition if they do not
fulfill structural or other functions.
SOLAR-ORIENTED PLAN — A subdivision or land development plan as
defined in Part 2 of this Chapter with a minimum of 25% of all lots or
structures oriented for solar access purposes as specified in § 703(1) of this
Chapter.
SOLAR SKYSPACE — The space between a given location and the sun which
must remain unobstructed between 9:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m. mean solar time
on the date of the winter solstice in order to permit sufficient solar energy
to impinge on that location to allow efficient solar utilization.
SOLAR SKYSPACE EASEMENT — A right, expressed as an easement,
covenant or condition or other property interest in any deed or other
§ 701 FOREWORD § 702
FWD:557
instrument executed by or on behalf of any landlord which protects the solar
sky space of an actual, proposed or designated solar energy collector at
a described location by forbidding or limiting activities or land uses that
interfere with access to solar energy. The solar skyspace may be described
as a three-dimensional space in which an obstruction is prohibited or
limited, or as the times of day during which direct sunlight to the solar
energy collector may not be obstructed, or as a combination of the two
methods.
§ 703. Plan Processing Procedures. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 703]
§ 704. Plan Requirements. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 704]
1. General Statement. For solar access purposes, all subdivisions and land
developments shall be designed so that a minimum of 25% of all lots or
structures receive unobstructed sunlight on the south side of the lot or
the south wall of the longest axis of the structure of building.
2. Sketch Plan. The same standards shall be required for a solar-oriented
plan as specified in § 302 of this Chapter.
3. Preliminary Plan. The same standards shall be required for a solaroriented
plan as specified in § 303 of this Chapter.
4. Final Plan. The same standards shall be required for a solar-oriented
plan as specified in § 304 of this Chapter.
5. Final Plan Recordation. The same standards shall be required of a solaroriented
plan as specified in § 305 of this Chapter.
6. Waiver of Requirements. The same standards shall be required of a
solar-oriented plan as specified in § 308 of this Chapter.
1. Sketch Plan. The same standards shall be required of a solar-oriented
plan as specified in § 402 of this Chapter.
2. Preliminary Plan. The same standards shall be required of a solaroriented
plan as specified in § 403 of this Chapter with the additional
information listed below also being required to be shown on the plan:
A. True north arrow.
B. Proposed number and location of all lots having the capability of
providing proper building orientation for the use of solar energy
systems.
C. Location of proposed solar skyspace easements and open space
areas intended to remain undeveloped in order to protect solar
access to proposed building sites.
D. The limits of any areas of tree removal necessary to provide
effective use of solar energy systems and the identification of
predominant tree types in those areas.
§ 702 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 704
FWD:558
§ 705. Improvement Guarantees. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 705]
The same standards shall be required of a solar-oriented plan as specified
in Part 5 of this Chapter.
§ 706. Design Standards. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 706]
The same standards shall be required of a solar-oriented plan as specified
in Part six of this Chapter with the following provisions being included as
additional standards for the solar-oriented portion, or portions, of the plan:
E. A shadow analysis showing the location of existing trees and new
trees and screening, and shadows cast by proposed structures and
nature landscaping at 9:00 a.m., noon, and 3:00 p.m. on the date of
the winter solstice. Shadows shall be plotted with regard to
topography, slope and direction.
F. The Borough Council may require the submission of additional data
as necessary to assure that adequate provision has been made in
the planning and design of the subdivision or land development to
enable the maximum effective use of solar energy systems.
3. Final Plan. The same standards shall be required of a solar-oriented
plan as specified in § 404 of this Chapter with the additional information
listed below also being required to be shown on the plan:
A. True north arrow.
B. Delineation of solar skyspace easements and open space areas
required to remain undeveloped to protect solar access to building
sites.
C. As a condition of final plan approval, the applicant may be required
to provide solar skyspace easements or restrictive covenants with
deeds of the lots in a subdivision or buildings in a land development
to guarantee solar access protection.
A. Insofar as possible, streets on which structures are proposed to front
shall be oriented along an east-west axis with maximum deviations
permitted up to 25°; provided that such orientations are feasible based
on soil and slope conditions and are a practical means of providing safe
and convenient access and circulation.
B. Side lot lines shall, so far as practical, run from due north to south
where the resulting angle of incidence with the street is not less than
30°. A variation of up to 25° east or west of the north/south axis is
permitted.
C. Buildings shall be oriented such that their longest axis faces within 25°
of true south whenever lot size, street orientation, soil, and slope
conditions make this practical.
§ 704 FOREWORD § 706
FWD:559
D. Solar skyspace easements shall be in writing and shall be subject to the
same conveyancing and instrument recording requirements as other
easements. Any such easements shall be appurtenant; shall run with
the land benefited and burdened; and shall be defined and limited by
conditions stated in the instrument of conveyance. Instruments
creating a solar skyplace easement shall include but not be limited to:
(1) A permanently identifiable description of the skyspace above the
burdened land into which trees, buildings and/or other obstruction
as specified by the easement shall not be permitted to encroach;
(2) Any terms or conditions under which the solar skyspace easement
is granted or will be terminated; and,
(3) Any provision for compensation by the owner of the land benefiting
from the solar skyspace easement, or compensation of the owner of
the land burdened by the solar skyspace easement for maintaining
the easement.
E. The installation of all improvements shall, within the limits of
practicability and feasibility, be oriented to maximize the solar access to
buildings constructed thereon.
F. Where recreation space is being provided, it shall be located in such a
manner that allows maximum practical solar access to neighboring
structures.
G. The location and species of trees and other landscaping elements shall
be such that when grown to full maturity shall not impede solar access
to neighboring structures.
H. Where open space in being provided, it shall be located, wherever
possible, to provide a buffer from the shading effects of taller structures
or obstructions on existing or proposed shorter buildings.
I. Landscaping shall be designed, installed, and maintained with the aim
of allowing as great a portion of the site to remain or become wooded
without adversely affecting the availability of solar access to the south.
Whenever conflicting provisions prevail, the Borough Council, upon
recommendation of the Borough Planning Commission, will determine
which standard will be adhered to in each such instance.
§ 706 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 706
FWD:560
Part 8
ADMINISTRATION
§ 801. General. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 801]
This Part outlines the procedures for enforcement and amendment of this
Chapter, as well as procedures for challenges and appeals of decisions
rendered under this Chapter.
§ 802. Amendments. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 802]
§ 803. Modifications. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 803; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
§ 804. Challenges and Appeals. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 804]
The decisions of the Borough Council with respect to the approval or
disapproval of a plan or waiver request may be appealed directly to court as
provided for in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended.
1. Amendments to this Chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a proposed ordinance by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
2. In the case of an amendment other then that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior
to the date of the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
1. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this Chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this Chapter is
observed.
2. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this Chapter
involved and the minimum modification necessary.
3. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
4. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 805
FWD:561
§ 805. Effect of Change in This Chapter. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; as
added by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Changes in this Chapter shall affect plats as follows:
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary
or final, is duly filed as provided in this Chapter, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this Chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly approved. The applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved
preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an
application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application
shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in this
Chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this Chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Borough
Council, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the
date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of
the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot,
building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
§ 805 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 805
FWD:562
§ 806. Preventive Remedies. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; as added by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five years period the aforesaid
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plat approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in this Chapter, zoning, and other governing
ordinance enacted by the Borough of Elizabethtown subsequent to the
date of the initial preliminary plan submission.
1. In addition to other remedies, the Borough of Elizabethtown may
institute and maintain appropriate actions by law or in equity to
restrain, correct or abate violations, to prevent unlawful construction,
to recover damages and to prevent illegal occupancy of a building,
structure or premises. The description by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other documents used in the process of selling
or transferring shall not exempt the seller or transferor from such
penalties or from the remedies herein provided.
2. The Borough of Elizabethtown may refuse to issue any permit or grant
any approval necessary to further improve or develop any real property
which has been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of
real property in violation of this Chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
A. The owner of record at the time of such violation.
B. The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
C. The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
D. The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
§ 805 FOREWORD § 806
FWD:563
§ 807. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985; § 805; as
added by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and as amended by Ord. 897, 7/17/
2008]
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
3. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough of Elizabethtown
may require compliance with the conditions that would have been
applicable to the property at the time the applicant acquired an interest
in such real property.
1. Any person, partnership or corporation, or the members of such
partnership or the officers of such corporation, who or which, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall do
any of the following commits a violation of this Chapter:
A. Lay out, construct, open and/or dedicate any street, sanitary sewer,
storm sewer, water main or other improvement for public use,
travel or other purposes or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon;
B. Sell, transfer or agree to enter into an agreement to sell or transfer
any land in a subdivision or land development, whether by
reference to or by use of a plan of such subdivision or land
development or otherwise;
C. Erect any building or buildings which constitute a land
development thereon;
D. Commence site grading or construction of improvements prior to
recording of a final plan, unless such grading or construction is for
the sole purpose of installing improvements as prescribed in § 304
herein, unless and until a final plan has been prepared in full
compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and has been
recorded as provided herein;
E. Fail to comply with any condition imposed upon approval of a
preliminary plan or a final plan or any condition imposed upon the
granting of any waiver;
F. Fail to comply with any agreement with the Borough relating to
development in accordance with a preliminary plan or a final plan;
or
G. Fail to comply with any note included on an approved preliminary
plan or final plan.
2. Any person, partnership or corporation, or the members of such
partnership or the officers of such corporation, who or which, being the
§ 806 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 807
FWD:564
§ 808. Conflicts. [Ord. 663, 6/20/1985, § 807]
Whenever there is a difference between the minimum applicable standard
specified herein and those included in other applicable Borough ordinances
and regulations, the most stringent standard or requirement shall apply.
owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall
construct or permit the construction of any improvement or develop or
permit the development of any property in a manner which does not
fully comply with the approved improvement construction plan or final
plan, as applicable, commits a violation of this Chapter.
3. Any person, partnership or corporation, or the members of such
partnership or the officers of such corporation, who or which, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, shall
knowingly provide false information on any plan, report, certification or
other document required to be submitted by this Chapter commits a
violation of this Chapter.
4. Any person, partnership or corporation, or the members of such
partnership or the officers of such corporation, who or which, being the
owner or agent of the owner of any lot, tract or parcel of land, in any
other way takes action or permits another to take action not authorized
by this Chapter or contrary to the provisions of this Chapter commits a
violation of this Chapter.
5. As an additional condition for the issuance of a permit or the granting of
an approval to any owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 807 FOREWORD § 808
FWD:565
Chapter 23
SWIMMING POOLS
Chapter 24
TAXATION, SPECIAL
§ 808 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 808
FWD:566
Part 1
REALTY TRANSFER TAX
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 1]
This Part shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania."
§ 102. Authority. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 2]
This Realty Transfer Tax is levied under authority of Article XI-D, entitled
"Local Real Estate Transfer Tax," of the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer
Tax Act, which is a new Article added by Act 77-1986 (Act of July 2, 1986,
No. 77, P.L._____) to the Pennsylvania Real Estate Transfer Tax Act, Act
14-1981, (Act of May 5, 1981, No. 14, P.L. 36) as amended. The Pennsylvania
Real Estate Transfer Tax is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., and Article
XI-D is codified at 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq. This Realty Transfer Tax is also
levied under authority of "The Local Tax Enabling Act," Act of December 31,
1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 3]
The following words when used in this Part shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this § 103, except where the context clearly indicates a
different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
is hereby appointed collector of the tax levied by this Part.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution, which is organized under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the United States, or any other state,
territory, foreign country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to real
estate within the Borough, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of
trust or other instruments of like character given as security for a debt and
deeds of release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title
does not pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the
contract has been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration
is payable over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which
solely grant, vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also
include a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording
under § 109 of this Part.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:567
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include: (1)
recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing, camping,
skiing, show competition or racing; (2) the raising, breeding or training of
game animals or game birds, fish, cats, dogs, or pets or animals intended for
use in sporting or recreational activities; (3) fur farming; (4) stockyard and
slaughterhouse operations, or (5) manufacturing or processing operations
of any kind.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors or lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation, or entity of
any kind. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine
or imprisonment, or both, the term "person," as applied to associations,
shall include the responsible members or general partners thereof and, as
applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
REAL ESTATE TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering,
accepting, or presenting for recording of a document.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments, including without limitation,
buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries,
spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees, and other
improvements, immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law
pass with a conveyance of land, but excluding permanently attached
machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
(1)
(2) A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under lease or occupancy agreement.
(3)
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership of
disposition of real estate; or,
(1)
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
(2)
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 103
FWD:568
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
VALUE —
An interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate if fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
(1)
An interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years by which,
either by reason of the length of the term of the grant of a right
to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group of
rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in
real estate in which the lessee has equity, In determining the term of a
lease, it shall be presumed that a right or option to renew or extend a
lease will be exercised if a rental charge to the new lessee is fixed of if
a method for calculating the rental charge is established.
(2)
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual consideration therefor, paid or to be paid, including liens or other
encumbrances thereof existing before the transfer and not removed
thereby, whether or not the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and
ground rents, or a commensurate part thereof where such liens or other
encumbrances and ground rents also encumber or are charged against
other real estate. Provided, that where the document shall set forth a
nominal consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the
price set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale.
(1)
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, and occupancy agreement, a
leasehold or possessory interest, any exchange of properties, or the real
estate of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real
estate within the Borough determined by adjusting the assessed value
of the real estate for local real estate tax purposes for the common
level ration of assessed values to market values of the taxing Borough
in which the Borough is located as established by the State Tax
Equalization Board, or a commensurate part of the assessment where
the assessment includes other real estate;
(2)
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate the value of
which is not determinable under clause one or two, the actual monetary
worth of such interest.
(3)
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
(4)
§ 103 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:569
§ 104. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 4]
A tax is hereby levied and imposed, for general Borough purposes, on every
real estate transaction, at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate
represented by the document involved in the real estate transaction.
§ 105. Evidence of Payment. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 5]
The payment of the tax imposed hereunder shall be evidenced by the
collector affixing on the document an official stamp or writing setting forth
the date of payment of the tax and amount of tax paid.
§ 106. Exempt Parties. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 6]
The United States, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from
payment of the tax imposed by this Part. The exception of such
governmental bodies shall not, however, relieve any other party to a real
estate transaction from liability for the tax.
§ 107. Excluded Transactions. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 7; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
The tax imposed by this Part shall not be based upon:
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor or a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer. The singular shall include the plural and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
A. The tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the document if
presented for recording, within 30 days of acceptance of such
document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. If the real estate is located partially within and partially outside the
Borough, the tax shall be calculated on the value of the portion within
the Borough.
C. The tax imposed hereunder shall be due and payable to the collector, as
a joint and several liability, by every person who makes, executes,
delivers, accepts or presents for recording any document, or in whose
behalf any document is made, executed, delivered, accepted or
presented for recording, In the case of an acquired company, the
company shall also have liability for payment of the tax. All such
persons shall also be liable for any penalties imposed under this Part.
D. It is the intent of this Part that the entire burden of the tax imposed on a
real estate transaction by the Borough and other political subdivisions
shall not exceed the limitation prescribed in § 8 of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6908, so that if any other political subdivision
imposes a tax on real estate transactions taxed under this Part, the
provisions of said § 8 shall apply.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:570
A. A transfer to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or to any or its
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication
or deed in lieu of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection
with condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year from
the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff shale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division of kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who since been divorced, provided the
property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired by
the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce, between parent and child or the spouse of such
child, between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration or property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
descendant to the descendants; devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
collector is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that clearly
identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 107 FOREWORD § 107
FWD:571
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer:
(1) For no or nominal consideration between principal and agent or
straw party; or,
(2) From or to an agent or straw party where, if the agent or straw
party were his principal no tax would be imposed under this Part.
Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee or
statement of value fails to set forth that the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this clause.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation of statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the Borough reasonably determines that the primary intent for
such merger, consolidation of division is avoidance of the tax imposed
by this Part.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conservation, energy conservation, energy production, pollution
control, warehousing or agriculture; and,
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or person
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
§ 107 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 107
FWD:572
§ 108. Documents Relating to Associations or Corporations and
Members, Partners, Stockholders or Shareholders Thereof. [Ord.
680, 1/19/1989, § 8]
Except as otherwise provided in § 107, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer of demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this Part, corporations and
associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 109. Acquired Company. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 9]
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses tax exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954, and
which has as its primary purpose preservation of land for historic,
recreational, scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due in $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction or coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this § 107, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement of
value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document is
not subject to tax under this Part.
1. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:
A. Does not affect the continuity of the company; and,
B. Of itself or together with prior changes has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
2. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets there are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this Part.
§ 107 FOREWORD § 109
FWD:573
§ 110. Credits Against Tax. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 10]
§ 111. Statement of Value. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 11]
Every document lodged with or presented to the collector for recording
shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this Part. The provisions of this § 111 shall not apply to any excludable
real estate transfers which are exempt from taxation based on family
relationship, provided the relationship is specified in the deed, instrument
or writing. Documents which are not to be recorded shall be presented to
the collector and shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the document
and statement of value executed by a responsible person connected with
the transaction showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and
3. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition to the collector for recording and
for the affixation of the official stamp or writing evidencing payment of
the tax. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate holdings
of the acquired company in the Borough.
1. Where there is a transfer of a residential property to a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
2. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
3. There is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a credit
for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given the
grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
4. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
5. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this § 110, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 109 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 111
FWD:574
complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not
subject to tax under this Part. Evidence of such payment shall be affixed
to the original document and the certified copy. The certified copy and
statement of value shall be filed with the collector.
§ 112. Unlawful Acts. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 12]
§ 113. Civil Penalties. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 13]
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. Make, execute, deliver, accept or present for recording or cause to
be made, executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording
any document without the full amount of tax thereon being duly
paid;
B. Fail to record a declaration of acquisition, as required by this Part;
C. Fraudulently affix to any document any forged evidence of
payment; or
D. Fail, neglect or refuse to comply with or violate other provisions of
this part or any rules and regulations promulgated by the Borough
under this part, or any rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue to the extent applicable to the tax levied
hereunder.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this § 112 shall be guilty of
a summary offense.
3. A person who makes a false statement of value or declaration of
acquisition, when he does not believe the statement or declaration to be
true, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
1. If any tax owing under the terms of this Part shall not be paid when due,
10% of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected as an initial
penalty for nonpayment or underpayment of the tax.
2. In addition, if any tax owing under the terms of this Part shall not be
paid when due, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax
at the rate of 1% per month of fractional part of a month, on the amount
of the unpaid tax, from the due date until an amount of the tax is paid in
full.
3. In addition, in the case of failure of any acquired company to record a
declaration of acquisition, as required by this Part, unless it is shown to
the satisfaction of the Township that such failure is due to reasonable
cause, a penalty shall accrue on the amount of the unpaid tax at the rate
of 5% per month or fractional part of the month, on the amount of the
unpaid tax, from the due date until the amount of the tax is paid in full.
This penalty shall be in addition to all other penalties, but shall not in
the aggregate exceed 50% of the amount of unpaid taxes.
§ 111 FOREWORD § 113
FWD:575
§ 114. Lien. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 14]
The tax imposed by this Part shall become a lien upon the lands, tenements,
or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying being situated, wholly or
in part within the boundaries of the Borough, which land, tenements,
hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in or conveyed by or
transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed, assessed
and levied by this Part, said lien to begin at the time when the tax under
this Part is due and payable, and continue until discharge by payment, or in
accordance with the law, and the solicitor is authorized to file a municipal or
tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Lancaster County, in accordance
with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S.
§ 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 115. Proceeds of Judicial Sale. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 15]
The tax imposed under this Part shall be fully paid, and have priority out of
the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, and the sheriff, or other officer, conducting said sale, shall
pay the tax herein imposed out of the first monies paid to him in connection
therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax
herein imposed, the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 116. Enforcement. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 16]
4. In addition, if any part of any underpayment of tax id due to fraud, there
shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the underpayment.
5. In addition, if the Borough files suit in order to collect the amount of any
tax not paid when due under this part, at the discretion of the court, any
person liable for payment of the tax shall also be liable for reasonable
attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in prosecution of the suit.
6. No document upon which tax is imposed by this part shall at any time
be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
Commonwealth, or recorded in the office of any Recorder of Deeds of
any county of this Commonwealth, unless the tax imposed hereunder
shall have been paid in full and evidence of payment shall have been
affixed thereto by the collector.
1. In order to determine whether the proper amount of tax has been paid,
without limiting any other rights of the Borough, the Borough shall have
the right to review all documents or records relating to any real estate
transaction or any related transactions, and to take such other steps as
the Borough shall deem necessary or appropriate, including a review or
audit of any documents or records of any party to a real estate
transaction to determine the fair market value of the real estate or any
other relevant matter as determined by the Borough. Upon request of
the Borough, and at such place and time as specified by the Borough,
§ 113 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 116
FWD:576
§ 117. Collector. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 17]
§ 118. Regulations. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 19]
The Borough may promulgate and enforce reasonable rules and regulations
for the interpretation, collection and enforcement of the tax.
§ 119. Interpretation; Effect. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 20]
any party shall make available to the Borough any documents or
records requested by the Borough.
2. In the event any tax is not paid when due, the Borough may enforce
payment of the tax, together with all penalties, by suit in assumpsit or
any other appropriate means.
1. As provided in 10 P.S. § 11011-6, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the
collection agent for this tax, without compensation for the Borough.
2. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the collector shall not
accept for recording any document unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
3. On or before the tenth day of each month, the collector shall pay over to
the Borough all taxes collected under this Part, less 2% for use of the
county, and shall also provide a report containing the information
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax. The 2% commission shall be
paid to the county.
4. In accordance with Act 77-1986, any Recorder of Deeds who shall
record any document upon which tax is imposed under this Part without
payment of tax as required under this part, as is indicated in the
document or accompanying statement of value shall, upon summary
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500 and costs
of prosecution.
1. To the extent this Part imposes a tax on a real estate transaction which
is subject to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax
imposed by Act 77-1986, and to the extent not inconsistent herewith or
with rules or regulations adopted by the Borough, this Part shall be
interpreted in the same manner as Act 77-1986 and in accordance with
regulations promulgated thereunder.
2. The provisions of this Part, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to adoption of this part, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances, and not as new
enactments.
3. This Part shall impose a tax on all transactions which the Borough is
permitted to tax under Act 77-1986 to the fullest extent permissible.
§ 116 FOREWORD § 119
FWD:577
§ 120. Effective Date. [Ord. 680, 1/19/1989, § 21]
This Part shall become effective immediately, or on the date permitted by
law, and shall continue in force hereafter without annual reenactment.
4. In the event this Part is declared invalid, the prior ordinance or
ordinances of the Borough levying a realty transfer tax shall remain in
full force and effect, and shall not be affected in any way by adoption of
this Part.
5. The provisions of this Part shall not affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish
any offense, under the authority of any ordinance in force prior to
adoption of this Part.
6. Subject to the provisions in this § 120, this Part shall supersede, replace
and repeal ordinances levying a realty transfer tax in force immediately
prior to adoption of this Part.
§ 119 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 120
FWD:578
Part 2
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS TAX
§ 201. Short Title. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930,
10/20/2011]
This Part 2 shall be known and may be cited as the "Elizabethtown Borough
Earned Income Tax Ordinance of 2011," as amended.
§ 202. Definitions. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930,
10/20/2011]
All terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling Act shall have the meanings set
forth therein. The following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein:
COLLECTOR — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant to
the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
ENACTMENT — This Part 2.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough of Elizabethtown.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, as set forth
in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., while such numbering and provisions remain in
effect under Act 32 of 2008, and as set forth in 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.,
when such numbering and provisions become effective under Act 32, and as
amended in the future.
TAX — The tax imposed by this enactment.
TAXING AUTHORITY — Elizabethtown Borough.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the collector for reporting the amount
of tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or
reported under this enactment or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TCC — The Tax Collection Committee established to govern and oversee
the collection of earned income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
TCD — Any tax collection district to which the taxing authority or any part
of the taxing authority is assigned under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 203. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by
Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
1. General Purpose Resident Tax. The taxing authority hereby imposes a
tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits of individual residents of the taxing authority.
2. General Purpose Municipal Nonresident Tax. The taxing authority also
imposes a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned
§ 201 FOREWORD § 203
FWD:579
§ 204. Exemption from Tax for Individuals Under Age 16. [Ord. 801,
12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
income and net profits derived by an individual who is not a resident of
the taxing authority from any work, business, profession or activity of
any kind engaged in within the boundaries of the taxing authority.
3. Ongoing Tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this enactment is repealed or the rate is changed.
4. Combined Tax Rate Applicable to Residents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to residents of the taxing authority, including the tax
imposed by the school district and municipality in which the individual
resides, is 1%. This combined tax rate is included solely for the purpose
of providing information applicable on the date of the adoption of this
Part 2. This combined tax rate might change if the school district
changes the tax rate imposed by the school district.
5. Municipal Tax Rate Applicable to Nonresidents. Currently, the total rate
applicable to nonresidents working within the taxing authority based on
the municipal nonresident tax rate is 1%.
6. Local Tax Enabling Act Applicable. The tax imposed under authority of
the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits, are incorporated into this
enactment. Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that
are required to be applied to a tax on earned income or net profits will
automatically become part of this enactment upon the effective date of
such amendment, without the need for formal amendment of this
enactment, to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
7. Applicable Laws, Regulations, Policies and Procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and regulations, policies and procedures adopted by the
TCC or by the collector. This includes any regulations, policies and
procedures adopted in the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
1. This governing body finds that:
A. Minors of various age groups have traditionally, and with judicial
sanction, been considered as comprising separate classes for any
legislative purposes; and
B. Minors under the age of 16 are generally unemancipated and
subject to compulsory school attendance and child labor laws and
therefore have limited earned income and net profits and control of
money such that enforcement of reporting and collection of the tax
hereunder against them would yield inconsequential amounts and
be unduly difficult, expensive and not in the public interest.
§ 203 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 204
FWD:580
§ 205. Exemption from Municipal Nonresident Tax for Residents of
Other States if Similar Exemption in Other State. [Ord. 801, 12/16/
1999; as amended by Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
Individuals who are residents of a state other than Pennsylvania are exempt
from liability for the tax, but only if all local governments of the locality
where the individual resides either impose no tax on the income of a
Pennsylvania resident derived from activities within the locality or exempt
that income from tax. In addition to this exemption from municipal
nonresident tax, certain credits and deductions against the tax are
permitted under certain circumstances as provided in applicable law and
regulations.
§ 206. Individual Tax Returns and Payments. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999;
as amended by Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
Every individual receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall file tax returns and pay the tax in accordance with the Local Tax
Enabling Act.
§ 207. Employer Withholding, Remittance and Tax Returns. [Ord.
801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
Every employer shall register, withhold and remit the tax, and file tax
returns in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 208. Tax Collector. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord.
930, 10/20/2011]
The tax will be collected from individuals and employers by the collector.
§ 209. Interest, Penalties, Costs and Fines. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999;
as amended by Ord. 930, 10/20/2011]
Individuals and employers are subject to interest, penalties, costs and fines
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act, including costs imposed by
the collector in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 210. Severability. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930,
10/20/2011]
The provisions of this enactment are severable; and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this enactment. It is
declared to be the intention of the governing body that this enactment
would have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had
not been included.
2. For these reasons, individuals under the age of 16 years are exempt
from liability for the tax.
§ 204 FOREWORD § 211
FWD:581
§ 211. Purpose; Amendment and Restatement; Effect on Prior
Provisions and Actions. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord.
930, 10/20/2011]
§ 212. Effective Date. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord.
930, 10/20/2011]
This Part shall become effective as provided by law. To the extent that
this Part amends imposition, collection or any other matter relating to the
earned income tax as reenacted by this Part, such revised provision shall
become effective January 1, 2012.
§ 213. Adoption. [Ord. 801, 12/16/1999; as amended by Ord. 930,
10/20/2011]
This enactment is adopted and enacted October 20, 2011.
1. The primary purpose of this enactment is to conform the earned income
and net profits tax currently imposed to the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time
frame required by Act 32.
2. Any prior enactment imposing a tax on earned income or net profits of
individuals is amended and restated in its entirety to read as stated in
this enactment. Any other prior enactment or part of any prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. To the extent the same as any enactment in
force immediately prior to adoption of this enactment, the provisions of
this enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment
and not as a new enactment. If this enactment is declared invalid, any
prior enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and
effect and shall not be affected by adoption of this enactment. If any
part of this enactment is declared invalid, the similar part of any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in effect and shall not be
affected by adoption of this enactment.
3. The provisions of this enactment shall not affect any act done or liability
incurred, nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution
pending or to be initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish
offense under the authority or any enactment in force prior to adoption
of this enactment.
4. Subject to the foregoing provisions of this section, this enactment shall
amend and restate on the effective date any enactment levying a tax on
earned income or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective
date.
§ 211 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 213
FWD:582
Part 3
LOCAL SERVICES TAX
§ 301. Definitions.
1. The following words and phrases, when used in this Enactment, shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this Section, unless the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person or persons appointed by this Enactment
or by subsequent enactment of the Governing Body, to collect the tax
imposed by this Enactment.
COMPENSATION — Salary, wages, commission, tip, bonus, fee, or any
other payment or income.
EARNED INCOME AND NET PROFITS — The meanings as set forth in
the Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6913.
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2008.
EMPLOYEE — An individual paid compensation by an employer to
perform an occupation of any kind.
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
unincorporated association, institution, trust, corporation, government
agency, or other entity engaged in business or operating within the
boundaries of the Taxing Authority, employing one or more individuals
engaged in an occupation.
ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,
and as amended in the future.
ENACTMENT — This Local Services Tax Ordinance.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough of Elizabethtown, County of
Lancaster and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
OCCUPATION — Any work, job, activity, livelihood, trade, profession,
business or enterprise of any kind, including services, domestic or
other, for which any compensation is received. A person may have more
than one occupation.
REGULATIONS — Regulations duly adopted by the Collector for
administration of the tax. To the extent allowed by law, including but
not limited to 1 Pa. C.S.A. § 1937, the Governing Body intends to
incorporate future amendments to the Regulations. If a court prohibits
such construction, the Governing Body intends to incorporate the
Regulations as they exist on the date of adoption of this Enactment. A
copy of the Regulations currently in force shall be available for public
inspection.
TAX — The tax imposed by this Enactment.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 301
FWD:583
§ 302. Imposition of Tax; Regulations.
§ 303. Exemptions From Tax.
TAX RETURN — A form prescribed by the Collector for reporting the
amount of any tax deducted from an employee or otherwise owed under
this Enactment.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31.
TAXING AUTHORITY — The Borough of Elizabethtown, County of
Lancaster and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
TAXPAYER — Any individual on whom the tax is imposed.
2. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
1. The Taxing Authority hereby imposes a tax of $52 on each individual
who engages in an occupation within the boundaries of the Taxing
Authority. The tax is imposed for the tax year starting on the effective
date and ending on December 31. The tax is imposed for each tax year
thereafter without annual reenactment, until this Enactment is
repealed or amended.
2. The tax is based on an individual engaging in an occupation within the
boundaries of the Taxing Authority at any time during the tax year, and
shall be known as the "Local Services Tax" or the "Occupation Privilege
Tax." The Enabling Act, as amended by Act 7 of 2007, has denominated
any Occupation Privilege Tax as a Local Services Tax.
3. All provisions of the Enabling Act imposing requirements applicable to
a local services tax and all provisions of the Regulations are
incorporated into this Enactment. If there is any discrepancy between
the Regulations and the Enabling Act, or the Enactment and the
Enabling Act, the provisions of the Enabling Act shall control.
4. The tax is imposed, and the proceeds of the tax shall be used in
accordance with all applicable requirements of the Enabling Act.
1. An individual whose total earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Taxing Authority in any tax year is less than $12,000
is exempt from the tax for the tax year.
2. Individuals may also be exempt for other reasons, including disability
resulting from serving in the armed forces, active duty as a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces, and other reasons as set forth
in the Regulations.
3. An individual may obtain exemption prospectively by filing a local
services tax exemption certificate on a form provided by the Collector in
accordance with the Regulations. The exemption certificate shall be
§ 301 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:584
§ 304. Individuals Who Engage in an Occupation in Multiple
Jurisdictions; Multiple Employers.
Rules applicable to individuals who engage in an occupation in multiple
jurisdictions or have multiple employers are as set forth in the Regulations.
§ 305. Employer Collection.
filed with the Collector, and if the individual is an employee also with
the individual's employer.
4. If an individual pays the tax and at the end of any tax year has total
income during the tax year that is less than the income exemption
amount, or otherwise qualifies for an exemption, the Taxing Authority
will on request after the end of tax year refund to the taxpayer the tax
paid for the tax year.
1. Every employer not registered under the provisions of an enactment of
the Taxing Authority imposing a tax on earned income and net profits
shall, within 30 days after the Effective Date, or within 30 days after
first becoming an employer, register with the Collector the employer's
name, address and any other information required by the Collector on
an employer registration form prescribed by the Collector.
2. Every employer is required to deduct the tax as set forth in the
Regulations from any compensation payable to any employee on whom
the tax is imposed, unless the employee has filed a local services tax
withholding exemption certificate in accordance with the Regulations.
As set forth in the Regulations, the full amount of the tax shall be
deducted in lump sum if the combined municipal and school district tax
rate is $10 or less. As set forth in the Regulations, the tax shall be
deducted pro rata on a per payroll basis if the combined municipal and
school district tax rate exceeds $10.
3. As set forth in the Regulations, no employee is required to pay tax
through more than one employer during any payroll period.
4. An employer is excused from withholding to the extent provided in the
Regulations if the employee has filed a local services tax withholding
exemption certificate in accordance with the Regulations. The
exemption certificate may provide exemption from withholding based
on: (1) low income or other exemption from tax as stated in the
Regulations; (2) withholding by another principal employer; (3) prior
payment to the Taxing Authority of the full amount of the tax imposed
by the Taxing Authority; or (4) prior payment during the same tax year
of $52 as a tax imposed under the Enabling Act on an individual based
on engaging in an occupation in Pennsylvania.
5. If an employee has filed a local services tax withholding exemption
certificate and it is determined as set forth in the Regulations that the
employee is not eligible for exemption or no longer eligible for
§ 303 FOREWORD § 305
FWD:585
§ 306. Taxpayer Direct Payment.
Every individual who is self-employed, or whose tax for any other reason is
not deducted by an employer under Section 605 of this Enactment shall file
a tax return and pay the tax directly to the Collector. Except as otherwise
stated in the Regulations, every such individual engaged in an occupation
within the Taxing Authority at any time after the effective date and on or
before March 31, shall file a tax return and pay the full amount of the
tax to the Collector on or before April 30. Except as otherwise stated in
the Regulations, every such individual who has not previously paid the
full amount of the tax, who engages in an occupation within the Taxing
Authority at any time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30,
September 30, and December 31, shall file a tax return and pay the full
amount of the tax to the Collector on or before the following July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively. Every individual who is selfemployed
or whose tax for any other reason is not deducted by an employer
exemption, the employer shall start or restart withholding as set forth
in the Regulations.
6. As to each taxpayer employed at any time after the effective date and on
or before March 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the Regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector on or before April 30
the amount of tax deducted on or before March 31. As to each taxpayer
for whom the full amount of the tax has not previously been deducted or
paid directly by the taxpayer to the Collector, who is employed at any
time in any of the three-month periods ending June 30, September 30,
and December 31, every employer shall deduct the tax from
compensation payable to the taxpayer as set forth in the Regulations,
and shall file a tax return and pay to the Collector on or before the
following July 30, October 30, and January 30, the amount of tax
deducted on or before June 30, September 30, and December 31,
respectively. Every employer shall follow this same procedure every tax
year.
7. Tax amounts deducted from compensation by an employer shall at all
times be the property of the Taxing Authority, and shall constitute a
trust fund held by the employer until remitted to the Collector; and
deduction of tax from wages shall, as between the employee and the
Taxing Authority, constitute payment of the tax by the employee,
regardless of any insolvency or failure to remit by the employer.
8. Any employer who fails to deduct the tax or who fails to pay the tax to
the Collector shall be liable for the tax and applicable penalties in full as
though the tax had originally been imposed against such employer. If
the employer is a partnership, the partners thereof, and if the employer
is a corporation, limited liability company, or other organization or
entity, all officers thereof, and any other person responsible for
payment of taxes, shall have the same liability as the employer.
§ 305 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:586
under § 605 of this Enactment, shall follow this same procedure every tax
year.
§ 307. Nonresident Taxpayers.
By virtue of engaging in an occupation within the boundaries of the Taxing
Authority, both resident and nonresident individuals are subject to the tax.
§ 308. Tax Collector Power and Duties.
§ 309. Interest, Penalties, Costs and Fine.
1. The Collector shall collect the tax, fines and penalties imposed by this
Enactment, and shall keep records of collection.
2. The Collector may examine the books, papers, and records of any
individual or employer in order to verify compliance with this
Enactment. Every individual the Collector believes might be subject to
the tax and every employer or person the Collector believes might be an
employer shall on request meet with and show to the Collector all
books, papers, and records requested by the Collector. Every employer
or person the Collector believes might be an employer shall also
provide access to the employer's books, papers and records at the
employer's place of business and provide a place for the Collector's
review of such books, papers and records. For purposes of this
Enactment, records shall include records in any form, including
computer and other electronic records.
3. The Collector may file suit in its name or in the name of the Taxing
Authority for recovery of any amount owed to the Taxing Authority.
4. Except as limited by any applicable law, the Collector shall have all of
the powers that the Taxing Authority has or that the law prescribes for
tax collectors relating to administration and enforcement of this
Enactment.
5. The Collector may promulgate and enforce Regulations relating to
administration and enforcement of this Enactment.
1. If any Tax is not paid when due, the following penalty shall apply: a
penalty of 5% of the amount unpaid for each month or a fraction of a
month during which the amount remains unpaid.
2. Any individual or entity who or which fails or refuses to pay tax or other
amounts owed or to pay tax deducted from employees shall, in addition
to paying the amount owed, pay reasonable costs incurred, as set forth
in the Regulations, by the Taxing Authority, Collector or any other
person or entity appointed to collect the amount, to provide notices of
delinquency or to implement similar procedures to collect delinquent
taxes.
§ 306 FOREWORD § 309
FWD:587
§ 310. Tax Collector Appointment; Tax Collection Enforcement.
The Lancaster County Tax Collection Bureau, also doing business as
Middletown Area Tax Collection Bureau, is appointed Collector according to
the terms of a tax collection agreement as presented this date or previously
executed. The officers of this Taxing Authority are authorized to take any
actions necessary or appropriate to carry out the terms of this Enactment
and the tax collection agreement.
§ 311. Severability.
The provisions of this Enactment are severable and if any of its provisions
are ruled by a court invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions of this Enactment It is
declared to be the intention of the Governing Body that this Enactment
would have been adopted if such invalid or unconstitutional provision had
not been included.
§ 312. Repealer.
This Enactment restates, reenacts and amends Chapter 24, Part 3, of the
Code of Ordinances of the Borough of Elizabethtown in order to comply with
Act 7 of 2007, but that prior enactment or all or part of any other prior
enactment conflicting with the provisions of this Enactment is rescinded
insofar as the conflict exists. So far as they are the same as enactments in
3. If legal proceedings are commenced for failure to pay any amount
owed, the person or entity liable therefor shall, in addition to the
amount owed, pay to the Taxing Authority, Collector or any other person
or entity appointed to collect the tax the costs of collection, including
reasonable attorney fees.
4. Any individual or entity who or which fails or refuses to file any
employer registration form or tax return required by this Enactment or
the Regulations, who or which fails or refuses to pay tax or other
amounts owed or to pay tax deducted from employees, who or which
refuses to permit the Tax Collector to examine books, papers and
records or who or which makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent
filing or return, shall, upon conviction thereof, before any District
Justice or Magistrate, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500
for each offense, and costs, and in default of payment of said fine and
costs be subject to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 30 days. If
an employer is a partnership, the partners thereof, and if an employer is
a corporation, limited liability company or other organization or entity,
all officers thereof, and any other person responsible for payment of
taxes, shall be subject to prosecution under this Section as the
employer.
5. The failure of any individual or entity to receive or procure forms
required for making a required filing or return shall not excuse making
such a filing or return.
§ 309 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 312
FWD:588
force immediately prior to the adoption of this Enactment, the provisions
of this Enactment are intended as a continuation of such prior enactment
and not as new enactment. If this Enactment is declared invalid, any prior
enactment levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect and shall
not be affected in any manner by adoption of this Enactment. The provisions
of this Enactment shall not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall
they affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be initiated to enforce any
right or penalty or to punish offense under the authority of any enactment
in force prior to the adoption of this Enactment. Subject to the foregoing
provisions of this Section, this Enactment shall supersede and repeal on the
effective date any enactment levying an occupation privilege tax in force
immediately prior to the effective date.
§ 313. Adoption.
This Enactment is adopted and enacted November 15, 2007.
§ 312 FOREWORD § 313
FWD:589

Part 4
PER CAPITA TAX
§ 401. Authority for Enactment. [Ord. 493, 4/4/1966; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
This Part is enacted under authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, P.L.
1257, No. 511, December 31, 1965, 53 P.S. §§ 6901 et seq., as hereafter
amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania.
§ 402. "Resident" Defined. [Ord. 493, 4/4/1966; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
The word "resident" as used in this Part shall mean every adult 18 years or
older who lives within the Borough.
§ 403. Imposition of Tax. [Ord. 493, 4/4/1966; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
Every resident shall pay $5 for the present calendar year and each year
hereafter; provided, the tax hereby imposed shall not be levied upon any
resident whose total income during the taxable year is less than $6,700.
§ 404. Collection. [Ord. 493, 4/4/1966; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/
15/2001]
All taxes, interests, costs and penalties imposed by this Part shall be
collected by the Borough Tax Collector.
§ 405. Effective Date. [Ord. 493, 4/4/1966; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
This Part shall become effective on December 28, 1967 and shall continue
in effect on a calendar year basis without annual reenactment.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 405
FWD:591

Part 5
DELINQUENT TAXES
§ 501. Penalty for Delinquent Taxes. [Ord. 596, 12/21/1976, § 1]
Taxpayers, subject to the payment of taxes to the Borough of Elizabethtown,
who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for
four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of
10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be
collected by the Tax Collector.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 501
FWD:593

Part 6
LERTA PROGRAM
§ 601. Definitions. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
The following words and phrases when used in this Part shall have the
following meaning:
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The governing body formed and assembled as
the Borough Council of Elizabethtown Borough, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
DETERIORATED AREA — Any area meeting the requirements of the Local
Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance Act, 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property owned by an individual, association, or corporation, and
located in deteriorated areas, as hereinafter provided, or any such property
which has been the subject of an order by a government agency requiring
the unit to be vacated, condemned or demolished by reason of
noncompliance with laws, ordinances, or regulations. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement and should not result in
an increased assessed value and taxation.
IMPROVEMENT — Repair, construction or reconstruction, including
alterations and additions, having the effect of rehabilitating a deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity, or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep and
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
LERTA — Abbreviation for the Local Economic Revitalization Tax Assistance
Act, the Act of December 1, 1977, P.L. 237, No. 76, 72 P.S. § 4722 et seq.
§ 602. Eligible Areas. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014; as amended by Ord. No.
993, 5/16/2019]
The Borough Council determines that the properties identified below shall
be the area which contains and consists of deteriorated properties which
are eligible for tax exemption under this Part. Additional eligible areas may
be included from time to time by ordinance of the Borough Council. The
properties included within the deteriorated area and subject to the benefits
of this Part are as follows:
Lancaster County Tax
Account No. Address Record Owner
2503157800000 28 South Market Street South Market Street, LP
2506571100000 206 South Market
Street
Market Street Ventures
Group LLC
2500871500000 18 North Market Street Loyal Order of Moose
596
§ 601 FOREWORD § 603
FWD:595
§ 603. Exemption. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
§ 604. Exemption Schedule. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
§ 605. Procedure for Obtaining Exemption. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
1. The amount to be exempted from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost
of new construction or improvements to deteriorated property in
accordance with the exemption schedule established by this Part.
2. The exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to that
improvement for which an exemption has been requested in the manner
set forth in this Part and for which a separate assessment has been
made by the Board of Assessment of Appeals.
1. The schedule of real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in accordance
with the below portion of improvements to be exempted each year.
Length
(Year)
Portion
(%)
1 100
2 90
3 80
4 70
5 60
6 50
7 40
8 30
9 20
10 10
2. If an eligible property is granted a tax exemption pursuant to this Part,
the improvement shall not, during the exemption period, be considered
as a factor in assessing other properties.
3. The exemption from taxes granted under this Part shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
1. Any person desiring tax exemption under this Part shall notify the
Borough Manager as well as the Business Manager of the
Elizabethtown Area School District in writing on a form provided to the
applicant at the time he secures a building permit for new construction
or an improvement as defined by this Part. A copy of the exemption
request shall be forwarded to the Lancaster County Assessment Office.
§ 603 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 605
FWD:596
§ 606. Termination Date. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014; as amended by Ord.
No. 993, 5/16/2019]
An application for exemption under the provisions of this Part, as enacted by
Ordinance No. 956, shall be made within five years of the effective date of
such ordinance, May 15, 2014. An application for exemption for properties
identified in § 602, as amended by Ordinance No. 993, may be made at any
time within five years from the effective date of such ordinance. All qualified
applications under this Part are eligible for the entire ten-year exemption
schedule.
§ 607. Extension. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
The Borough may, by ordinance adopted from time to time, extend the time
for filing an application for exemption. However, in no event shall any one
extension period exceed five years.
§ 608. Revocation of LERTA Exemption. [Ord. 956, 5/15/2014]
The exemption from real estate taxes provided for herein shall be forfeited
by the applicant and/or subsequent owner of the real estate for the failure to
pay any nonexempt real estate taxes by the last day of the time period to pay
such taxes in the penalty period. Upon receipt of the notice of nonpayment
of nonexempt real estate taxes, the Borough Manager shall discontinue the
LERTA exemption.
The Lancaster County Assessor shall, upon notice by the applicant
and after completion of the new construction or improvement, assess
separately the new construction or improvement and calculate the
amount of the assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with
the limits established by this Part and shall notify the taxpayer, the
Borough and the school district of the reassessment and the amount
of the assessment eligible for the exemption. Appeals from the
reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken
by the taxpayer or the local taxing authority as provided by law.
2. The cost of the new construction or improvements to be exempted and
the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this Part, if any, shall not apply to the
adoption of any such amendment.
§ 605 FOREWORD § 608
FWD:597
Chapter 25
TREES
§ 608 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 608
FWD:598
Part 1
SHADE TREES
§ 101. Title. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 1]
This Part shall be known as the "Shade Tree Ordinance of the Borough of
Elizabethtown."
§ 102. Definitions and Interpretation. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 2]
In interpreting this Part, the present tense includes the future; the singular
number includes the plural and the plural the singular and the word person
includes natural person, partnership, firm, association and corporation.
BOROUGH — The duly incorporated Borough of Elizabethtown.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The duly appointed members of the Borough
Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown.
COMMISSION — The duly appointed members of the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The area of any public street, road, highway or other
publicly held thoroughfare within the corporate limits of the Borough that
has been designated by law as a public right-of-way.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant which is planted in
any right-of-way or has at least 1/2 of trunk, branches or roots extending
into any right-of-way.
§ 103. Legislative Intent. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 3]
The Borough recognizes that properly planted, maintained and protected
shade trees add to the aesthetics and health and welfare of the citizens
of the Borough. Therefore, it shall be the intent of this Part to establish
a Shade Tree Commission for the Borough, define the mission of that
Commission and establish rules and regulations to encourage the planting
of appropriate shade trees, provide for the proper maintenance of trees,
protect shade trees and provide guidelines for the removal and replacement
of shade trees.
§ 104. Shade Tree Commission. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 4]
1. A Shade Tree Commission is hereby established consisting of three
members who are citizens of the Borough. Each member shall serve a
term of five years.
2. The Shade Tree Commission shall have the power to enforce the
provisions of this Part as provided by law.
3. The Shade Tree Commission shall, when called upon, act as an advisory
panel to Borough Council on all Borough matters having an
environmental impact on the Borough including, but not limited to, land
§ 101 FOREWORD § 104
FWD:599
§ 105. General Regulations. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 5]
development, park development or improvements and downtown
revitalization projects. The Shade Tree Commission shall report to
Borough Council through the Borough Manager.
1. The maintenance, care or removal of any shade tree, as defined herein,
and required compliance with any provision of this Part shall be the
responsibility of the property owner on whose property the tree is
located or whose property abuts the right-of-way in which the shade
tree is located.
2. No person shall plant a shade tree within any public right-of-way within
the Borough except as detailed herein under Central Business District
provisions. Shade trees existing at the date of adoption of this Part may
continue to be maintained. In the event of the removal of a shade tree
existing in the right-of-way, a replacement tree shall not be planted in
the same location.
3. All mature shade trees shall be kept trimmed to a minimum branching
height of 10 feet into right-of-way, except that the Commission may
require greater height clearances to eliminate traffic or other hazards.
4. Whenever, in the opinion of the Commission, a health or safety hazard
exists caused by a shade tree, the Commission may issue a written
order to the responsible property owner to take action to correct the
condition within 10 days of the date of the order. If after written
notification, the responsible property owner fails to take corrective
action, the Borough shall have the required work accomplished to
correct the health or safety condition and shall bill the responsible
property owner. Failure to remit by the responsible property owner may
result in a lien placed against the property by the Borough.
5. If, in the opinion of the Commission, there is any diseased tree on any
property within the Borough, the Commission may issue a written order
to the responsible property owner to cut and remove the diseased tree
within 30 days. If after written notification, the responsible property
owner fails to remove the tree, the Borough shall have the tree removed
and shall bill the responsible property owner. Failure to remit by the
responsible property owner may result in a lien placed against the
property by the Borough.
6. The Shade Tree Commission may hire any person or firm having special
knowledge of plant, shrub or tree diseases to assist in determining the
existence of diseased trees within the Borough.
7. Any expenses or costs incurred by the Borough or by the Shade Tree
Commission shall be paid out of the general funds of the Borough.
8. The Shade Tree Commission, its agents or employees, shall have full
power and authority to enter upon any property within the Borough for
§ 104 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 105
FWD:600
§ 106. Special Provisions for Shade Tree in the Central Business
District. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 6]
In addition to the foregoing general regulations, the following special
provisions shall apply to shade trees located in the Central Business
District:
§ 107. Special Provisions for Shade Trees in Borough Parks, Open
Space and Recreation Areas. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 7]
§ 108. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 782, 9/18/1997, § 9; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this Part
shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
the purpose of inspection of or ascertaining the existence of any
diseased tree and to cause the cutting and removal of any diseased tree.
A. The Commission shall annually inspect all shade trees within the
Central Business District and shall file a report with the Borough
Council on the condition of the trees needed maintenance.
B. Only the following types of trees may be planted in the right-of-way:
(1) Hybrid Red Maples.
(2) Lindens.
(3) Thornless Honey.
(4) Locusts.
(5) Pears.
(6) Elms.
C. Whenever a shade tree is removed in the Central Business District, the
shade tree shall be replaced in accordance with this Part. All removed
shade trees shall be replaced except when a change in street
construction or land development makes it impossible or would cause
the replacement to be a safety or health hazard. A decision not to
replace a removed shade tree must be approved by the Commission.
1. The Commission shall annually inspect all trees in the parks of the
Borough and on all open space and recreational areas owned by the
Borough, and shall file a report with Borough Council on the condition
of the trees and needed maintenance.
2. Any new planting proposals shall be reviewed by the Commission and
the Commission shall make recommendations on the type of tree that
should be planted.
§ 105 FOREWORD § 108
FWD:601
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part
continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 108 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 108
FWD:602
Chapter 26
WATER
§ 108 FOREWORD § 108
FWD:603

Part 1
WATER CONNECTIONS
§ 101. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
These rules and regulations are a part of the contract with every person who
takes water service and every such person by taking that service agrees to
be bound hereby. These rules and regulations are not intended to conflict
with any local, State or Federal legislation. Any provisions that are found to
be in direct conflict with such legislation shall not be applicable.
§ 102. Enforcement. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 2]
These rules and regulations shall become effective on the date of adoption
of this Part for all properties then and after connection to the water system.
All prior rules and regulations not consistent herewith are hereby repealed,
provided, however, that all rights and fees due the Borough under such
rules and regulations are preserved. The Borough reserves the right to
amend these rules and regulations in such manner and at such time as, in
its opinion, may be advisable.
§ 103. Definitions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 3; as amended by Ord.
829, 11/15/2001]
APPLICANT — A person, building owner or lot owner who applies for water
services at a premises.
APPLICATION — Form supplied by the Borough indicating the desire to
connect to the water system.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown.
BOROUGH SERVICE LINE — The service pipe and appurtenances
extending from the Borough's main including:
CONTRACTOR — A builder or other person who uses water on a temporary
basis for construction purposes.
CROSS-CONNECTION — Any connection direct or indirect that physically
joins a customer's service line, or any piping extension thereof, to a
nonpotable source of water; or to a water system other than that of the
Borough.
CUSTOMER — Any person who receives water service from the Borough.
CUSTOMER SERVICE LINE — That part of the water service pipe extending
from the Borough's service line to the premises (except the water meter).
METER — A device(s) for measuring the quantity of water used which is a
basis for determining charges for service to a customer.
WATER SERVICE LINE — The tee or tap in the main, the lateral pipe to
a point at or near the property line, the curb stop or service valve and
the curb box or valve box.
A.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 103
FWD:605
OWNER — The person in whose name the deed for a property is designated.
PERMIT — Borough of Elizabethtown water and/ permit (including
application form).
PREMISES — The property, building, or other site to which water service is
furnished, including:
TOWNSHIP — Mount Joy Township or West Donegal Township.
WATER SYSTEM — The Borough's water supply and distribution facilities,
taken as a whole, or as any portion thereof.
§ 104. Application Procedure. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 4; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
A. A building under one roof and occupied by one family or one business.
Each combination of buildings owned by one person, serviced by one
service line, and occupied by one family or business.
B.
C. Each side of a double house or each housing unit.
Each apartment, office, or suite of offices located in a building having
several such apartments, offices, or suites of offices and using in
common one or more means of entrance.
D.
E. Any mobile home occupied by one family or business.
Any other type of dwelling unit or business requiring water usage as
determined by the Borough.
F.
1. Any applicant desiring water service from the Borough's main into his
or her premises must first make a written application on the form
furnished by the Borough.
2. The applicant must also demonstrate that the premises has received
final subdivision or land development plan approval and recorded at the
County level. If the applicant's premises is located within the Township,
the applicant must also produce a letter from the Township stating that
the lot(s) have received final plan approval and recordation as above
mentioned.
3. The application, which must be signed by the owner or duly authorized
agent, shall not be approved until the Borough receives full payment of
all applicable service connection charges, tapping fees or other charges
adopted by the Borough.
4. Separate service applications shall be made for each premises as
defined by this Part.
5. The fact that an application may not exist, or may not be signed by the
owner, shall not relieve the owner of his or her responsibility for
ultimate payment of all service charges related to the premises.
§ 103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 104
FWD:606
§ 105. General Conditions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 5]
6. Applications for service will be reviewed by the Borough and its
consulting engineers. Completed applications shall be reviewed in
order of date of submittal.
7. In the event that service connections are available on a limited basis
only, applications will be reviewed and approved in order of date of
submittal. A waiting list of approved applications will be on file at the
Borough Office until new permits are issued.
8. In the event that a deposit is required, no interest will be paid by the
Borough.
9. A permit shall be issued when the completed application has been
approved by the Borough.
1. No customer or any premises receiving water service shall be allowed
to supply such service to other persons or other premises without
written consent of the Borough.
2. Upon approval of the water service application, and payment of all
applicable charges, the Borough will install its service lines. The
location of the service line will be designated by the Borough.
3. All Borough property owners, customers or premises shall be
connected to the Borough water service lines as of the effective date of
this Part. A waiver of this provision may be granted only by Borough
Council.
4. The Borough will be responsible for the maintenance and repair of its
service line.
5. The customer's service line, beyond the Borough's service line, shall be
installed and maintained by the customer at his expense.
6. The customer's service line shall be installed as a continuous length of
pipe and shall meet Borough specifications.
7. When a customer desires to change in location or size of an existing
service line, he shall bear the entire cost of the change, including the
Borough's service line.
8. Although service line pressure may be undesirably low, the Borough
shall be under no obligation to increase pressure by pumping or other
means.
9. Each customer will be supplied through a separate metered service
connection unless the Borough waives this requirement in written form.
10. In private developments, the Borough shall own and maintain the
Borough water service line in the same manner as a publicly owned
development.
§ 104 FOREWORD § 105
FWD:607
§ 106. Meter Installation. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 7]
§ 107. Residential Conversions. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 8; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Conversions of existing industrial or commercial structures to a residential
use, provided that the previous use has not lapsed by more than 30 months,
may average the previous metered usage towards the proposed residential
use for the purpose of computing the connection fees. Future residential
use shall be calculated at 12,000 gallons per quarter for each premises.
Example: An existing industrial structure consumed 480,000 gallons in the
four quarters prior to closing its operation. An applicant seeks to renovate
this structure or include 20 apartment units. The connection fee for water
services would by calculated as follows:
§ 108. Fee Adjustment. [Ord. 683, 10/15/1987, § 9]
Borough Council may, at its sole discretion, review and modify the water
and/ connection fees for a particular property when such an adjustment is
in the overwhelming public good.
11. No cross-connections of any type shall be allowed by the Borough.
1. Each premises, prior to occupancy, shall install a water meter provided
by the Borough. Failure to notify the Borough of occupancy, or failure to
install a water meter, shall result in an additional charge of $5 per day
for each premises.
2. Contractors shall install a meter in all premises prior to use of the
sewer system. Failure to install the meter shall result in an additional
charge of $5 per day for each premises.
A. Four hundred eighty thousand gallons ÷ four quarters = 120,000
gallons per quarter.
B. One hundred twenty thousand gallons per quarter ÷ 12,000 gallons =
10 units.
C. Twenty proposed units - 10 adjusted units = 10 units.
D. The applicant would pay $10,000 for water connections and $10,000 for
connections.
§ 105 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 108
FWD:608
Part 2
CONNECTION REQUIRED
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 1.1]
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this Part shall be as follows:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, political subdivision.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial of any property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation or other group or entity.
PROPERTY — Any building, group of buildings or land within the Borough
and designated or separate, distinct parcel on the real estate map of the
Borough.
WATER SYSTEM — The water distribution facilities, including all related
facilities to be constructed, installed or acquired by or for the Borough,
including all property, real, personal and mixed, rights, powers, licenses,
easements, rights-of-way, privileges, franchises and other property or
interest in property of whatsoever natures used or useful in connection
with such facilities, and together with all additions, extensions, alterations,
improvements and betterments from time to time, by or for the Borough.
§ 202. Connection Required. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 2.1]
The owner of any property abutting upon any street in which there is a
water main which is part of the water system, shall connect such property
therewith, in such manner as the Borough may require, within 60 days after
notice to such owner from the Borough to make such connection, for the
purpose of conducting water to said property, subject to such limitations
and restrictions as shall be established by the Borough from time to time.
§ 203. Notice to Connect. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 2.2]
The notice by the Borough to make a connection to the Water System,
referred to in § 202, shall consist of a copy of this Part, including any
amendments at the time in effect, and a written or printed document
requiring such connection in accordance with the provisions of this Part and
specifying that such connection shall be made within 60 days from the date
such notice is given. Such notice may be given at any time after a water
main is in place which can be connected to the property and conduct water
thereto. Such notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal
service or by registered mail or by such other method as at the time may be
provided by law.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 204
FWD:609
§ 204. Method of Conducting Water. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 2.3]
In the event that it is determined by the Borough's employees or
representatives that the owner's method of conducting water from the
water system to the property, whether by piping, or otherwise, is defective,
causing the water system to lose water and/or pressure, it shall be the
obligation of the owner, within 10 days after notice to such owner from the
Borough, to repair the defective condition.
§ 205. Notice to Repair Defective Condition. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984,
§ 2.4]
The notice by the Borough to repair a defective condition, referred to in
§ 204, shall consist of a written or printed document requiring the defective
condition to be remedied within 10 days from the date such notice is given.
Such notice shall be served upon the owner either by personal service or by
registered mail or by such other method as at the time may be provided by
law.
§ 206. Remedy of Defective Conditions. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 2.5]
If the owner of any property located in the Borough after 10 days notice
from the Borough, in accordance with §§ 204 and 105 hereof, shall fail to
correct and remedy the defective condition as required, the Borough may
repair and remedy the defective condition and shall collect from such owner
the costs and expenses thereof. In such case, the Borough shall forthwith,
upon completion of the work, send an itemized bill of the costs of the repairs
to the owner of the property upon which repairs have been so made, which
bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by the owner of
such property to pay said bill, the Borough shall file a municipal lien for said
repairs, the same to be subject in all respects to the general law provided
for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 207. Inspection. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 2.6]
The Borough, its employees or representatives shall have the right from
time to time, as cause appears, to enter upon the premises of any owner
for the purposes of inspecting such owner's property, for the purposes of
enforcing any provision of this Part.
§ 208. Compliance. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 3.1]
No connection shall be made to the water system except in compliance with
the ordinances and rules and regulations of the Borough. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the property to connect to the water system
in strict compliance with this Part and rules and regulations of the Borough.
In the event the owner shall not so comply, the Borough shall have the same
remedy hereunder as is set forth in § 210 for failure to connect.
§ 204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 209
FWD:610
§ 209. Adoption of Additional Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 658, 10/
1/1984, § 3.2]
The Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with the water system, which additional rules and regulations,
to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed as a part of this
Part.
§ 210. Failure to Connect. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 10]
If the owner of any property located in the Borough and whose property
abuts upon any street in which there is a water main being part of the water
system, after 60 days' notice from the Borough, in accordance with § 202,
shall fail to connect such property as required, the Borough may make
such connection and shall collect from such owner the costs and expenses
thereof. In such case, the Borough shall forthwith, upon completion of the
work, send an itemized bill of the cost of the construction of such connection
to the owner of the property to which connection has been so made, which
bill shall be payable forthwith. In case of neglect or refusal by the owner
of such property to pay said bill, the Borough shall file a municipal lien for
said construction within six months of the date of the completion of the
construction of said connection, the same to be subject in all respects to the
general law provided for the filing and recovery of municipal liens.
§ 211. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 4.1; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this Part shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 plus costs and, in
default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this Part continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 212. Fines and Costs. [Ord. 658, 10/4/1984, § 12]
Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this Part shall be enforceable
and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by applicable law.
§ 209 FOREWORD § 212
FWD:611

Part 3
RATES AND CHARGES
§ 301. Short Title. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 1]
This Part shall be known and may be cited as the "Elizabethtown Borough
Water Rates and Regulations ordinance."
§ 302. Definitions and Word Usage. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 2]
1. In the interpretation of this Part, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
2. All words and phrases defined herein shall have the meaning set forth
below:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania.
CONSUMER — Every separate family, person, business, institution, or
other entity that occupies a single unit of occupancy and receives public
water from the water system.
COUNCIL — Borough Council of the Borough acting through its
designated representatives.
CUSTOMER — An owner of a property which contains a unit of
occupancy that contracts for water service to such unit of occupancy.
DWELLING UNIT — An improved property or portion thereof
containing one room, a group of rooms, mobile home, building or other
enclosure connected, directly or indirectly, to the water system and
occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarters by a
family or any other group of persons living together or by a person or
persons living alone. By way of example and not by way of limitation, a
dwelling unit shall be considered each:
NONRESIDENTIAL UNIT — A separate unit in an improved property
other than a dwelling unit. A nonresidential unit shall include, but
not be limited to, each quarters for separate commercial, industrial or
institutional customer.
OWNER — Any person having an ownership interest, whether legal or
equitable, sole or partial, in any property.
A. Single family detached dwelling.
B. Each side of a single family semi-detached or twin dwelling.
C. Each house in a row of houses.
Each apartment, condominium or cooperative unit in any structure
containing more than one unit for residential purposes.
D.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 302
FWD:613
§ 303. Rates and Charges. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 3]
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership, public or private
corporation whether for profit or not for profit, trust, estate, or other
legally recognized entity. Whenever the term "person" is used in
connection with any provision imposing duties, ordering action to
comply with the terms of this Part, or providing for the imposition of
a fine or penalty, the term "person" shall include the members of an
association, partnership, or firm and the officers of any public or private
corporation whether for profit or not for profit.
PROPERTY — Any land upon which any structures are located which
structure or structures are connected to the water system.
UNIT OF OCCUPANCY — Each separate dwelling unit or separate
nonresidential unit.
WATER SYSTEM — The water supply and distribution facilities,
including all related facilities constructed, installed or acquired by or
for the Borough and including all property, real, personal and mixed,
rights, powers, licenses, easements, rights-of-way, privileges,
franchises and other property or interests in property of whatsoever
nature used or useful in connection with such facilities, together with
all additions, extensions, alterations, improvements and betterments
thereof or thereto which may be made, installed or acquired from time
to time by or for the Borough.
1. All water shall be sold by meter only and shall be sold only to the owner
of the property served. The Borough reserves the right to change the
manner and/or frequency of billing at any time.
2. Effective for the quarterly billing covering the period commencing July
1, 2000, and thereafter, the water rates for each unit of occupancy
receiving water from the water system for water consumed per quarter
annum shall be as follows:
First 3,000 gallons or
less
$21
3,001 to 7,000 gallons $21 + [(gallons used-3,000)/1,000 x $4.75]
7,001 to 25,000 gallons $40 + [(gallons used-7,000)/1,000 x $5.75]
25,001 to 49,000
gallons
$143.50 + [(gallons used-25,000)/1,000 x $4]
49,001 to 5,000,000
gallons
$239.50 + [(gallons used-49,000)/1,000 x
$2.25]
greater than 5,000,000
gallons
$11,379.50 + [(gallons
used-5,000,000)/1,000 x $0.75]
3. If two or more units of occupancy are supplied from one connection, the
water rates established in Subsection (2) above are hereby imposed for
each separate unit of occupancy. The water consumption for each unit
§ 302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 303
FWD:614
§ 304. Billings and Payments. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 4]
of occupancy shall be calculated by dividing the total water
consumption metered for the single connection within the quarter by
the number of units of occupancy served by the single connection. The
customer shall pay for each separate unit of occupancy that charge
calculated using the rates in Subsection (2) above for the water
consumption calculated in accordance with this subsection.
4. The Borough hereby establishes the following fees and charges for
items relating to the water system other than consumption of water:
A. For the return of a check unpaid from a financial institution: $25
B. For the resumption of service after water service has been
discontinued to a unit of occupancy for any reason: $50
1. All rates and charges for the use of the water system shall be billed and
customers shall make payment as follows:
A. All water rates, together with any penalties thereon, shall be paid
by the customer to the Borough for use of the Borough at the times
and in the manner hereinafter specified.
B. The water rates imposed shall be computed quarterly for calendar
quarters beginning on January 1, April 1, July 1 and October 1 for
each year. Water rates shall be billed for the preceding calendar
quarter.
C. Water rates shall be paid on or before the thirtieth day after the
billing date indicated on the bill. If any water rate is not paid in full
on or before that date, a penalty of 5% on the amount due shall be
added and paid by the customer in addition to the water rate due.
D. If any water rate or other charge is not paid in full within five days
after the billing date, in addition to the penalty set forth in
Subsection (1)(c) above, interest shall be imposed at the rate of 5%
per annum.
E. Failure to receive a bill shall not exempt any customer from the
obligation to pay the water rates or from the accruing of penalties
or interest. The presentation of a bill to a customer is only a matter
of accommodation and not a waiver of this Section.
F. Any customer who or which has reason to doubt the accuracy of a
bill shall notify the Borough in writing within 10 days of the date of
the bill as to the fact that the customer believes the bill to be
inaccurate and the factors which support the customer's position.
G. Water rates, rents and charges imposed by this Part, to the
maximum extent permitted by law, shall be a lien on the property
connected to and served by the water system. Any such water
rates, rents or charges which shall be delinquent, to the extent
§ 303 FOREWORD § 304
FWD:615
§ 305. Use of Water; Service Interruptions; Meters. [Ord. 812, 6/15/
2000, § 5]
§ 306. Change in Ownership of Property. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 6]
permitted by law, shall be filed as a lien against the property so
connected and served by the water system, which lien shall be filed
in the office of the Prothonotary of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the filing
and collecting of municipal claims.
1. Water supplied by the Borough may be used for all residential, business,
industrial, agricultural, public or other legal purposes; provided,
however, that the Borough reserves the right to impose at any time such
restrictions in the use of water as may be necessary due to accidents,
breakdowns, shortages of water, temporary discontinuance of water
service to make necessary repairs, removals or replacements or other
unavoidable emergencies. The Borough shall make every effort to notify
consumers before service is interrupted. However, no deduction in
water rates shall be allowed for failure on the part of the Borough to
supply water, and the Borough shall not be responsible for any losses
due to an inability to supply water.
2. Each customer shall be required to install a water meter, if requested
by the Borough, a remote reader, to measure the quantity of water
consumed. Each such meter and remote reader shall be furnished by
the Borough and shall be installed by the Borough or by the owner in
accordance with rules and regulations to be adopted by the Borough.
The Borough shall determine the location for all meters and remote
readers. If the Borough determines that a meter is to be placed within
the customer's building, the customer will provide a readily accessible
place (in the basement if a basement exists in such building) near the
entrance of the water service pipes. All meters and remote readers shall
remain the property of the Borough.
3. Each customer and each consumer shall at all times properly protect
the meter and the remote reader from injury by frost or freezing or hot
water or any other cause. If a meter or remote reader is damaged by
frost or freezing or hot water or any other external cause, the customer
shall pay the cost of repair the damaged meter and/or remote reader or
the cost of a new meter and/or remote reader.
4. No person shall tamper or interfere with any meter or remote reader.
No person shall take any action which shall result in the inaccurate
metering of water provided to any unit of occupancy.
1. When the ownership of a property changes from one person to another,
the previous owner/customer shall notify the Borough in writing and in
advance of the date of discontinuance of service under his ownership.
Should the owner/customer fail to give such notice, he shall be
responsible for all charges up to and including the date the new owner
§ 304 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:616
§ 307. Responsibility of Property Owners. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 7]
§ 308. Rules and Regulations. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 8]
§ 309. Termination of Water Service. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 9]
The Borough may disconnect water service to any property or unit of
occupancy for any of the following reasons:
makes application for service. The new owner shall make application
for service in the same manner as for a new service in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Borough.
1. The owner of any property connected to the water system shall be
responsible for all tenants or other occupants of such property insofar
as such acts shall be governed by provisions of this Part.
2. All connections, service lines and fixtures famished or owned by the
owner shall be maintained by such owner in good order, and all valves,
meters and appliances famished and owned by the Borough and on the
property of the owner shall be protected properly and cared for by said
owner. All leaks in the service line or any other pipe or fixture in or on
the premises supplied must be repaired immediately by the owner.
3. The Borough shall not be responsible for maintaining any portion of the
building water connection owned by the owner or for damage done by
water escaping therefrom or from lines or fixtures on the owner's
property, and the owner shall at all times comply with all ordinances
and regulations with reference thereto and make changes therein
required on account of change of grade, relocation of mains or
otherwise.
4. Consumers shall not turn the water on or off at any corporation stop or
curb stop or disconnect or remove the meter or permit its disconnection
or removal without the prior, written consent of the Borough.
5. Consumers shall not tamper with or permit tampering with in any other
way cause or permit injury to any meter or any other property of the
Borough.
1. The Borough, from time to time, in accordance with law, by appropriate
ordinance or resolution, may adopt such additional rules and
regulations as, in the opinion of the Council, shall be desirable,
beneficial or necessary for or in connection with the use and operation
of the water system.
2. Any such rules and regulations so adopted by the Council shall be
construed in conjunction with the provisions of this Part and shall
become effective on the date fixed by the Council upon adoption
thereof.
A. Nonpayment of water rates or other charges imposed under this Part.
§ 306 FOREWORD § 309
FWD:617
§ 310. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 812, 6/15/2000, § 10; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
B. Nonpayment of sewer rates and charges.
C. Misrepresentation in an application for water service as to the property,
number of units of occupancy, or the use to be made of the water or
placement of false information on or omission of relevant information
from an application for water service.
D. Waste of water through improper or imperfect pipes, lines, fixtures,
beyond the connection to the Borough's water main.
E. Tampering with or damaging any water line, meter, remote reader, curb
stop, seal or other appliance owned by the Borough.
F. Violation of any rule of the borough for the use of the water system.
G. Refusal to allow access to the property for the purpose of inspection or
for the reading, maintenance or removal of a meter.
1. It shall be a violation of this Part to commit or permit any other person
to commit any of the actions set forth in § 409 of this Part or to commit
or permit any other person to commit any action prohibited by any
provision of this Part or to fail to comply with any other provision of this
Part.
2. Any person who violates or permits the violation of any provision of this
Part shall be, upon conviction thereof, sentenced to a fine of not less
than $100 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation continues and each section of this Part which
is violated shall constitute a separate violation.
3. The Borough reserves the right to take any action necessary to collect
any water rates or other charges and any penalties and interest
imposed under this Part in addition to taking any enforcement action
authorized by this Section.
§ 309 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 310
FWD:618
Part 4
DROUGHT CONTINGENCY PLAN
§ 401. Drought Contingency Plan. [Ord. 694, 1/18/1989, § 1; as
amended by Ord. 837, 9/19/2002, § 1]
1. The plan listed below provides the Borough with a set of drought
indicators or triggers which will accurately identify the onset of
drought occurrences in a manner that gives sufficient time and warning
to respond appropriately.
2. The triggers and responses are staged with progressively stricter and
more severe response measures with each stage.
Stage I
Trigger Point Demand Measures Supply Measures
State declares a
drought watch or
warning for this area.
Voluntary restrictions
on nonessential water
use.
Systemwide leakage
and loss reduction
survey.
Stage II
State declares a
drought emergency
for this area.
Implement mandatory restrictions on
nonessential water use. If Stage III appears
imminent, submit water rationing plan to the
Pennsylvania Drought Coordinator for
approval.
Stage III
Trigger Point Demand Measures Supply Measures
Groundwater and
surface water sources
are unable to meet the
demand of the system.
Implement water
rationing plan after
the Governor declares
the Elizabethtown
service area a drought
or water shortage
emergency area, and
the Commonwealth
Drought Coordinator
approves the plan.
Notify State Water
Plan Division (717)
787-5008.
Utilize emergency
sources and equipment
(list emergency
sources and equipment
necessary to utilize
each source).
§ 401 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:619
§ 402. Nonessential Use Ban. [Ord. 694, 1/18/1989, § 2; as amended
by Ord. 837, 9/19/2002, § 1]
Prohibited Exceptions
1. Any sewage or stormwater treatment system
that is utilizing spray irrigation if the system is
approved by DEP prior to the emergency and
the spray area is approved prior to or during the
emergency.
2. Newly seeded or sodded grass areas can be
watered during the hours of 5:00 p.m. to 9:00
a.m. by means of a bucket, can or handheld hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff.
3. Newly seeded or sodded grass areas can be
watered during the hours of 7:00 p.m. to 11:00
p.m. by any means designed and operated to
ensure effective conservation.
4. A professional landscaper may water newly
seeded or sodded grass areas during regular
working hours by any means designed and
operated to ensure effective conservation.
5. A professional landscaper or irrigation
contractor can use water for testing newly
installed or repaired irrigation equipment, not to
exceed 15 minutes per zone.
6. Water can be used for grub control, not to
exceed one application during the effective
period of the Governor's emergency
proclamation.
Use of any water
for watering
grass.
7. Water can be used to implement revegetation
following earthmoving, where required under an
erosion and sedimentation plan, in a manner
that ensures effective conservation.
1. Any sewage or stormwater treatment system
that is utilizing spray irrigation if the system is
approved by DEP prior to the emergency and
the spray area is approved prior to or during the
emergency.
Use of any water
for watering
athletic fields.
2. Grass tennis courts can be watered by means of
a bucket, can or handheld hose equipped with
an automatic shutoff nozzle, or by means of an
irrigation system designed and operated to
restrict the timing or total volume of water,
when applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. in a manner that ensures effective
conservation.
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 402
FWD:620
Prohibited Exceptions
3. Athletic field grass areas, other than sand-based,
can be watered between 5:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m., one night per calendar week, in
accordance with a schedule submitted to the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator, local law
enforcement agency and, if applicable, to the
public water supply agency.
4. Sand-based athletic fields can be watered in
accordance with a plan approved by the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator.
5. Newly seeded or sodded grass can be watered
by a means that ensures effective conservation.
6. Athletic field nongrass areas can be watered to
control dust in manner that ensures effective
conservation, if necessary to protect public
health or safety.
7. Water can be used by professional landscapers
or irrigation contractors for the purpose of
testing newly installed or repaired irrigation
equipment, not to exceed 15 minutes per zone.
1. Irrigation for the production of food and fiber or
the maintenance of livestock and poultry.
2. Water applied by means of a handheld hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle, or an
irrigation system designed and operated to
restrict the timing or total volume of water and
to restrict the application to specific plantings
and that ensures effective conservation, when
applied between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 9:00
a.m.
3. Water used by nurseries to maintain stock, by a
means that ensures effective conservation.
4. Water used by public gardens of national, state
or regional significance or arboretums to
preserve specimens by a means that ensures
effective conservation.
5. Water used by a professional landscaper or
irrigation contractor during working hours, by a
means that ensures effective conservation.
Use of fresh
water for
irrigation and
watering of
outdoor gardens,
landscaped
areas, trees,
shrubs and other
out-door plants.
6. Water can be used to implement revegetation
following earthmoving, where required under an
erosion and sedimentation plan, in a manner
that ensures effective conservation.
§ 402 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:621
Prohibited Exceptions
1. Greens, tees and fairways can be watered in
accordance with a plan approved by the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator, between
the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
2. Water can be used by means of a handheld hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle, to
syringe heat sensitive grasses on tees, greens
and fairways, between the hours of 10:0 a.m.
and 5:00 p.m., not to exceed 15 minutes on any
grass area.
Use of any water
for watering of
golf courses.
3. Water can be used by professional landscapers
or irrigation contractors to test newly installed
or repaired irrigation equipment, not to exceed
15 minutes per zone.
1. Water can be used for prewashing in
preparation of recoating and sealing a paved
surface.
2. Tennis courts composed of clay or similar
materials can be watered by means of a bucket,
can or handheld hose equipped with an
automatic shutoff nozzle.
3. Water can be used for sanitation of the premises
of raw or processed food, pharmaceutical or
vaccine processing, storage or vending
establishments, including restaurants and
grocery stores.
4. Water can be used for sanitation of the premises
of waste handling, storage and disposal
facilities.
Use of any water
for washing
paved surfaces,
such as streets,
roads, sidewalks,
driveways,
garages, patios,
parking areas,
tennis courts,
decks and patios.
5. Water can be used to comply with permit
conditions or other regulatory requirements.
1. Water can be used to perform the primary and
necessary aeration function for a pond that
supports fish life.
Use of any water
for ornamental
purposes,
including
fountains,
artificial
waterfalls and
reflecting pools.
2. Water can be used to top off ornamental water
gardens or fish ponds to the minimum extent
necessary to maintain fish and aquatic life.
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 402
FWD:622
Prohibited Exceptions
1. An individual may wash personally owned or
leased vehicles with buckets or handheld hose
equipped with an automatic shutoff nozzle for
prerinse and rinse, not to exceed a total of two
minutes spray time. Water use is limited to odd
street addresses on first and third Saturdays of
the month and even or no street addresses on
second and fourth Saturdays of the month.
2. Water may be used by commercial car washes at
the minimum rate necessary to ensure an
effective wash.
3. Water may be used for cleaning of construction,
emergency, public transportation or government
vehicles if necessary to preserve the proper
functioning and safe operation of the vehicle.
4. Water may be used for cleaning or sanitizing
equipment used for hauling or vending raw or
processed food, pharmaceuticals or vaccines, or
for handling waste products.
5. Water may be used for the cleaning of new and
used cars that are part of a dealer's sales
inventory in accordance with restrictions
contained in the regulations.
6. Water may be used by professional mobile wash
businesses as part of normal business practices.
Use of any water
for washing or
cleaning of
mobile
equipment,
including
automobiles,
trucks, buses,
trailers, carts,
wagons, railroad
cars, campers
and boats.
7. Water may be used by nonprofit service
organizations or clubs for fundraising activities
by means of bucket or by handheld hose with
automatic shutoff nozzle for prerinse and rinse,
not to exceed a total of two minutes spray time
per vehicle.
Serving water in
eating or
drinking places.
1. Water can be served only if requested by a
customer.
1. Water can be used for public swimming pools
and residential swimming pools serving 25 or
more dwelling units, if the pools have filtration
equipment allowing for continued use and
recycling of water over the swimming season.
Filling and
topping off
swimming pools
2. Water can be used for swimming pools operated
by health care facilities used in relation to
patient care and rehabilitation.
§ 402 FOREWORD § 402
FWD:623
Prohibited Exceptions
3. Water can be used for other pools only if
approved by the public water supply system
from which the water is withdrawn. If water is
obtained from other sources, permission from
the owner of the source is required.
Use of any water
that is not for a
beneficial use.
No exceptions.
§ 403. Local Water Rationing Plan. [Ord. 694, 1/19/1989, § 3; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. Purpose. This local water rationing plan is intended to establish
measures for essential conservation of water resources, and to provide
for equitable distribution of limited water supplies, in order to balance
demand and limited available supplies and to assure that sufficient
water is available to preserve public health and safety within the
service area of the Borough of Elizabethtown in the event of a drought
emergency as established by the Governor's office.
2. Authority. The Pennsylvania Emergency Management is authorized to
promulgate, adopt and enforce a water rationing plan by virtue of
Emergency Management Services Code 35, Pa.C.S. 7101 et seq., as
implemented by the Drought Emergency Proclamation dated.
3. Definitions.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown.
EMERGENCY SERVICE AREA — The service area of the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
EXCESS USE — The usage of water by a water customer in excess of
the water allotment provided under the local water rationing plan for
that customer, over any applicable period.
NONRESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER — Commercial, industrial,
institutional, public and all other users with the exception of hospitals
and health care facilities.
RESIDENTIAL CUSTOMER — Any customer who receives water
services for a single or multi-family dwelling unit. The term "residential
customer" does not include educational or other institutions, hotels,
motels or similar commercial establishments.
SERVICE AREA — The territory and the customers serviced by the
Borough of Elizabethtown.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The temporary suspension of water
supply, or reduction of pressures below that are required for adequate
supply to any customer, portion of a water supply system or any entire
system.
§ 402 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:624
SPECIAL EMERGENCY AREA — The area or areas within which the
Governor has declared a state of drought and water shortage
emergency.
WATER ALLOTMENT — The maximum quantity of water allowed for
each customer over any applicable period as established pursuant to
this Plan.
WATER CUSTOMER — Any person who is connected to and receives
water service from the Borough of Elizabethtown.
4. Scope. This local Water Rationing Plan shall apply to all water uses
within the service area of the Borough of Elizabethtown, encompassing
all or part of the Borough of Elizabethtown, Mount Joy Township, and
West Donegal Township.
5. Objective of the Plan.
A. It is imperative that water customers within the Emergency Service
Area achieve an immediate and further reduction in the water use
in order to extend existing water supplies and, at the same time,
assure that sufficient water is available to preserve the public
health and sanitation and provide fire protection service.
B. The objective of this local water rationing plan is to effect an
immediate 25% reduction in water usage.
C. The immediate 25% reduction in water usage is another step along
a continuum of responses to the present water supply crisis. Should
drought conditions continue, further reductions in usage may be
required. It must be emphasized that the 25% usage reduction in
the emergency area is a valid and attainable figure reflective of the
conditions which currently exist.
D. The plan provides for equitable reductions in water usage, and for
equal sacrifice on the part of each water customer. The success of
this plan depends on the cooperation of all water customers in the
emergency service area.
6. Prohibited Nonessential Water Uses. The following water uses are
declared nonessential and are prohibited within the Emergency Service
Area.
A. The watering of lawns.
B. The watering of outdoor gardens, landscaped areas, trees, shrubs,
and other outdoor plants, except between the hours of 5:00 p.m.
and 9:00 a.m. by means of a bucket, or pail, at the minimum rate
necessary.
C. The washing of automobiles and trucks except when required for
safety and operational purposes.
D. The washing of streets, driveways and sidewalks.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:625
E. The serving of water in restaurants, clubs or eating places unless
specifically requested by the individual.
F. Ornamental water use, including but not limited to, fountains,
artificial water-falls and reflecting pools.
G. The use of water for flushing sewers or hydrants by municipalities
or any public or private individual or entity except as deemed
necessary and approved in the interest of public health or safety by
the municipal health officials.
H. The use of fire hydrants by fire companies for testing fire apparatus
and for fire department drills except as deemed necessary in the
interest of public safety and specifically approved by the Borough
of Elizabethtown.
I. The use of fire hydrants by Borough road departments, contractors
and all others, except as necessary for fire fighting or protection
purposes.
J. The use of water to fill and top off swimming pools.
7. General Requirement for Water Use Reductions. Each and every water
customer, regardless of whether residential, commercial, industrial,
municipal, institutional or other type of user, shall achieve the water
use reductions set forth in this local water rationing plan. In order to
achieve the overall objectives of the Plan, the water use restrictions and
limitations set forth in §§ 7-9 shall apply.
8. Water Use Restrictions for Residential Users.
A. Metered Residential Water Customers and Allotments.
(1) The number of permanent residents in each dwelling unit
(household) will determine the amount of water that each
household will be allowed.
(2) Each dwelling unit (household) shall be allotted 40 gallons per
day for each resident of the household. Households with only
one permanent resident will have a daily allotment of 55
gallons.
(3) Residential water customers are required to provide Borough
personnel with reasonable access to read meters as necessary
to implement this rationing plan. Where access is not readily
available, the Borough shall make all reasonable efforts to
contact customers in order to arrange for access to read
meters. In the event a water customer does not allow Borough
personal entry to read the meter, after the Borough has made
reasonable efforts to arrange for such access, the dwelling unit
(house-hold) allotment will be reduced to 55 gallons per day.
B. Exemptions and Variances.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:626
(1) Where the residential water allotment provided under this
§ 303 would create extraordinary hardship, as in the case of
special health-related requirements, the water customer may
apply to the Borough for any exemption or variance from these
requirements. If the Borough finds that the allotment provided
in this § 303 would impose extraordinary hardship, the
Borough may establish a revised allotment for the particular
customer.
(2) Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such an
exemption or variance rendered by the Borough may file an
appeal with the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas in
accordance with the provisions and procedures of the Local
Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. §§ 551-555, §§ 751-754.
C. Suggested Conservation Measures. The Borough will provide
residential water customers with suggested means for reducing
water consumption in order to achieve the established allotment.
These suggestions may include:
(1) Locate and repair all leaks in faucets, toilets and water-using
appliances.
(2) Adjust all water-using appliances to use the minimum amount
of water in order to achieve the appliance's purpose.
(3) Use automatic washing machines and dishwashers only with
full loads. Preferably, wash dishes by hand.
(4) Take shorter showers and shallower baths.
(5) Turn off shower while soaping; turn off faucet while brushing
teeth, etc.
(6) Install flow restrictors in showerheads and faucets.
(7) Reduce the number of toilet flushes per day. Each flush uses
about five gallons. Reduce water used per flush by installing
toilet tank displacement inserts.
(8) Use sink and tub stoppers to avoid wasting water.
(9) Keep bottle of chilled drinking water in refrigerator.
(10) Read the meter to determine the household's daily water use.
9. Water Use Restrictions for Nonresidential Water Customers.
A. Nonresidential customers include commercial, industrial,
institutional, public and all other users, with the exception of
hospitals and health care facilities.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:627
B. Nonresidential water customers shall reduce their water usage by
a minimum of 25% of use levels for the same quarter of the
preceding year.
C. It is the primary responsibility of each nonresidential water
customer to meet its mandated water use reduction goal in
whatever manner possible.
D. The Borough will establish a water allotment for each
nonresidential water customer, based upon a required 25%
reduction of water usage from the rate of water used by the
customer in the same quarter of the preceding year of the last
recorded use level if no meter readings record the rate of the
customer's use in the same quarter of the preceding year.
E. Each nonresidential water user shall provide access to Borough
personnel for purposes of meter reading and monitoring of
compliance with this plan. The Borough shall make all reasonable
efforts to contact customers to arrange for access.
F. If the mandated 25% reduction in water usage cannot be obtained
without imposing extraordinary hardship threatening health and
safety, the nonresidential customer may apply to the Borough of
Elizabethtown for a variance. For these purposes, "extraordinary
hardship" means a permanent damage to property or economic loss
which is substantially more severe than the sacrifices borne by
other water users subject to this water rationing plan. If the
Borough finds that the 25% reduction would cause extraordinary
hardship or threaten health or safety, the Borough may grant a
variance and establish a revised water use reduction requirement
for the particular customer.
G. Any person aggrieved by a decision relating to such a variance
rendered by the Borough may appeal the decision to the
Commonwealth Drought Coordinator who shall render a final
decision.
H. The Borough of Elizabethtown will supply each nonresidential
customer with suggested means to reduce usage levels. These
suggestions may include:
(1) Identify and repair all leaky fixtures and water-using
equipment. Special attention is to be given to equipment
connected directly to the water line, such as processing air
conditioners and furnaces.
(2) Assure that the valves and solenoids, which control water
flows, are shut off completing when the water-using cycle is
not engaged.
(3) Adjust water-using equipment to use the minimum amount of
water required to achieve its stated purpose.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:628
(4) Shorten rinse cycles for laundry machines as much as possible;
lower water levels should be implemented wherever possible.
(5) Temperature settings of hot water for showers should be set
down at least 10° to discourage lengthy shower taking.
(6) Where plumbing fixtures can accommodate them, flow
restricting or other water-saving devices should be installed.
(7) Review usage patterns to see where other savings can be
made.
(8) For processing and cooling and other uses where possible,
either reuse water or use from sources that would not
adversely affect public water supplies.
(9) Advise employees, students, patients, customers and other
users not to flush toilets after every use. Install toilet tank
displacement inserts; place flow restrictors in showerheads
and faucets; close down automatic flushes overnight.
(10) Adjust flushometers and automatic flushing valves to use as
little water as possible or to cycle at greater intervals.
(11) Encourage water-consciousness by placing water-saving
posters and literature where employees, students, patients and
customers, etc., will have access to them.
I. Customers should read water meters on a frequent basis to
determine consumption patterns.
10. Water Use Restrictions for Hospitals and Health Care Facilities.
A. Hospitals and health care facilities shall comply with all restrictions
imposed on residential and nonresidential water customers as may
be applicable to each individual institution, to the extent
compliance will not endanger the health of the patients or residents
of the institution.
B. Each hospital and health care facility shall survey its water usage
patterns and requirements and implement such additional
conservation measures as may be possible without endangering the
health of patients or residents to achieve a 25% reduction in the
institution's water usage.
C. The Borough will provide each hospital and health care facility with
suggested means to reduce usage levels. These suggestions may
include:
(1) Reduce laundry usage or services by changing bed linen, etc.,
only where necessary to preserve the health of patients or
residents.
(2) Use disposable food service items.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:629
(3) Eliminate, postpone or reduce, as may be appropriate, elective
surgical procedures during the period of the emergency.
11. Enforcement of Water-Rationing Plan.
A. The Borough of Elizabethtown will have lead responsibility for the
monitoring of compliance with this water rationing plan.
B. The following provisions shall govern the implementation of
temporary service interruptions:
(1) In order to effectuate compliance with this plan, the Borough
of Elizabethtown is hereby authorized and required to plan and
implement temporary service interruptions to all or part of its
water supply system, as the Borough may deem appropriate,
when any and/or all of the following conditions are determined
by the Borough to exist, as to its water supply system:
(a) A 25% reduction in systemwide water usage has not been
achieved; and/or,
(b) The 25% reduction in systemwide water usage has been
achieved, but has failed to have a significant impact in
extending limited water supplies; and/or,
(c) Temporary service interruptions are necessary in order to
further extend limited and/or dwindling water supplies.
(2) In the event that the Borough determines that temporary
service interruptions are necessary, the Borough shall notify its
customers through the public media (newspaper, radio,
telephone, and television), at least one day prior to the
temporary service interruptions, that a planned, temporary
service interruption is to be imposed.
In addition, the Borough shall notify the Commonwealth
Drought Coordinator, the local coordinator of emergency
management, local public health authorities, the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Agency, and the regional office of
the Department of Environmental Protection. Such notice
shall:
(a) State the day or days when the planned, temporary service
interruptions will occur;
(b) State the time(s) when such planned, temporary service
interruptions will commence, and the time(s) such
interruptions will cease;
(c) State whether the planned, temporary service
interruptions are to be imposed on the entire system, or a
part thereof, and, if only part(s) of the system will
experience planned, temporary service interruptions,
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:630
identify the geographical boundaries within which
planned, temporary service interruptions will occur;
(d) Advise all customers within the areas affected by planned,
temporary service interruptions how to treat any water
received from the system, for human consumption, during
the period(s) of planned, temporary service interruptions
and for such additional time as may be necessary until full
pressure is restored to the system.
(3) If the Borough imposes planned, temporary service
interruptions as authorized and required by this Plan, it must
provide for the continued delivery of water to health care
facilities within the area(s) affected by such interruptions, by
means of adequate, alternative delivery measures that may be
necessary.
(4) If the Borough implements planned, temporary service
interpretations, it must make provisions, by any means
possible, for the continued delivery of such water, as may be
necessary, for the proper operation of sewage collection,
treatment and disposal systems and facilities.
C. Any residential or nonresidential water customer who exceeds the
allotments established pursuant to this Water Rationing Plan will
be subject to the following excess-use charge.
(1) The Borough of Elizabethtown is directed to collect an "excess
use charge" based on the amount by which a customer's use
exceeds the water allotments established pursuant to the Local
Water Rationing Plan, computed in accordance with the
following schedule:
Excess Usage Per Month Charge for Excess
First 2,000 gallons or portions
thereof
$7 per 1,000 gallons or
portion thereof
Each 1,000 gallons or portion
thereof thereafter
$15 per 1,000 gallons or
portion thereof
(2) Any monies collected by the Borough through excess-use
charges shall not be accounted for as income to the Borough
but shall be placed by the Borough in a reserve account. Funds
collected shall be disposed of in accordance with the directions
of the Commonwealth Drought Coordinator.
D. In addition to the excess-use, noncompliance with the Water
Rationing Plan will result in the following:
(1) For the first excess use, a warning of possible discontinuation
shall be issued to the customer by the Borough.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:631
(2) For the second or subsequent excess use, the Borough may
interrupt or shut-off service to the customer for a period not to
exceed 48 hours, or, if the customer provides access, the
Borough may install a flow restriction in the customer's service
line for the duration of the emergency. The cost incurred by the
Borough to interrupt or shut-off and reinstate service, or to
install and remove a flow restrictor, shall be assessed to the
water customer by the Borough.
E. The Borough of Elizabethtown is authorized to alter meter reading
schedules to assure adequate monitoring of compliance with this
Plan.
F. Any customer or other person aggrieved by a decision or action by
the Borough imposing an excess-use charge or other remedy for
noncompliance with the requirements of this Plan may proceed in
accordance with the following provisions:
(1) The Borough shall adopt procedures which provide an
opportunity for the customer or aggrieved party to rebut the
finding of a violation, or evidence of circumstances beyond the
customer's control which resulted in the violation. The
Borough shall keep a record of evidence presented regarding
disputed violations, and shall provide the customer or
aggrieved party with a written notice of the Borough's final
decision and action in such case.
(2) Any person aggrieved by the final decision or action of the
Borough may file an appeal with the Lancaster County Court of
Common Pleas, in accordance with the provisions and
procedures of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa.C.S. §§ 551-555,
751-754.
12. Penalties. Any person who violates the provisions of this Plan, who fails
to carry out duties and responsibilities imposed by this Plan, or who
impedes or interferes with any action undertaken or ordered pursuant
to this Plan, shall be subject to the penalties provided by law under 35
Pa.C.S. § 7707.
13. Savings Clause. Nothing in this Local Water Rationing Plan shall in any
way limit or affect the power or authority of any political subdivision to
adopt and enforce ordinances, rules, restrictions and orders for water
conservation and protection of essential water supplies, provided that
such ordinances, rules and restrictions are not inconsistent with the
requirements of this Plan.
14. Amendment of Plan. The Borough of Elizabethtown may, at any time,
submit to the Pennsylvania Emergency Management Agency proposed
additions to or amendments of this Plan. Such amendments shall be
expeditiously considered by the Emergency Management Council, and
shall take effect upon adoption by the Council.
§ 403 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 403
FWD:632
15. Implementation Period. These regulations shall be implemented upon
declaration by the Governor of a drought or water shortage emergency,
and shall remain in effect during the period of such emergency until
terminated by action of the Governor, or by order of the Pennsylvania
Emergency Management Council.
§ 403 FOREWORD § 403
FWD:633

Part 5
TAP-IN FEES
§ 501. Definitions. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 1]
The following definitions shall be used in this Part:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property located within the Borough's
service area upon which there is erected a structure or structures, or
renovation or improvement to existing structures intended for continuous
or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or animals and
from which structure or structures water is provided.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society,
corporation or other group or entity vested with ownership, legal or
equitable, sole or partial, of any improved property.
OWNER — The person who has real title for the ownership of the land upon
which a unit is located.
UNIT — The property, building or other site to which water service is
furnished including:
§ 502. Authorization. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 2]
The Borough hereby authorizes, imposes and enacts a tapping fee to
recover costs for the capacity related facilities required to provide such
water service. The tapping fee is hereby imposed against any improved
property and against the owner of such improved property whenever owner
hereafter shall connect such improved property with a water main
constituting a portion of the water system owned by the Borough, or when
there is an expansion, addition, conversion or other creation of a unit which
results in an increase or potential for increase in the volume of water
consumed for such property. Said fee shall be in the amount of $1,659
for each unit with, or the equivalent volume consumed, or in the case of
an expansion, addition or change in use for each additional unit water
A. A building under one roof and occupied by one family or one business.
Each combination of buildings owned by one person, serviced by one
service line and occupied by one family or business.
B.
C. Each side of a double house or each housing unit.
Each apartment, office or suite of offices located in a building having
several such apartments, offices or suites of offices and using in
common one or more means of entrance.
D.
E. Any mobile home occupied by one family or business.
Any other type of dwelling unit or business requiring water service as
determined by the Borough.
F.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 502
FWD:635
consumed by such improved property regardless of whether the water
mains are installed by the owner, developer or the Borough. In the case of
residential uses having multiple units or uses therein, a separate fee shall
be paid or each unit.
§ 503. Fees. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 3]
The fee imposed by § 502, above, is based upon the use of the capacity
related facilities and based on the cost of the facilities which provide
existing service, and is determined by the replacement cost of said facilities
as determined by the Borough as attached hereto and marked Exhibit "A"
and incorporated herewith.66
§ 504. Permit Required. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 5; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
No person shall connect any improved property with any part of the water
system without first making application for and securing a permit from the
borough. Such application shall be made on a form to be provided by the
Borough. No permit shall be issued until all applicable customer facilities
fees, connection fees and tapping fees have been paid and until a permit
application processing fee in the amount of $175 has been paid.
§ 505. Connection Fee. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 5]
A connection fee for each individual connection to the water system shall
be paid for the actual cost incurred by the Borough for inspection of the
physical connection to the water system. Said fee shall be in the amount of
$150 for each unit.
§ 506. Customer Facilities Fees. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 6]
All owners of improved properties shall pay to the Borough a customer
facilities fee. The customer facilities fee shall reimburse the Borough for
its costs relating to the provision of a water meter, a remote meter and
other necessary metering facilities. The customer facilities fee shall be the
actual cost of the water meter and associated facilities paid by the Borough
plus the cost for the Borough to inspect the installation of the water meter,
remote meter and other necessary metering facilities. Said fee shall be in
the amount of $216 for each unit.
§ 507. Payment. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 7]
The customer facilities fee, connection fee, tapping fee and application
processing fee, as applicable, shall be due and payable at the time
application is made to the Borough to make any such connection to the
water system.
66.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough office
§ 502 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 508
FWD:636
§ 508. Determination of Fee. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 8]
The Borough hereby incorporates by reference the records of the Borough
used to determine the fees and makes these available to public inspection.
§ 509. Administration. [Ord. 792, 2/18/1999, § 9]
The Borough is hereby authorized and empowered to enact rules,
regulations and administration directives to implement the administration
of the imposition and collection of the fees.
§ 508 FOREWORD § 509
FWD:637

Part 6
WATER SYSTEM CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS
A.
General Provisions.
§ 601. Purpose. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § 1]
§ 602. Short Title. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § II]
The short title of this Part shall be the "Borough of Elizabethtown Water
System Installation Specification Ordinance."
1. This Part sets forth uniform requirements for water system
construction in Elizabethtown Borough.
2. This Part defines certain terms and provides for the regulations of the
construction or repair of water systems and appurtenances by others,
by contract or agreement or any other means with the Borough. Except
as otherwise provided herein, the Borough Manager shall administer,
implement and enforce the provisions of this Part.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 602
FWD:639

B.
Rules and Regulations.
§ 611. General. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § I; as amended by Ord. 829,
11/15/2001]
1. Scope.
A. These specifications cover the design and construction of water
main extensions. They also cover, in a general manner, the design
and construction of new separate water supply systems including
the installation of portable water piping, valves, specials, etc.
B. The persons or agencies referred to in these specifications are
defined as follows:
APPLICANT — Any person or company who applies for water
service.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown.
CONTRACTOR — The builder of the water main extension or water
supply facilities, whether under contract with the applicant or the
Borough.
OWNER — The legal owner of real estate or other property.
C. When an applicant for water service wishes to design and construct
a separate water supply system, the applicant shall consult with the
Borough prior to design, to obtain approval and to establish design
criteria.
D. All water service projects shall be done in accordance with
Borough ordinances, rules, regulations and schedules of charges
for water service and these general specifications.
E. An applicant for an extension of water service shall submit four sets
of plans providing the following information:
(1) Water Demands.
(a) Number and type of housing units, with anticipated
construction schedule.
(b) Estimated total population served.
(c) Average daily water demand.
(d) Maximum daily water demand.
(e) Maximum hourly water demand.
(f) Fire protection demand and duration (hours).
(g) Construction elevations (U.S.G.S. datum).
§ 611 FOREWORD § 611
FWD:641
(2) Planimetric mapping showing existing and proposed streets,
property and lot lines, and building locations at a scale of one
inch equaling 50 feet.
(3) Topographic mapping showing vertical relationship of new
system to the existing. (NOTE: Planimetric and topographic
may be combined or overlaid on each other.)
(4) Existing and proposed utilities including location and sizes of
mains, valves, hydrants, blow-offs and other facilities.
(5) Legend of symbols, scale and date.
(6) A note which states: "All water main construction shall
conform to the Elizabethtown Borough general specifications
for water system construction, which shall take precedence
over other notes on the drawings."
2. Design Criteria.
A. General. The following design criteria shall be used unless
exceptions are approved in writing by the Borough. Where special
design criteria are required, the applicant should consult with the
Borough prior to preparation and submission of plans.
B. Water Demands.
(1) Population (new developments). Three persons per unit.
(2) Domestic Water Demand.
(a) Average Daily Demand. Fifty gallons per capita per day.
(b) Maximum Daily Demand. Two times average daily
demand.
(c) Maximum Hourly Demand. Four times average daily
demand.
(3) Industrial or Special Water Demands. Established for each
installation.
C. Water Pressures.
(1) General. New development will be evaluated on the basis of
the ability of the system to supply a minimum of 40 psi at
ground elevation and 20 psi during fire flow.
(2) Booster Pumping Stations. The necessity of design of and
construction of booster pumping shall be subject to Borough
approval.
D. Size of Mains.
§ 611 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 611
FWD:642
(1) Main sizes shall conform to Borough ordinances, rules and
regulations. Required minimum sizes are eight inch diameter
Class 52 DIP with cement lining in residential areas, and
twelve-inch diameter Class 52 in employment center areas.
Adequacy of main sizes is based on a total flow requirement of
fire demand plus maximum daily demand plus special
requirements. A maximum C value of 130 is permitted for new
cement-lined ductile iron pipe. The Borough retains the right
to reduce the size of the main when a reduction is warranted
according to the Borough Engineer.
(2) Fire hydrant branches shall be not less than six-inch diameter
and no longer than necessary. The maximum permissible
length is 50 feet unless a longer length is approved by the
Borough. The Borough reserves the right to increase or reduce
the size main proposed when such a change is warranted as
determined by the Borough Engineer.
E. Location of Mains.
(1) General.
(a) Mains shall normally be located within the right-of-way
lines of public streets. If it is necessary to locate a main on
private property, the applicant shall provide a water main
easement in the name of the Borough. The easement shall
consist of a twenty-foot wide permanent easement,
normally centered on the pipeline, and a additional twentyfoot
wide temporary construction easement.
(b) Distribution main networks shall be looped and dead-end
mains shall be avoided. When dead-end mains cannot be
avoided, hydrants shall be provided at the main ends.
(c) Distribution mains shall be located a minimum of 20 feet
from the nearest structure, except as approved by the
Borough.
(d) A safe and adequate separation shall be maintained
between water mains and all other underground utilities.
(2) Water Mains Near Sewers.
(a) Water main installation near sewers shall conform to the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Water Supply Manual. Water mains shall be laid at least 10
feet, horizontally, from any existing or proposed drain line.
If local conditions prevent a horizontal separation of 10
feet, the water main shall be laid in a separate trench, or
on an undisturbed earth shelf located on one side of the
sewer, such that the bottom of the water main is at least 18
inches above the top of the sewer. When it is impossible to
§ 611 FOREWORD § 611
FWD:643
obtain the horizontal and vertical separation stipulation
above, both the water main and the sewer should be
constructed of pressure pipe utilizing mechanical joints
employing a rubber gasket to obtain a seal. Both the water
main and the sewer shall be pressure-tested after
backfilling to assure watertightness.
(b) When a water main crosses a sewer or storm drain, the
bottom of the water main shall preferably be installed 18
inches above the top of the drain, and this vertical
separation shall extend at least 10 feet horizontally on
each side of the sewer. If a water main must cross under a
sewer or drain, a full length of water main pipe shall be
centered under the sewer, the vertical separation shall be
a minimum of 18 inches, and the sewer pipe shall be
encased in concrete for a minimum of 10 feet on each side
of the crossing.
(c) Water mains shall always cross above sewer force mains
with a minimum vertical separation of 18 inches, and the
sewer force main shall be encased in concrete for at least
10 feet on each side of the crossing. See concrete
encasement detail.
(d) No water pipe shall pass through, or come into contact
with, any part of a sewer manhole.
F. Cross Connections. No water source of any type, other than the
Borough water supply, shall be connected to customer piping
served from the Borough water system. All potential cross
connections shall be eliminated and the Borough may require any
customer to install a backflow prevention device in accordance
with § 612(28) on the Borough water service line.
G. Minimum Cover Over Pipes. The minimum depth of backfill over
pipes shall be four feet, or 48 inches. When the minimum depth of
cover cannot be provided, insulated construction approved by the
Borough shall be employed.
H. Location of Valves.
(1) Generally, a minimum of three valves shall be used at crosses
and two valves at tees. The Borough reserves the right,
however, to require the installation of four valves at each cross
and three valves at each tee. Valves shall be placed at least
every 700 feet on arterial mains and minor distributors, or at
other selected points throughout the distribution system as
determined by the Borough.
(2) All water mains shall extend at least 40 feet beyond each valve
located on a dead-end main, unless otherwise approved by the
Borough.
§ 611 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 611
FWD:644
(3) A valve shall be installed on each hydrant branch pipe between
the main and the hydrant and near the end of any main which
may be extended.
I. Air-Release and Vacuum Valves. May be required in certain
situations as determined by the Borough.
J. Blow-offs, Not permitted.
K. Fire Hydrant. Fire hydrants are required and shall be installed at
the applicant's expense. Hydrant spacing and locations shall be as
required as follows:
(1) In low density single family residential areas, all parts of an
existing or proposed building shall be within 300 feet of a
hydrant.
(2) In high density residential or common commercial areas, each
entire unit shall be within 300 feet of one hydrant and 500 feet
of a second hydrant.
(3) Generally, a hydrant should be placed at each street
intersection, and intermediate hydrants should be installed if
the distance between intersections is excessive.
(4) In checking distances between hydrants and buildings,
measurements should be made along public streets, except
where private entrances or parking areas are available for
access.
(5) On all high points on the distribution main.
L. Cathodic Protection. Water mains installed near utilities having
cathodic protection shall themselves be protected. The method of
protection, which may include insulating couplings, polyethylene
encasement, electrical connectors, test stations, and other
facilities, shall be subject to Borough approval. General
specifications for cathodic protection are presented in § 614(15).
M. Customer Metering. Each customer shall be metered.
N. Corporations. Corporations will be installed at the low and high
points of the new water main to facilitate the hydrostatic and
pressure tests.
3. Borough's Right of Inspection. The Borough shall have the right to
inspect any water system construction being carried out by the
applicant. Should the inspected work prove unsatisfactory, the cost of
removing and replacing, renewing and making good the unsatisfactory
work shall be borne by the applicant. No water service facility shall be
placed in service until it has been successfully tested in the presence of
an authorized Borough representative in accordance with § 615.
§ 611 FOREWORD § 611
FWD:645
4. Working Conditions. No night, Saturday or Sunday work subject to
Borough inspection will be permitted except in cases of emergency and
then only with written Borough consent. No work shall be done when, in
the opinion of the Borough, the weather is unsuitable.
5. Contractor.
A. The word "contractor" as used in these specifications means any
person constructing water main in accordance with these
specifications and the rules and regulations of the Borough.
B. Where the contractor is acting as an agent of the applicant,
requirements of the contractor under these specifications shall also
apply to the applicant and the Borough shall have recourse to
either party. These specifications shall not, however, be construed
to dictate the legal relationship between an applicant and his or her
contractor.
6. Liability. The contractor shall be responsible for any and all damage,
loss, or injury to persons or property that may arise, or be incurred, in
or during the conduct or progress of the work.
7. Exploratory Test Pits. Test pits shall be dug in advance of trench
excavation when necessary to determine the location and depth of
existing utilities, rock, water levels or other conditions that might affect
construction.
8. Standard Specifications. Standard specifications of societies,
associations, institutes, etc., are referred to in these specifications
unless otherwise noted.
9. Work Area Traffic Control and Maintenance.
A. Traffic in work areas shall be controlled to protect the public and
workers, while minimizing the inconvenience to the public. Traffic
control devices shall conform to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (Penn-DOT) Regulations Governing the Design,
Location and Operation of all Traffic Designs, Signals and Markings
on or along Highways within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania;
the current revision of Bulletin Nos. 15, 43 and 730; and the
PennDOT Publication 112, Handbook for Work Area Traffic Control;
except where specified herein.
B. When vehicles must be stopped for short periods, work shall be
performed during other than peak traffic periods. Access to
residential and business establishments shall be maintained,
except when work is actually being performed in the area.
Trenches across driveways, side streets, alleys, and entrances shall
be maintained after backfilling.
10. Compliance with Provisions of Act No. 287. Pennsylvania General
Assembly Act. No. 287 and Act No. 172 set forth requirements designed
§ 611 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 611
FWD:646
to protect underground utility lines from damage during excavation.
Generally the acts require the contractor to ascertain the location and
type of utility lines at the work site and to request detailed information
from each user (utility owner or operator) not less than three working
days before beginning work. The contractor must provide operators
with the information and must inform any user of any damage made or
discovered during construction. Utility notification number required for
design and construction.
11. Special Requirements.
A. Construction of water mains and appurtenances shall conform to
the requirements of the Occupational Safety and Health Act
(OSHA).
B. All equipment used on roadways shall be equipped with rubber
tires or treads. If other than rubber tires or treads are used, the
pavement shall be protected by heavy rubber belting.
C. The contractor shall maintain existing water mains in service. If an
existing water main is damaged or broken, the contractor shall
expeditiously restore service at his or her expense.
D. The contractor shall not remove backfill material from the lines of
work before the excavation is refilled, except with Borough
approval. This provision shall not relieve the contractor of the
obligation to remove and dispose of the excavated material at his
expense.
E. The contractor shall protect the work from damage during storms.
F. The contractor shall authorize a competent person to be available
in case emergency situations arise during nonworking hours.
G. The contractor shall inform the local police and fire departments of
work schedule and of possible street obstructions.
12. Quality Assurance.
A. Piping and specials specified herein shall be essentially the
standard products of manufacturers who have been regularly
engaged in the successful production of high quality materials of
this type for at least 10 years.
B. Defective piping or specials must be repaired or replaced.
C. Pressure Tests for Ductile Iron Pipe.
(1) All completed ductile iron pipe shall be tested for leakage
between valves. Tests shall be conducted as directed by the
owner and as noted below.
(2) Test piping over four inches in diameter after installation at
150 psi. The piping shall hold the test pressure for one hour
§ 611 FOREWORD § 611
FWD:647
§ 612. Materials. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § II]
without a pressure loss. Contractor must repair any visible
leaks.
D. Pressure Tests for Copper Tubing.
(1) Test piping one inch and less in diameter after installation at
150 psi. The piping shall hold the test pressure for one hour
without a pressure loss. Repair any visible leaks.
(2) Test piping 1 1/4 — two inches and less in diameter after
installation at 150 psi. The piping shall hold the test pressure
for one hour without a pressure loss. Repair any visible leaks.
13. Delivery, Storage and Handling.
A. Deliver, store and handle the piping, valves and specials in
accordance with the manufacturer's recommendations, and as
supplemented herein.
B. Pipe and related materials shall be loaded and unloaded by lifting
with hoists or skidding so as to avoid shock or damage. Under no
circumstances shall such material be dropped or skidded against
piping already on the ground.
C. Pipe and related materials shall at all times be handled with care to
avoid damage. The interior shall be kept free from dirt and foreign
matter. All pipe, valves and appurtenances shall be carefully
lowered or raised into place, with suitable equipment in a manner
that will prevent damage to the material. Under no circumstances
shall pipe or accessories be dropped or dumped.
D. Pipe, pipe linings, fittings, valves and all related materials shall be
thoroughly inspected for defects prior to their being installed. Any
defective, damaged or unsound material, as determined by the
owner, shall be repaired or replaced as directed at no additional
cost to the owner.
E. All lumps, blisters and excess coating shall be removed from the
ends of each pipe. The joints shall be wire brushed and wiped clean
and dry and free from oil and grease before the pipe is installed.
1. Ductile Iron Pipe.
A. All ductile iron pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.51 (AWWA C151)
and shall be cement-mortar lined in accordance with American
Water Works Association AWWA C104. All ductile iron pipe should
be double cement lined and seal-coated inside and bituminouscoated
outside. All water mains four-inch diameter and larger shall
be ductile iron pipe, except that pipe in cathodic protection areas
may be PVC.
§ 611 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 612
FWD:648
B. Joints shall be the push-on or mechanical joint type, conforming to
ANSI A21.11 specifications. Furnish joints will all required
accessories.
C. The contractor shall submit to the Borough, in triplicate, a
certificate from the manufacturer that the pipe furnished complies
with all applicable requirements of ANSI A21.51. Minimum
thickness of ductile iron pipe shall conform to ANSI A21.50 (AWWA
C152).
2. Fittings.
A. Ductile iron fittings shall be accepted for all ductile iron pipe.
Ductile iron fittings shall have a minimum pressure rating of 250
psi, and shall conform to ANSI A21.52 (AWWA C152).
B. Fittings used with ductile iron pipe shall be furnished with
mechanical joint ends conforming to ANSI A21.11. Mechanical
joint fittings shall be furnished Complete with either gray iron or
ductile iron glands, bolts and nuts, and plain rubber gaskets. The
use of compact mechanical joint fittings will not be acceptable.
C. Flanged fittings, for exposure piping or when specified on the
Drawings, shall conform to ANSI A21.10 or ANSI B16.1. All flanges
shall be faced and drilled in accordance with ANSI B16.1. Machine
bolts and nuts for flanged fittings shall be steel, conforming to
ASTM Designation A307, Grade B. Dimensions of bolts and nuts
shall conform to ANSI B18.2. Threads of bolts and nuts shall
conform to ANSI B1.1, Coarse-Thread Series, Class 2A fit on bolts,
and Class 2B fit on nuts. Dimensions of gaskets shall conform to
ANSI B16.21.
D. All fittings shall be cement-mortar lined, paint seal coated inside,
and bituminous coated outside, conforming to AWWA C104. The
contractor shall submit to the Borough, in triplicate, a certification
from the manufacturer that all fittings comply with the ANSI
Standards noted above.
3. Cement-Mortar Lining. Cement-mortar lining shall conform to ANSI
A21.4 (AWWA C104), except that the cement-mortar lining thickness
shall not be less than 1/8 inch for four inch through 12 inch main sizes
and 3/16 inch for 14 inch through twenty-four-inch main sizes. Paint
seal coat in accordance with ANSI A21.4.
4. Mechanical Joint Retainer Glands. Are not to be used in the Borough.
5. Valves.
A. General. Valves 14 inch and larger shall be butterfly valves as long
as valve design pressures are not exceeded. Valves four to 12
inches shall be resilient seated gate valves (AWWA C509).
B. Butterfly Valves.
§ 612 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:649
(1) Butterfly valves shall conform to AWWA CS04, except where
otherwise specified herein. Butterfly valves shall be the tightclosing,
rubber-seated type. Valves shall be bubble tight at
design pressure, and shall be satisfactory for valve operation
after long inactive periods.
(2) Valves shall be the short body type with mechanical joint ends,
constructed of ductile iron conforming to ASTM A126, Class B.
All valves bodies shall have two hubs for shaft bearing
housings, cast integrally with the body. Body shell thicknesses
shall conform to Table three of AWWA C504. Valves shall be
painted in accordance with AWWA C504, § 4.2.
(3) Valves shafts shall be one piece or two piece units securely
attached to the valve disc. Valve shafts shall have a minimum
diameter as specified in Table 4 of AWWA 504, and shall be
18-8 stainless steel, Type 304. Shaft seals shall conform to
AWWA C504, § 3.7. Valves bearings shall be nylon, reinforced
Teflon or graphite bronze.
(4) Valve shafts shall provide leak-proof shutoff with design
pressure on one side and zero pressure on the other side. Valve
seats shall be the 90° type, and shall be bonded and/or
mechanically secured to the valve body or disc. Valve discs
shall be alloy cast iron conforming to ASTM A436, Type I or 2,
or ASTM A439, Type D2, with a maximum lead content of
0.003%.
(5) Valve operators shall be worm gear or traveling nut type, fully
enclosed, and fitted with a standard two-inch square operating
nut. Operators shall produce the required output torque with a
maximum input torque of 150 foot pounds on the operating
nuts. All valves shall open to the left.
(6) The contractor shall furnish manufacturer's certified shop
drawings, in triplicate, to the Borough. Valves shall be U.S.
Pipe, Mueller, Keystone, American- Darling or American Flow
Control.
(7) The contractor shall furnish manufacturer's certified shop
drawings, in triplicate, to the Borough for approval. The
manufacturer shall also certify that the valves comply with
AWWA C509.
C. Resilient Seated Gate Valves. Gate valves shall be four to 10 inch
and shall be resilient seated, meeting or exceeding AWWA C509.
Gate valves shall have mechanical joint ends and be equipped with
two inch operating nuts and be suitable for buried applications.
Valves shall open when turned to the left. Valve shall have fusionbond
epoxy coating on the inside and outside of the valve. The valve
shall be as manufactured by American Darling, Kennedy, Clow or
approved equal.
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 612
FWD:650
D. Tapping Sleeves and Valves.
(1) The contractor shall verify the type of existing pipe and the
outside diameter of pipe on which the tapping sleeve is to be
installed. The tapping sleeve shall have bell or caulked type
ends. The sleeves shall be made in two halves which can be
assembled and bolted around the main. Gaskets shall extend
the entire length of the sleeve to form a watertight joint when
the side bolts are properly tightened.
(2) The tapping valves shall have flanged inlets with mechanical
joint outlets. All valves shall be vertical ductile iron body,
bronze mounted, inside screw valves with two inch operating
nuts, and double disc gates. The valves shall open to the left,
and shall be fitted with O-ring seals. The tapping valves shall
conform to the applicable section of AWWA Standard C500.
(3) The contractor shall furnish manufacturer's certified shop
drawings, in accordance with § 01340 specifications. In
addition, the manufacturer shall furnish an affidavit that the
tapping valves furnished comply with all applicable provisions
of AWWA Standard C500.
(4) The interior surface of each valve shall receive two coats of
asphaltic varnish in accordance with Federal Specification TTV-
5 I C. The exterior surface of each valve shall receive two
coats of bituminous coating in accordance with AWWA
Specifications. The tapping sleeves and valves shall be as
manufactured by the Mueller Company or approved equal.
6. Valve Boxes. Underground valves shall have extension-type, roadwaytype
valve boxes. Valve boxes shall be cast iron material with a strong
magnetic attraction, and shall have threaded construction. Valve boxes
shall have 5 1/4 inch shafts, shall have covers marked "WATER", and
shall be coated inside and out with a tar or asphalt compound.
Manufactured by Bingham and Taylor, Tyler or an approved equal.
7. Extension Stems. Each underground valve whose operating nut is
deeper than four feet shall be equipped with an extension stem that is
one-inch square solid steel and fitted over the valve operating nut. The
stem shall have a two-inch square top operating nut and a spacer or
spyder. Each extension stem top shall be set in the range from three
feet to six inches below ground surface and shall not interfere with the
valve box cover.
8. Small Valves.
A. General. Small valves are defined as three inch or smaller valves
and shall be ball valves, unless specified otherwise.
B. Gate Valves. Gate valves shall be the 125 pound double disc,
parallel seat, rising stem type and be handwheel operated. Valve
§ 612 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:651
bodies shall be bronze and have screw ends. Valves shall be Crane
Company or approved equal.
C. Globe Valves. Globe valves shall be the 125 pound bronze disc type
with screw ends and shall be handwheel operated. Valve bodies
shall be bronze. The valves shall be Crane Company or approved
equal.
9. Plastic Water Service Tubing. Not permitted in the Borough. When
existing plastic service lines need replacing, they will have to be
replaced with copper, see § 612(10). See § 612(4) for explanation.
10. Copper Tube. Copper tube shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
B-88, with Type K underground and Type L in exposed locations.
11. Fittings for Copper Tubing.
A. Fittings for underground copper tubing shall be compression type
conforming to ANSI B16.26, Cast Copper Alloy Fittings for
Compression Copper Tubes. Fittings for exposed copper tube shall
be 125 pound bronze screwed fittings, conforming to ANSI B16.15
or 250 pound fittings, conforming to ANSI B16.17.
B. Fittings connecting copper to copper shall be three-part straight
couplings and shall be Mueller Company H-15400 (no substitutes).
C. Straight couplings connecting copper to male iron pipe thread shall
be Mueller Company H-15450 (no substitutes).
D. Straight couplings connecting copper to female iron pipe thread
shall be Mueller Company H-15425 (no substitutes).
12. Corporation Stops.
A. Corporation stop and box shall be designed to AWWA C800.
B. For copper tubing, corporation stops shall be Mueller 110
Compression Connection Outlet (no substitutes allowed).
13. Curb Stops and Boxes.
A. Curb stop and box, designed to AWWA C800, should be all bronze
construction, inverted key stop.
B. Curb stops should be Mueller 110 Compression Connection Outlet
(no substitutes allowed).
C. Box must be extension type arch pattern base of two-piece cast-iron
construction coated inside and out with tar base enamel and
topped with cast iron lid secured with bronze bolt.
D. Curb boxes may be Tyler, Bingham Taylor or Gardner (no
substitutes), however when the curb box is to be placed in concrete
such as a sidewalk, only Gardner boxes will be permitted.
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 612
FWD:652
14. Clamping Devices. Socket clamps, anchor straps and tie rods, used to
anchor pipe fittings, shall be as manufactured by the Grinnell Company,
Inc., Stellar Clow Corporation or approved equal. The contractor shall
submit a sketch for Borough approval for installations using clamping
devices.
15. Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be compression type with a 5 1/4
inch main valve, and a six inch mechanical joint inlet. The hydrant shall
have two 2 1/2 inch hose nozzles, and one 4 1/2 inch pumper nozzle,
complete with nozzle cap chains. The hydrant shall be traffic type with
breakable safety flange and stem coupling and shall open counter
clockwise. The hydrant shall have a hexagon operating nut and shall be
provided with National Standard threads on the hose and streamer
nozzles. Hydrants shall conform to AWWA C502 and shall be leakproof
at the design pressure. Hydrants shall be Mueller Centurion, Model
A423 (no substitution).
16. Steel Encasement Pipe. All steel encasement pipe shall be either
fabricator pipe or mill pipe, manufactured in accordance with AWWA
C200, latest edition. Pipe shall have flame or machine cut plain ends,
which shall be beveled for field welding and circumferential joints, and
shall have a protective coating of Standard Mill Primer prior to
shipment. Steel encasement pipe shall be the size and wall thickness
specified in Part five of the American Railway Engineering
Specifications for pipelines and shall have a minimum tensile strength
of 60,000 psi and a minimum yield point of 35,000 psi. Pipe shall
conform to ASTM Designation A135, Grade B; A139, Grade B; or A252,
Grade 2.
17. Mechanical Couplings.
A. Steel mechanical couplings of the gasket, sleeve type shall be
furnished and installed where shown on the drawings or required.
The coupling shall be of the proper diameter to make a tight joint.
The coupling shall not have stops. All couplings shall be for 150 psi
working pressure.
B. Each coupling shall consist of one middle ring of a thickness and
length suitable for the proposed application and test pressures; two
followers; two rubber compounded wedge section gaskets and
sufficient trackhead bolts to properly compress the gaskets.
C. Couplings to be buried shall be coated on the inside and outside
with two coats of asphaltic varnish in accordance with Federal
specification TT-V-51c. Manufactured by Ford FC1.
18. Flanged Coupling Adapters. Flanged coupling adapters shall have a
cast iron body and a malleable or ductile iron follower flange. The
flange bolt circle, bolt size, and spacing shall conform to ANSI Standard
B16.1, Class 125. Flanged coupling adapters shall have two anchor
studs for up to eight inch pipe size and four anchor studs for 10 and 12
§ 612 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:653
inch pipe sizes. Flange coupling adapters shall be Rockwell Product No.
Type 912, or approved equal.
19. Pressure Regulating Valves.
A. The installation of pressure regulating valves may be required by
the Borough to prevent excessive pressures at customer services or
other locations.
B. Pressure regulating valves two inch and smaller shall be
diaphragm-type with cast-bronze body and galvanized iron strainer.
They shall be manufactured by Mueller Co., A. W. Cal Valve Mfg.,
Corp., Watson McDaniel Co., Inc., Watts Regulator Co., or approved
equal.
C. Pressure regulating valves 2 1/2 inch and larger shall be Golden-
Anderson Model 45-D or approved equal.
20. Air Release Valves. Air release valves shall be combination air release
valves as manufactured by Multiplex Manufacturing Company (Crispin
Universal), Valve and Primer Corporation (APCO) Model 143C, or
Golden-Anderson Valve Specialty Company (Model 1-CAV), or approved
equal. Valves shall be sized in accordance with manufacturer's
recommendations based on main size, main capacity and pressure.
21. Precast Reinforced Concrete Manholes. Manholes shall have a precast
reinforced concrete manhole top section set on a cast-in-place concrete
base. The top section shall comply with ASTM Designation C478,
Specifications for Precast Reinforced Concrete Manhole Sections, and
shall be an eccentric cone design with a minimum inside base diameter
of four feet.
22. Concrete. Concrete shall conform to PennDOT Specifications, Form
408, § 704, Cement Concrete and Ready-mixed Cement Concrete. Class
B concrete used for Class B bedding, reaction backings, or pipe
encasements shall have an average compressive strength of 3,000 pa at
28 days and a three inch maximum slump. No compressive strength
shall be less than 2,500 psi.
23. Manhole Brick and Mortar. Brick shall conform to ASTM Designation
C32, Grade NA, and mortar shall be one part cement, two parts sand
and water. Commercially prepared masonry cement shall conform to
ASTM Designation C91.
24. Manhole Frames and Covers. Manhole frames and covers shall conform
to ASTM A48 for Class No. 30 and shall be Neenah Foundry Company
No. R-1772-A or approved equal. The word "WATER" shall be east in
two-inch high letters on the cover.
25. Manhole Steps. Manhole steps shall be forged 6061-T6 aluminum alloy
or Fiberglass reinforced plastic cast into the precast cement manhole
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 612
FWD:654
top section, shall be aligned vertically and spaced a maximum 12 inch
apart on equal centers, and shall satisfy OSHA requirements.
26. Meters.
A. General.
(1) All meters will be supplied by the Borough at no cost to the
owner. The owner must notify the Borough at least 60 days
prior to the installation requesting the number of meters and
their sizes.
(2) No meter by-pass lines will be accepted except in installations
at emergency institutions (hospitals, etc.).
B. Residential Type (5/8 inch, 3/4 inch and one inch). The meters shall
conform to the AWWA Standard for Cold-Water Meters —
Displacement Type, C700, except as noted below. The capacity of
the meters shall conform to Tables I and 2 of AWWA Standard,
C700. The outer case of all meters shall be bronze composition and
shall be frost protected. The intermediate gear train shall be
included in the register box.
C. Commercial Type (1 1/2 inches and two inches). The meters shall
conform to the Standard for Cold Water Meters — Displacement
Type, C700. The meter case, measuring chamber, and register box
and lid shall be bronze. All interior parts shall be movable without
disturbing the connections to the connections to the pipeline.
D. Compound Meters (three inches through 12 inches). Meters shall
conform to the AWWA Standard for Cold Water Meters -Compound
Type, C702. Main case connections shall be flanged and measuring
chambers shall be bronze.
E. Fire Service Meters. Fire service meters shall conform to the
AWWA Standard for Cold Water Meters — Fire Service Type, C703.
Measuring chambers shall be bronze.
F. Remote Registration Systems. Remote registration systems shall
conform to the AWWA Standard for Direct Reading Remote
Registration Systems for Cold-Water Meters, C706, and the AWWA
Standard for Encoder-Type Remote-Registration systems for Cold-
Water Meters, C707. The system shall visually register flow at the
meter as well as at the remove register. The meter serial number
shall be imprinted on the register. Wire or tubing shall be suitable
for exposed mounting.
G. Catalogues. The manufacturer or vendor shall furnish the Borough,
in triplicate, with catalogues and brochures describing the
materials to be furnished. The information shall include repair
parts lists and loss of head curves.
27. Meter Pits. Not permitted.
§ 612 FOREWORD § 612
FWD:655
§ 613. Excavation and Backfill. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § III]
28. Backflow Prevention Devices.
A. General. A backflow prevention device shall be installed on all new
water services.
B. Reduced Pressure Backflow Preventers. This device shall be used
at connections where toxic chemicals, sewage or other substances
determined by the Borough to be hazardous, might enter the
distribution system. It shall conform to AWWA C506, shall be
minimum 150 psi design pressure, and shall be equipped with
suitable test cocks. The device consists of an automatic pressure
differential relief valve located in the zone between two or more
independently acting check valves, which in turn are located
between two tightly closing shutoff valves. All reduced pressure
backflow preventers for fire service connections shall be BEECO
Model 6-U, or approved equal. All other reduced pressure backflow
preventers shall be BEECO Model 12 or 6-C, CLA-VAL Co. Clayton
Model RP-2 or RP-I, Watts Regulator Company Series 909 or
approved equal.
C. Double Check Valve Assemblies. This device shall be used at
connections where nuisance materials, such as foods and
beverages, or other materials that do not constitute a health
hazard, might enter the distribution system. It shall conform to
AWWA C506, shall withstand a 150 psi design pressure, and shall
be equipped with suitable test cocks. The device consists of an
assembly of independently acting check valves located between
two tightly closing shut-off valves but without a pressure
differential relief valve. All double check valve assemblies shall be
BEECO Model VC, Hershey No. 1, CLA-VAL Co. Clayton D, or
approved equal.
1. General.
A. Excavation and backfill work shall conform to the AWWA Standard
for Installation of Cast Iron Water Mains, C600, plus the changes
and additions specified herein. The contractor shall conform to the
regulations of all governmental agencies having jurisdiction over
the work.
B. Standard details for trench excavations are attached to these
specifications and are made a part thereof. These details cover
earth trenches, rock trenches, trenches in unsuitable soil, trenches
in roadway shoulders and trenches in paved areas.
C. The term "subgrade," as used herein, shall have the following
meanings:
(1) The planned bed of a trench prepared to receive bedding
material.
§ 612 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 613
FWD:656
(2) The area upon which the lower surface of roadway paving
rests.
(3) The area upon which the planned bottoms of manholes rest.
2. Rock Excavation.
A. Unless otherwise approved by the Borough, rock shall be removed
from the trench at least 25 feet in advance of pipelaying. Rock shall
be excavated for the full specified width of the trench for a depth of
eight inches below the outer bottom of the pipe.
B. Rock below the specified subgrade that is shattered and unfit for
foundation in the Borough's opinion shall be removed and the area
backfilled to the proper subgrade with Class B concrete or coarse
aggregate subgrade material. Rock encountered at blank
connections or stubs shall be excavated at least 10 feet from the
blank connections in the direction of any proposed future
extension, and the excavation shall conform to the requirements for
the extension.
3. Explosives and Blasting.
A. Blasting procedures shall conform to Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry regulations, AWWA C600, § 6.12, and NFPA
495. Rock within five feet of any existing water or gas main, sewer,
electrical conduit, or other utility or structure shall be removed by
means other than blasting. The Borough reserves the right to
designate any other specific limits of the work in which rock shall
be removed by means other than blasting.
B. A licensed blaster is required and a seismographic monitoring plan
shall be implemented.
C. Where lines pass in vicinity of existing construction, the contractor
shall be required to perform a preblast survey of the existing
structures to established baseline conditions. This should be done
by licensed engineer specializing in this work.
4. Removal of Pavement and Storage of Materials.
A. The contractor shall grub and clear the surface and remove all
surface materials over the line of the trench; properly separate and
classify the material removed; and store, guard, and preserve any
materials required for backfilling or other purposes. All materials
taken from the trenches shall be stored away from the street or
highway, unless otherwise authorized by the Borough or PennDOT.
The materials shall be placed or stored in a manner that will not
obstruct any pipe, culvert, gutter, drain, ditch or waterway. The
width of existing pavement removed shall be no greater than the
trench widths specified in § 613(5), unless otherwise directed by
§ 613 FOREWORD § 613
FWD:657
the Borough. Pavement shall be cut into neat lines with a concrete
saw or air spade in accordance with local government regulations.
B. In business districts, State highways, streets with heavy traffic,
narrow streets, or any other locations where working space is
limited, the excavated material shall, when required by the
Borough, be removed as soon as excavated, contractor must
comply with PennDOT 459 regulations when working on State
highways. The contractor shall not cast excavated material beyond
the curb or right-of-way lines, or on sidewalks or lawns. Excess
excavated material shall be removed to the location provided by the
contractor. The contractor may bring back this material for backfill
or provide other suitable material. When soft or wet material must
be hauled over streets, the contractor shall prevent spillage. All
topsoil within the trench limits shall be removed prior to excavation
and replaced after backfilling.
5. Width and Depth of Pipe Trenches. The width and depth of pipe
trenches shall conform to the dimensions shown on the attached
standard detail drawing. Trench sides shall be vertical, and dimensions
shall apply to the inside faces of any required sheeting. The trench
depth shall include a minimum depth of cover of four feet. The
contractor shall not excavate below the depths specified, except where
excavation of rock or unsuitable material is required. Trenches
excavated beyond the specified depths without written approval of the
Borough shall be backfilled with thoroughly tamped Class A bedding
material at the contractor's expense.
6. Preparation of Pipe Trenches. Pipe trenches shall be uniformly graded
to planned subgrade. If subgrade conditions are satisfactory, as
determined by the Borough, Class A bedding material shall be furnished
and placed as described below. If subgrade conditions are not suitable,
the contractor shall excavate the unsuitable material and backfill in
accordance with standard detail.
7. Bedding Material. Stone bedding shall be provided in all cases except
where conditions require class bedding. Stone bedding shall consist of
a six-inch encasement of IB stone to be placed in two lifts. The first lift
shall be filled 1/2 of the pipe barrel and chalked or vibrated underneath
the pipe. The second lift is to be placed at a height of six inches above
the pipe and leveled out.
8. Sheeting, Shoring and Bracing. Sheeting, shoring and bracing shall
conform to Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry
Regulations, OSHA regulations, and AWWA C600, § 616(13), unless
otherwise specified herein. Sheeting, bracing and shoring shall be
designed by contractor. Sheeting, bracing and shoring shall be
withdrawn and removed as the trenches are being backfilled; except
where the Borough shall require that same be left in place, or where the
Borough permits the contractor to leave same in place. Voids or holes
§ 613 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 613
FWD:658
left by the sheeting or sheet piling shall be filled with compacted
approved material.
9. Backfilling Trenches.
A. Trench backfill shall conform to PennDOT 459 regulations,
PennDOT highway occupancy permit regulations and AWWA C600,
except as specified herein and on the standard trench details.
B. Backfill material shall be carefully placed in trenches according to
specified layer thickness, and each layer shall be thoroughly
compacted. The amount of compaction equipment and compaction
effort is subject to Borough approval.
(1) Select Backfill. Select backfill material shall consist of clean,
dry earth and shall not contain stones larger than one inches.
Excavated material may be used if approved by the Borough.
(2) Ordinary Backfill. Ordinary backfill material shall consist of
clean dry earth, and shall not contain stones larger than six
inches. Excavated material may be used if approved by the
Borough.
(3) Trenches Located on State Highways.
(a) All trench excavation and backfill on State highways shall
conform to PennDOT requirements. The applicant shall
pay all costs of PennDOT inspections.
(b) Backfill of transverse or longitudinal trenches under paved
surfaces shall be refilled from a point six inches above the
top of pipe to the pavement in four inch mechanicallycompacted
layers with coarse aggregate. The coarse
aggregate shall be Pennsylvania No. 2RC, conforming to
§ 677.2 of PennDOT Specifications, Form 408. The
contractor shall remove excess excavated material at his
or her expense. Backfill under unpaved shoulders shall be
refilled from a point one foot above the top of pipe to a
point 18 inches below the existing grade of the shoulder in
four inch mechanically-compacted layers with approved
backfill material. The backfill shall conform to § 206.2 of
PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(4) Trenches Located in Borough Streets and Alleys.
(a) Trenches located along Borough streets shall be refilled in
four-inch mechanically-compacted layers from a point six
inches above the top of pipe to the pavement subgrade
with suitable, approved ordinary backfill.
(b) Should the excavated ground be determined by the
Borough not to be suitable, approved ordinary backfill, No.
2RC course aggregate will be substituted.
§ 613 FOREWORD § 613
FWD:659
(5) Unpaved Areas Not Subject To Traffic. Trenches in unpaved
areas not subject to traffic shall be refilled from a point six
inches above the top of pipe to the existing grade in eight inch
mechanically-compacted layers with approved ordinary
backfill. In areas requiring seeding, the backfill shall be
terminated four inches below the existing grade and the final
four inches refilled with approved topsoil.
10. Dewatering. The contractor shall keep all excavations free from water.
Contractor must comply with Lancaster County Soil Conservation
District regulations.
11. Existing Underground Utilities or Obstructions.
A. The contractor shall conform to General Assembly Act No. 287 and
Act No. 172.
B. The contractor shall be responsible for all damage to existing
underground utilities due to operations. The contractor shall
determine the correct location of utilities by means of exploratory
test pits and information obtained from utility owners; and shall be
responsible for all utilities and other obstructions, whether or not
they are shown on the drawings or are located incorrectly. Any
damage to existing utilities shall be repaired at the contractor's
expense and to the satisfaction of the owner of the utility.
C. The contractor shall uncover and verify the location of utilities and
other underground obstructions far enough in advance of the pipe
laying to permit changes in pipe alignment or grade to bypass the
obstructions without removing pipeline. If necessary, the
contractor shall be responsible for removing and reinstalling the
pipe at his own expense to avoid utilities.
D. The contractor shall support utility poles located at or near the
trench line limits, and shall contact utilities for pole supports when
necessary. If the utility poles are damaged, the contractor shall be
responsible for repairs.
12. Removal of Obstruction.
A. Any removal, realignment or change in the position of any pipe,
conduit, pole or other structure due to the construction shall be
done at the contractor's expense and with the approval of the
owner of the obstruction.
B. If fencing removed served as an enclosure for animals, the
contractor shall prevent the escape of the animals. Trees and
shrubs in rights-of-way shall not be damaged or cut down, unless
authorized by the owner of the property and the Borough. Trees cut
down shall have their stumps removed, and all resulting debris
shall be removed and disposed of by the contractor at his or her
expense. When the water main is completed, the contractor shall
§ 613 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 613
FWD:660
restore the temporary and permanent rights-of-way to their
original condition at his or her own expense.
13. Change of Trench Location or Depth. The Borough reserves the right to
require changes in the trench location or depth. If field conditions
require the lowering of the pipe to a depth greater than that specified,
the contractor shall obtain approval from the Borough to install the pipe
at the lower depth. If the contractor installs the pipe at the lower depth
without such approval, and the Borough determines that a different
pipe class is required at the lower depth, the contractor shall excavate
and remove the pipe of the lower class and shall install the pipe class
required by the Borough at his or her own expense.
14. Length of Open Trench. The Borough reserves the right to limit the
amount of trench opened in advance of pipelaying to not more than 100
feet and the amount of pipe laid in advance of backfilling not more than
50 feet. At the close of work at night or at the discontinuance of work,
not more than 20 feet of trench shall remain open at any location and
the Borough reserves the right to require the refilling of all open
trenches.
15. Accommodation of Drainage. The contractor must comply with
Lancaster County Conservation District requirements. The contractor
shall keep gutters, sewers, drains, and ditches open at all times for
surface drainage. The contractor shall direct water across or over
pavements only through approved pipes or properly constructed
troughs and shall do so at his or her own cost and expense. The ground
surface shall be properly ditched to prevent water from running into the
pipe trenches.
16. Accommodation of Traffic.
A. These provisions supplement the requirements of § 611(9). The
contractor shall comply with PennDOT Publication 203 Work Zone
Traffic Control standards. Streets shall not be unnecessarily
obstructed, unless the contractor obtains permission in writing to
close a street. The contractor shall take all necessary measures to
keep the street or road open and safe for traffic. During shutdowns
of work, the contractor shall insure that all streets affected by
construction are open and can be safely traveled by vehicles.
B. The contractor shall construct and maintain, without extra
compensation, adequate and proper bridges over excavations for
safe accommodation of pedestrians or vehicles. The contractor
shall furnish and erect approved barricades at crossings of
trenches or along the trench to protect the public.
C. All stored materials and equipment which may be obstructions to
traffic shall be protected by approved lights, lanterns, torches or
guards. The contractor shall not obstruct fire hydrants.
17. Protection of Property and Structures.
§ 613 FOREWORD § 613
FWD:661
A. The contractor shall sustain in their places, and protect from direct
or indirect injury, all poles, pipes, conduits, tracks, roadways,
curbs, walks, walls, buildings and other structures or property in
the vicinity of his work. The contractor shall be responsible for any
damages and assume all expense for direct or indirect injury,
caused by his work, to any person, property or structure. The
contractor must maintain access to all mailboxes.
B. Pipes and underground conduits exposed as a result of the
contractor's operations shall be adequately supported by timber or
planking, such that the anchorage of the supports will not be
distributed or weakened during backfilling. Approved backfill
material shall be carefully tamped under and around the supports,
and all supports shall be left in place.
18. Permits and Licenses. The applicant, or the Borough if it elects to do so,
shall obtain the necessary permit from PennDOT for the occupancy of
State highways. The applicant or the Borough, depending on ultimate
ownership, will submit the required data and execute agreements with
the railroad companies for the installation of water mains on their
rights-of-way. The contractor shall obtain and pay for any other permits
required by local or other governmental agencies having jurisdiction
over the streets to be opened. Prior to opening any excavation within
the right-of-way of any railroad, state highway or borough street,
necessary agreements must be executed and that all required permits
must be obtained by the contractor, the applicant or the Borough.
19. Cleanup. As the trenches are backfilled, the contractor shall
immediately remove and dispose of all surplus material. If the
contractor fails or neglects to keep roads, sidewalks, and other areas
free of surplus material after 24 hours, written notice to the contractor
and the costs of said work shall be charged to the contractor. When the
repaving is completed, all paved surfaces shall be swept clean, and if
required by the Borough, shall be flushed with water. All such work
shall be at the contractor's expense.
20. Maintenance of Unpaved Areas. The contractor shall maintain all
backfilled excavations in all unpaved areas to the satisfaction of the
owner for a period of one year from the date when the water main is
accepted by the Borough.
21. Clearing and Grubbing.
A. Clearing includes the cutting and disposal of all trees, vegetation,
and other objectionable material occurring within a width of the
work area established prior to construction. Grubbing includes the
removal and disposal of all stumps and root mats located within the
established area. The method of disposal of waste material shall
conform to all State and local laws, ordinances and regulations,
including the Air Pollution Control Act, approved January 8, 1960,
or as amended.
§ 613 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 613
FWD:662
§ 614. Pipeline Installation. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § IV]
B. Shade trees, hedges, shrubbery, flowers and grass on private or
public property shall not be cut or destroyed. The contractor shall
protect and/or remove and replace shade trees, hedges, shrubbery
and flowers along the water main and be responsible for
establishment of firm growth of said trees and other vegetation.
The Borough reserves the right to designate the size and number of
trees to remain in place and these trees shall be protected from
damage. Any trees killed or damaged by the contractor's
operations shall be replaced. Contractor must comply with
Lancaster County Soil Conservation District requirements.
22. Pavement Restoration. If existing pavement is destroyed while
installing water lines in the Borough, the following guidelines shall be
followed:
A. Temporary Paving. At the end of each working day, the trench shall
be temporarily paved with no less than a three-inch thick, tamped
layer of cold patch material. The contractor will be responsible for
maintaining this temporary paving until such time that permanent
paving-restoration occurs.
B. Permanent Paving.
(1) Permanent paving shall not occur until the entire water line
project is completely in place. The cold patch material shall be
removed and the trench edges shall be saw cut back a
minimum of 12 inches on both sides. The contractor shall then
match the types and thicknesses of existing pavement
materials. However, under no circumstances shall there be
anything less than two inches of BCBC and one inch of wearing
course.
(2) Prior to placing any asphalt material in the trench, the sides of
the existing asphalt shall be primed with AC-20.
(3) Upon completion of final compaction of the wearing course, the
top edges will be sealed with AC-20.
(4) This paving specification applies to streets, alleys, parking lots,
driveways and any other paved surface.
1. General. This section covers the installation of the water mains,
complete with all fittings, valves, reaction backings and/or harnessing,
connections and appurtenances. The contractor shall conform to AWWA
Standard for Installation of Cast Iron Water Mains, C600, except where
otherwise specified herein.
2. Responsibility for Material. The contractor shall be responsible for all
material, and shall replace at his own expense all such materials found
defective in manufacture or damaged in handling, as determined by the
§ 613 FOREWORD § 614
FWD:663
Borough. Any materials found defective shall be promptly removed
from the site. Defective pipe shall be classified as follows:
A. Damage to interior or exterior paint seal coats.
B. Damage to interior cement-mortar lining.
C. Insufficient cement-mortar lining thickness.
D. Poor quality interior paint seal coat causing a partial obstruction in
the pipe round.
E. Pipe out of round.
F. Damaged pipe barrel area causing a reduction in effective pipe
thickness.
G. Any material that is dropped during handling, regardless of its
apparent condition.
3. Handling of Material. Pipe shall be so handled that the coating and
lining is not damaged. If any part of the coating or lining is damaged,
the repair shall be made by the contractor at his or her expense and to
the satisfaction of the Borough. Valves and hydrants shall be stored and
kept dry before installation. Any material that is dropped during
handling is subject to rejection regardless of its apparent condition.
4. Alignment and Grade. Where the proposed pipeline route is on a curve,
the contractor may deflect the pipe at the joints to published
manufacturer tolerances. Where underground conditions require a
change of alignment or grade, such change shall be made only with the
written consent of the Borough. When a change in grade is indicated
which will result in the pipe having more cover than originally
anticipated, the class of pipe installed at the location shall withstand
the new loadings. Except at predesignated points, no high points shall
be established where air can accumulate. If field conditions necessitate
a change in the pipe profile and, in the opinion of the Borough, the
change requires the installation of a fire hydrant, the contractor shall
install the same.
5. Lowering Water Main Material into Trench. The contractor shall
conform to AWWA Specification C600, § 7.
6. Cleaning Pipe and Fittings. All lumps, blisters and excess coating shall
be removed from the end of each piece of pipe and fitting. The outside
of the spigot, the inside of the bed and the gasket shall be thoroughly
wiped clean and dry before the pipe is installed.
7. Laying Pipe.
A. Following trench excavation, pipe laying shall proceed upgrade
with pipe laid carefully, hubs upgrade, spigot ends fully centered
into adjacent hubs, and true lines and grades given.
§ 614 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 614
FWD:664
B. Each section of pipe shall rest upon the pipe bed for the full length
of its barrel, with recesses excavated to accommodate bells and
joints. Each pipe shall be firmly held in position so that the invert
forms a continuous grade with the invert of the pipe previously
placed.
C. Under no conditions shall pipe be laid in water, on subgrade
containing frost, and/or when trench conditions are unsuitable for
such work. In all cases, water shall be kept out of the trench until
concrete cradles, supports, encasement or saddles, where used,
and materials in the joints have hardened.
D. Any pipe that has its grade or joint disturbed after laying shall be
taken up and relaid. Any section of pipe already laid and found to
be defective shall be taken up and replaced with new pipe without
expenses to the owner.
E. Walking or working on top of the completed pipeline, except as may
be necessary in backfilling or tamping, shall not be permitted until
the trench has been backfilled to a height of at least two feet over
the top of the pipeline.
F. At times when pipe laying is not in progress, the open ends of the
pipe shall be closed by watertight plug.
G. All joints shall be made in accordance with the pipe supplier's
specifications and in accordance with the following instructions:
(1) Push-on Type Joints.
(a) Cleaning and assembly of push-on joints shall conform to
AWWA C600, § 9c.3. The inside of the bell and the outside
of the spigot end shall be thoroughly cleaned to remove oil,
grit, excess coating, and other foreign matter. These parts
shall be kept clean throughout assembly at the joint.
(b) The circular rubber gasket shall be flexed inward and
inserted in the gasket recess of the bell socket. Care shall
be taken to insure that the gasket is properly seated.
(c) A minimum amount of lubricant shall be evenly applied to
the spigot end with a brush. Gasket lubricant shall be as
supplied by the manufacturer.
(d) The spigot end shall be properly centered, and force shall
be applied using a ratchet jack-type tool or a roller chairtype
ratchet jack, until the white stripe at the spigot end is
just visible at the face of the bell. Any required deflection
shall be made only after the joint assembly has been made.
(e) Proper positioning of the gasket shall be checked with a
"feeler" gauge after each joint is made.
§ 614 FOREWORD § 614
FWD:665
(f) The edges of "field cut" pipe shall be touched up with a file
or grinder so as to remove rough edges and facilitate
assembly.
(2) Mechanical Joints. The cleaning, assembly, and bolting of the
mechanical joint shall conform to AWWA C600, §§ 9b.3 and
9b.4.
(3) Bell-and-Spigot Joints.
(a) Bell-and-spigot joints shall conform to AWWA Specification
C600, § 9a.
(b) Thoroughly clean the bell and the spigot end of the pipe of
all foreign matter and wash them with soapy water.
(c) Slip the gland and gasket over the plain end and seat the
spigot end in the bell (the small end of the gasket and the
lip on the gland shall face the bell).
(d) Push gasket into position with fingers, making sure it is
evenly seated.
(e) Moved gland into position for bolting, insert bolts and
make all nuts finger-tight, keeping the spigot centrally
located within the bell.
(f) Bolts shall be tightened in accordance with the
manufacturer's written instructions.
(g) If effective sealing is not obtained at the maximum torque
indicated above, the joint must be disassembled and
reassembled after thorough cleaning. Under no
circumstances are bolts to be over stressed.
(4) Flanged Joints.
(a) Flanged joints shall not be used for buried service.
(b) Flanges shall be wiped clean with a solvent-soaked rag
prior to installation. The gasket shall also be wiped clean.
(c) The pipe, fittings and valves shall be properly supported
during installation.
(d) All flanges shall be properly aligned and checked with a
spirit level horizontally along the pipe and vertically across
the flange faces.
(e) With flanges secured in position, half the bolts shall be
inserted at the bottom of the flange, the gasket inserted
between the flanges and the remaining bolts inserted.
§ 614 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 614
FWD:666
(f) The threads of the bolts shall be given a light coating of
thread lubricant, and the nuts shall be installed on the
bolts and turned up by hand. The nuts shall be tightened
with a wrench by the crossover method to load the bolts
evenly until the joints are tight.
(5) Mechanically Coupled Joints. Mechanical couplings shall be
installed in strict accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions, and in a manner to insure permanently tight joints
under all reasonable conditions of expansion, contraction,
shifting and settlement. The required torque ranges for the
joint harness shall be as specified by the pipe manufacturer.
8. Setting Valves and Valve Boxes. All valves shall be provided with a valve
box as detailed on the drawings. Unless otherwise directed by the
Owner all valves shall be set with their stems truly vertical. The tops of
the valve box shall be set neatly to the grade of the surface of the
existing ground, unless directed otherwise by the Owner. The valve box
shall not transfer shock or stress to the valve and shall be centered and
plumb over the wrench nut of the valve.
9. Setting of Hydrants. Fire hydrants shall be installed as specified in
AWWA C600, § 11. Where there is no sidewalk or curb the hydrant shall
be not less than six feet from the edge of the paved road surface. In no
case will hydrants be located closer than 25 feet to a building except
where building walls are blank firewalls. Hydrants shall not be located
closer than three feet to any obstruction or in front of entrance ways.
All hydrants shall stand plumb with the pumper nozzle facing the curb,
and six inches behind it, and the hose nozzles parallel to the curb.
10. Anchorage.
A. All plugs, caps, tees, and bends (both horizontal and vertical) shall
be provided with concrete reaction backings, or shall otherwise be
anchored as authorized by the Borough. Sizes of required concrete
reaction backings are shown on the attached standard detail
drawing. Where the water mains must be tested before connections
existing mains can be installed, temporary reaction backings or
restrained type plugs shall be installed. Concrete for reaction
backings shall be Class B cement concrete as specified in
§ 612(26). Care should be taken to insure that all weep holes
remain open and that no concrete covers any bolts or nuts or
interferes with future repairs or replacement.
B. The contractor shall submit a sketch and obtain the Borough's
approval for the anchorage of the pipe and fittings at each
connection, or at any other locations designated by the Borough.
The Borough reserves the right to require mechanical joint retainer
glands in addition to concrete backings.
C. Hydrant bases shall be braced against undisturbed earth with
reaction backings, or shall be restrained with tic rods, clamps or
§ 614 FOREWORD § 614
FWD:667
retainer glands, in a manner approved by the Borough. The
approved hydrant installation is shown on the attached standard
detail drawing.
11. Connections to Existing Water Lines. Connections shall be made to
existing water mains at various points in the project. These connections
shall be made in strict accordance with the requirements set forth by
the Engineer, and as specified hereinafter.
A. General.
(1) Each connection to the existing water line shall be made under
pressure with a tapping sleeve and valve. If this is not possible,
then the following conditions must be met.
(2) The contractor shall take special precautions so as not to
disturb in any way the functional operation of the existing
water main; except on a preplanned scheduled basis, the time
and date of which will be established in advance with the
Engineer and owner. The contractor shall at no time operate
water valves in the existing water system without the presence
of a duly qualified representative of the owner.
(3) The contractor shall be responsible for working in coordination
with the owner to insure that all customers that may be
affected by the interruption of service are given adequate
notice of the pending interruption of service. If the number of
customers and length of interruption are such, in the opinion of
the owner, to justify the need, the contractor shall place
advertisements in the local newspaper a minimum of three
times, prior to the scheduled interruption of service. The cost
of such advertising shall be included in the price bid for the
various connections.
B. Schedule of Work. The contractor shall follow the installation
schedule as outlined below:
(1) In locations where new water mains are to be connected to
existing water mains, the contractor will not be permitted to
proceed with the construction of the connection until he has
dug test pits and determined the exact location, elevation and
type of existing pipe and its outside diameter. The contractor is
reminded that old water main pipe may vary in roundness and
outside diameter and consider this factor in ordering materials
for the connection. The cost of excavating, maintaining, and
backfilling test pits shall be considered incidental to the earth
excavation and backfill, and no separate payment will be made.
Pits shall be protected and backfilled, if required, by the
contractor.
(2) If the condition of the connection is regulated by geometry, as
determined by data obtained from the excavation of the test
§ 614 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 614
FWD:668
pits, the contractor shall order any necessary additional
materials.
(3) The contractor shall notify the owner at least five days in
advance of the time he or she proposes to install the
connection, and shall establish with the owner the procedures
to be followed in installing the connection, including the day
and time of the proposed shutdown, and establish a new date
and time for the shutdown, based on the owner's knowledge of
system conditions. The contractor is hereby warned that the
owner reserves the right to require that any particular
connection be made at night or on a Sunday.
(4) Before the start of the installation of a connection, the
contractor shall do as much work in advance as possible prior
to actually shutting down the main, and shall have all
necessary tools, equipment, materials and labor on hand at the
start of the work.
(5) Once the existing main is cut, work shall be continuous until
water service is restored.
(6) When installing connections, estrained joints and tie rods and
clamps shall be used to the maximum extent possible, in lieu of
concrete thrust blocks when installing connections, unless
shown otherwise on the drawings. If it is necessary to use
concrete thrust blocks, the high early strength cement
concrete shall be used.
12. Service Lines.
A. General. The sizing of customer service lines shall be subject to
Borough approval and shall be based on the length of line and the
water demand. Residential service lines shall normally be 3/4
inches in size. The service line shall normally consist of a
corporation stop, copper pipe, curb stop and box.
B. Materials.
(1) Corporation Stops. See § 612(12).
(2) Copper Tube. See § 612(10).
(3) Fittings for Copper or Plastic Tubing. See § 612(11).
(4) Curb Stops and Boxes. See § 612(13).
(5) Steel Encasement Pipe. Steel pipe, three inches and smaller,
for encasement of service pipes shall be Schedule 40 welded
and seamless black steel pipe, conforming to ASTM
Designation A120.
C. Construction Methods.
§ 614 FOREWORD § 614
FWD:669
§ 615. Testing and Disinfection. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § V; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
(1) When installing corporation stops, the main shall be tapped at
a 45° angle with the horizontal. Service tubing shall be
installed as a continuous length of pipe and shall have a
minimum cover of four feet. Curb stops shall be vertical, with
the top of the curb box a finished grade. Where grading may be
still in progress, the curb box shall be marked by a high stake.
(2) Where service lines cross highways or streets, a 1 1/4 inch (for
3/4-inch service pipe) black steel casing pipe shall be installed
across the street by boring, jacking, auguring or drilling, and
the service line shall be inserted in the casing pipe. If
underground conditions do not permit boring, pushing, or
jacking, the contractor shall obtain authority approval before
proceeding with an alternate method of installation. PennDOT
normally requires that water mains crossing State highways be
installed in a casing pipe which shall be bored, jacked or
augured under the highway, as specified in § 616, "Special
Crossings." However, PennDOT may permit the open cutting of
trenches across State highways as specified in § 616.
13. Railroad and Creek Crossings. Pipeline crossings under railroad tracks
and creeks shall be installed in accordance with § 616, "Special
Crossings."
14. State Highway and Street Crossings.
A. Maintenance and control of traffic shall be as specified in § 611(9)
and the accommodation of traffic as specified in § 613(16).
B. All construction on state highway right-of-way shall be subject to
inspection by PennDOT personnel. Contractor shall comply with
PennDOT 459 Regulations and Highway Occupancy Permit
Regulations. Streets under local jurisdiction may also be subject to
inspection by the Borough Engineer.
15. Corrosion Control. Water mains that cross pipelines which are now, or
may be in the future, cathodically protected shall be constructed using
PVC pipe as specified herein. The PVC pipe shall extend a minimum
distance of 20 feet from the crossing pipe on each side. The PVC pipe
shall be suitable for direct connection to cast iron or ductile iron pipe,
and shall conform to AWWA C900. The PVC pipe shall be Johns-Manville
Blue-Brute Thickwall Ring-Tite PVC water pipe or approved equal.
16. Reaction Backings. Concrete reaction backings shall be provided for all
tees, crosses, and bends, both horizontal and vertical. Concrete shall be
Class A in accordance with PennDOT Form 408. Reaction backings shall
be designed for 175 psi minimum; contractor shall submit design for
approval.
§ 614 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 615
FWD:670
1. General.
A. This section covers the testing and disinfection of the water mains.
The contractor shall prepare a schedule and procedure for the
testing and disinfection of the different parts of the work and shall
submit the same to the Borough for approval two weeks before
beginning the testing and disinfection. The contractor shall
perform the testing and disinfection prompt and efficiently without
interference to the system operation. The contractor shall give the
Borough 24 hours notice before testing any main.
B. The contractor shall begin testing and disinfection of the various
sections of water mains promptly upon the completion of a section
of work, unless the Borough approves otherwise. The Borough
reserves the right to limit the amount of water main to be tested.
The contractor shall close the section of water main to be tested by
valves or temporary plugs and shall install temporary reaction
backings where required.
2. Hydrostatic and Leakage Test.
A. Hydrostatic pressure tests shall not be made until at least seven
days after concrete reaction backings are installed. The contractor,
at his option and expense, may use high early strength cement
concrete for reaction backings, in which case hydrostatic pressure
tests shall not be made until at least three days have elapsed.
B. The contractor shall completely backfill the trench, or may partially
backfill the trench with written approval of the Borough, prior to
carrying out the pressure test.
C. The section of water main being tested shall be filled with water a
minimum of 48 hours before the main is tested. The contractor
shall insure that air is expelled from the pipeline in accordance
with AWWA C600, § 4.1.3. Any taps necessary to release air or
water from the main during testing shall be made at the
contractor's expense, unless retained by the owner for other use.
D. After the pipeline has been filled with water for 48 hours, the
contractor shall conduct a hydrostatic or pressure test. The
duration of the pressure test shall be at least two hours. Each
section of water main shall be tested under the design pressure
specified in § 611(2)(C)(2), measured at the low point of the section
of main being tested. The proposed test pressure shall be approved
by the Borough prior to testing, and the contractor shall not employ
a test pressure which exceeds the allowable pressure of any
installed pipe, valve or appurtenance.
E. In order to successfully pass the pressure test the line or section of
line being tested cannot lose any pressure during the two hour test.
3. Disinfection.
§ 615 FOREWORD § 615
FWD:671
A. General. Before being placed in service, all pipe installed under
this contract shall be disinfected by chlorination in accordance with
AWWA C60 1, except where specified otherwise in this Section.
B. Preliminary Flushing. Prior to disinfection, the sections of pipeline
being disinfected shall be flushed thoroughly. If necessary, the line
shall be opened up to flush as in a case where no hydrants are
available.
C. Form of Chlorine for Disinfection. The contractor shall use either
liquid chlorine or calcium hypochlorite solution for disinfection in
accordance with AWWA C601, § 6.
(1) Liquid Chlorine. A chlorine-gas water mixture shall be applied
by means of a solution feed chlorinating device in combination
with a booster pump for injecting the chlorine gas-water
mixture into the main to be disinfected. This method shall be
used only if the contractor can demonstrate to the Engineer
that the person supervising the operation is thoroughly
familiar with and experienced in the handling of chlorine gas,
and that the equipment to be used is suitable, and that proper
safety equipment is available.
(2) Calcium Hypochlorite Solution. A chlorine-water solution of 1%
available chlorine shall be prepared, using granular calcium
hypochlorite, and this solution shall then be injected or
pumped into the pipeline. A chlorine water solution of 1%
available chlorine may be prepared by mixing approximately
one pound of calcium hypochlorite with 8.5 gallons of water.
D. Application of Chlorine. The hypochlorite solution shall be allied to
the water main with a gasoline or electrically-pod chemical feed
pump, designed for feeding chlorine solutions. For smaller
applications, the solution may be prepared in a barrel, and then
pumped into the main with a hand pump, such as a hydraulic test
pump. The dosage rate shall be such that the chlorine
concentration in the water in the pipe is a minimum of 50 p.p.m.
available chlorine. The following table gives the amount of calcium
hypochlorite and the quantity of 1% hypochlorite solution required
to produce a 50 p.p.m. chlorine concentration in 100 feet of pipe:
§ 615 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 615
FWD:672
Calcium Hypochlorite and Chlorine Solution Required
to Produce 50 p.p.m. Concentration in 100 feet of Pipe
Pipe
Size
Contents in a 100 foot
Section
Amount of
Calcium
Hypochlorite
Chlorine
Solution
Inches
Cub.
Ft. Pounds Gallons Ounces Pounds Gallons
6 19.60 1225 147 1 1/2 0.091 0.73
8 34.90 2180 261 2 1/2 0.159 1.30
10 54.55 3405 408 4 0.252 2.06
12 78.55 4905 588 5 5/8 0.35 2.88
16 139.60 8725 1044 10 0.621 5.22
E. Point of Application. The point of application of the chlorinating
agent shall be at the high end of the pipeline section, and through a
corporation stop inserted in the top of the new pipe. If the water for
the preparation of the chlorine solution is supplied from a tap on
the existing pipeline, there shall be a physical break between the
injector supply and the injector pump.
F. Rate of application. The chlorine solution shall be pumped slowly
into the new pipeline. Chlorine application shall not cease until the
entire main is filled with the chlorine solution. If required by the
Engineer, the chlorine residual shall be measured at several points
along the section of main being tested to insure that the proper
dosage and distribution of the chlorine solution is obtained.
G. Prevention of Reverse Flow. Great care shall be exercised in
manipulating valves, so that the strong chlorine solution in the line
being treated will not flow back into the adjoining water
distribution system.
H. Retention Period and Chlorine Concentration. The chlorinated
water shall be retained in the main for at least 24 hours, during
which time all valves and hydrants in the section treated shall be
operated, in order to disinfect the appurtenances. At the end of this
twenty-four-hour period, the treated water shall contain no less
than 25 p.p.m. chlorine throughout the length of the main. Should
the initial procedure fail to result in the conditions specified, the
chlorination procedure shall be repeated until such results are
obtained, at the contractor's expense.
I. Point of Discharge. The contractor shall discharge the disinfecting
solution from the mains through available outlets, or through taps
in the main. The contractor shall exercise all due precautions in
discharging the chlorine bearing water; since it is extremely toxic
and, if allowed to flow into streams, can readily destroy aquatic life.
§ 615 FOREWORD § 615
FWD:673
If any damage to property or fish life occurs due to the disposal of
the disinfecting solution, the cost of the damage shall be paid by
the contractor. If the possibility of damage to aquatic life is such, in
the opinion of the Engineer, that special precautions are required,
the contractor shall dechlorinate the disinfecting solution before it
goes to waste. The chlorine solution may be neutralized by applying
sodium thiosulfate in the ratio of two parts thiosulfate to one part
chlorine at the point of discharge. Contractor shall comply with
Lancaster County Soil Conservation District requirements.
J. Final Flushing. Following chlorination, the heavily chlorinated
water shall be thoroughly flushed from the line at its extremities
until the replacement water throughout its length, upon test, be
proven comparable to the quality of water in the existing
distribution system.
K. Flushing Water. Water for flushing will be provided by the owner,
but at no time shall valves on the water distribution system be
operated without the presence of a duly qualified representative of
the owner.
L. Water for Testing. Water will be furnished by the owner for one
hydrostatic test and disinfection procedure. If pipelines must be
retested and disinfected, the cost for additional water will be borne
by the contractor at a cost rate determined by the owner.
4. Disinfection of Water Main Connection. Since it may not be possible to
disinfect the pipe, valves and fittings installed at certain connections in
the manner specified above, the contractor shall proceed as follows:
A. Installation of Connection. Every precaution shall be observed
during the installation of the connection to prevent foreign material
and trench water from entering the pipe, fittings, and valves during
their installation.
B. Disinfection. The interior of all pipe, fittings and valves shall be
swabbed with a 5% hypochlorite solution. A 5% hypochlorite
solution can be obtained by mixing approximately three pounds of
granulated calcium hypochlorite with five gallons of water.
C. Flushing. After the pipe, fittings, and valves have been swabbed,
they shall be thoroughly flushed with water.
5. Disposal of Water.
A. Again, the contractor is reminded that the chlorinated water must
be disposed of in a manner such that no damage occurs to fish life
of vegetation. If the Department of Environmental Protection has
regulations for waste water disposal, it shall be the contractor's
responsibility to follow the regulations to their end. Contractor
shall comply with all Lancaster County Soil Conservation District
requirements.
§ 615 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 616
FWD:674
§ 616. Special Crossings. [Ord. 752, 2/7/1994, § VI; as amended by
Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
1. General.
A. This section of the specifications covers the requirements for the
construction of railroad, stream, and highway crossings.
B. All work shall be performed as specified herein, or as otherwise
required by the railroad company, the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, PennDOT, or other agencies having
jurisdiction.
2. Materials.
A. Water Main Pipe. All special crossings shall be constructed of
ductile iron pipe, having mechanical joint ends.
B. Steel Casing Pipe. Steel easing pipe shall conform to § 612(16) and
shall be installed at the locations specified by the Borough. Steel
easing pipes shall be of the diameter and wall thickness approved
by the Borough. However, the contractor, at his own expense, may
install a larger diameter casing pipe than is specified, provided all
necessary clearances under railroad tracks, highways, pipelines,
and other structures are maintained. If the contractor elects to use
a larger diameter steel casing pipe, the wall thickness shall be
increased accordingly, as required by the Borough.
C. Concrete. Concrete shall be as specified in § 612(22).
3. Railroad Crossings.
A. General. Railroad crossings shall be installed in accordance with
the requirements of Part 5, Pipelines, Specifications for Pipelines
for Conveying Flammable and Nonflammable Substances,
published by the American Railway Engineering Association and
with any additional or special requirements of the owner of the
track. The applicant shall pay all charges imposed by the railroad
for the crossing installation, including license agreement
preparation fees and the cost of any personnel and insurance
required by the railroad company during the crossing construction.
B. Work on Railroad Right-of-Way.
(1) The contractor shall inform himself of the terms and conditions
of the work on railroad right-of-way and shall bear the costs
which may arise therefrom. The contractor may not work on
railroad property until fully executed copy of the agreement
between the railroad company and the Borough has been on
file for 30 days with the Public Utility Commission, provided
that the Commission has not instituted proceedings affecting
the validity of the agreement in that time. Work in the railroad
§ 616 FOREWORD § 616
FWD:675
right-of-way shall conform to the agreement between the
railroad company and the Borough.
(2) The contractor shall submit any plans of construction method
and proposed materials in accordance with railroad
regulations. The railroad company approval of plans and
methods of doing the work will not be considered a release
from responsibility for damage to the railroad company by the
acts of the contractor or his employees.
(3) All costs to the railroad for flagging and protective personnel,
engineering inspection, removal and replacement of tracks,
repair to railroad facilities damaged by the contractor's
operations, and other work shall be borne by the contractor or
applicant.
4. Stream Crossings.
A. General. The Borough will obtain the necessary permits for stream
crossings from the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection. The contractor shall not perform any work in a stream
channel, unless he has been notified that the required permit has
been issued and informed himself of any special conditions. He
shall not damage the stream channel and stream banks, erode the
stream banks, deposit excess sediment in the stream, or otherwise
harm the streams or the properties along the streams.
5. Highway Crossing.
A. General. The Borough will submit PennDOT Form 945-A,
Application for Highway Occupancy Permit, for work on State
highway right-of-way. Contractor shall comply with PennDOT 459
regulations. The contractor will pay all PennDOT fees in connection
with the project.
B. Work on State Highway Right-of-Way.
(1) The contractor shall not start work on State highway right-ofway
until the Borough has received the "opening-of-highway"
agreement from PennDOT.
(2) The contractor shall notify the District Engineer having
jurisdiction of the proposed date for starting work a minimum
of two weeks prior to that date. The work carried out on State
highway right-of-way shall be performed in accordance with
the requirements set forth on Form 945-B, General Provisions
and Specifications Regulating Occupancy of State Highway
Right-of-Way, and such other special requirements as may be
stipulated by PennDOT. Questions pertaining to work on State
highway right-of-way should be directed to the District
Engineer having jurisdiction. The work shall be done under the
supervision of, and to the satisfaction of, PennDOT.
§ 616 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 616
FWD:676
Part 7
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEMS
§ 701. Definitions. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
For purposes of this Part, the following words shall have the meanings set
forth thereafter:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Elizabethtown, County of Lancaster,
Pennsylvania.
EAWA WATER — Water provided through the municipal water system
owned and/or operated by the Elizabethtown Area Water Authority.
EAWA WATER SYSTEM — The water system owned and operated by the
Elizabethtown Area Water Authority.
PRIVATE WATER SYSTEM — Any system designed to extract water from
the ground, springs or other water source, which is not EAWA water or the
EAWA water system, including but not limited to wells and springs.
§ 702. Private Water Systems Prohibited. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
Except where EAWA water is not available, it shall be unlawful to construct,
reconstruct or repair any private water system which is designed or
intended to provide water for drinking purposes. The owners of property
that currently do not have EAWA water connections, have private wells
and abut on or adjoin any street or highway in which an EAWA waterline
is located shall connect such property therewith, in accordance with all
applicable Borough ordinances, rules and regulations and EAWA rules and
regulations (including the payment of all applicable fees) within 60 days
after notice to such owner from the Borough. No private water system
shall be used or maintained for drinking water purposes at any time upon
property which has been connected to the EAWA water system or upon
which EAWA water is available.
§ 703. EAWA Water Required. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
All new construction within the Borough shall connect to the EAWA water
system, in accordance with all applicable Borough ordinances, rules and
regulations and EAWA rules and regulations (including the payment of all
applicable fees).
§ 704. Registration of Private Water Systems. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
All owners of property within the Borough that obtain water for drinking
purposes upon the property from a private well system shall register such
private water system with the Borough upon a form prepared by the
Borough Manager or his/her designee. If the Borough Manager determines
that such property can be served by EAWA water without the substantial
extension of the existing EAWA water system or EAWA water becomes
available to the property, the Borough Manager shall issue a notice to
§ 701 FOREWORD § 704
FWD:677
the property owner requiring such owner to connect to the EAWA water
system within 60 days of the notice, in accordance with all applicable
Borough ordinances, rules and regulations and EAWA rules and regulations,
including the payment of all applicable fees, at the sole cost and expense of
the property owner.
§ 705. Closure of Private Wells. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
All private wells located on properties served by EAWA water which do not
meet the requirements set forth at Exhibit A, attached to this Part,67 shall be
filled and sealed, at the expense of the owner of the property upon which the
private well is located, in accordance with all applicable laws, regulations
and ordinances, within 120 days of the adoption of this Part or the provision
of EAWA water to the subject property, whichever occurs later.
§ 706. Notice. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
Any notice provided by the Borough or any other official or employee
pursuant to the terms of this Part shall be provided by any one of the
following methods: personal service; certified mail, return receipt
requested; first class mail and posting the property in question; any other
method provided by law.
§ 707. Violations and Penalties. [Ord. 875, 7/20/2006]
Any person, group, association or organization that violates any provision
of this Part is guilty of a summary offense and shall pay a fine not less
than $100 nor in excess of $1,000 for each successive day that the violation
exists. In addition to any penalty provided hereunder, the Borough may seek
injunctive relief to prevent the violation of this Part.
67.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 704 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 707
FWD:678
Chapter 27
ZONING
§ 707 FOREWORD § 707
FWD:679

Part 1
TITLE, AUTHORITY, PURPOSE, COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
OBJECTIVES
§ 101. Short Title. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 1.0]
This chapter shall be known as and may be cited as the "Borough of
Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance."
§ 102. Authority. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 1.1]
This chapter is enacted and ordained under the grant of powers by the
General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Act 247, the
"Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code," July 31, 1968, as amended.
§ 103. Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 1.2]
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes:
§ 104. Community Development Objectives. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 1.3]
It is the intent of this chapter to promote and to foster the community
development goals and objectives as contained in the Elizabethtown
Borough Comprehensive Plan, as amended.
A. To promote, protect and facilitate one or more of the following: the
public health, safety, morals, general welfare, coordinated and practical
community development, proper density of population, civil defense,
disaster evacuation, the provision of adequate light and air, police
protection, vehicle parking and loading space, transportation, water,
sewerage, schools, public grounds and other public requirements.
B. To prevent one or more of the following: overcrowding of land, blight,
danger and congestion in travel and transportation, loss of health, life
or property from fire, flood, panic or other dangers. This chapter is
made in accordance with an overall program, and with consideration
for the character of the municipality, its various parts, and the
suitability of the various parts for particular uses and structures.
§ 101 FOREWORD § 104
FWD:681

Part 2
DEFINITIONS
§ 201. Definitions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, Art. 2; as amended by Ord.
876, 8/17/2006; by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. The following words are defined in order to facilitate the interpretation
of this chapter for administrative purposes and in the carrying out of
duties by appropriate officers and by the Zoning Hearing Board.
2. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated. Words used
in the present tense include the future tense. The singular includes the
plural. The word "person" includes any individual or group of
individuals, a corporation, partnership or any other similar entity. The
word "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel." The term "shall" is
always mandatory. The word "used" or "occupied" as applied to any land
or building shall be construed to include the words, "intended,
arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
ABANDONMENT — The relinquishment of property; or a cessation of
the use of the property, by the owner with the intention neither of
transferring rights to the property to another owner nor of resuming
the use of the property.
ACCESS DRIVE — A paved surface, other than a street, which provides
vehicular access from a street or private road to a lot.
ACCESSORY BUILDING — A building subordinate to and detached
from the principal building on the same lot and used for purposes
customarily incidental to the principal building.
ACCESSORY DWELLING UNIT — A small dwelling unit with no more
than two bedrooms that is built on the same lot as a primary dwelling
unit, a separate one- or two-bedroom dwelling unit in the basement, a
separate one- or two-bedroom dwelling unit in the attic, or a separate
dwelling unit converted from an existing or newly constructed
accessory structure or portion thereof.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principal use of the main building or land and located on the same
lot with such principal use or main building.
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — An establishment having as a substantial or
significant portion of its stock-in-trade, books, magazines, videotapes
and other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" (as defined herein),
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:683
or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
ADULT MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment or business
which provides the services of massage and body manipulation,
including exercises, heat and light treatments of the body, and all
forms and methods of physiotherapy operated by a medical practitioner,
chiropractor or professional massage or physical therapist licensed by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AGRICULTURAL ANIMALS — Animals associated with agricultural
operation, commonly kept or raised as a part of an agricultural
operation, such as livestock and poultry, including but not limited to
horses, swine, goats, ducks, chickens, turkeys, roosters, hens, cattle,
deer, sheep and lambs.
AIR RIGHTS — The right to use space above ground level.
ALLEY — A public thoroughfare other than a minor street which affords
only a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended
for general traffic circulation.
ALLEY SHOPS — A permitted use, within the Central Business District,
that has a main access onto an approved Borough alley.
ALTERATION — Any interior or exterior change to a building or
structure; any renovation that changes the use, classification, or
location of any building or structure. The meaning of this term shall not
include "maintenance," as that term is defined in this chapter.
ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL — Any change in the supporting
members of a building such as bearing walls, columns, beams or
girders.
AMENDMENT — A change in use in any district which includes
revisions to the zoning text and/or the official zoning map; and the
authority for any amendment lies solely with the Borough Council.
AMUSEMENT ARCADE — An establishment which has as its principal
business offering to patrons mechanical or electrical amusement
devices or games such as pinball machines, ping pong, darts, shooting
galleries, pool tables, videos, computer or similar devices and games.
ANIMAL GROOMING SERVICE — An establishment where animals are
bathed, clipped, or combed for the purpose of enhancing their aesthetic
value or health and for which a fee is charged. No overnight boarding
services shall be provided at the establishment.
ANIMAL HOSPITAL — A building used for the treatment, housing or
boarding of small domestic animals such as dogs, cats, rabbits and
birds or fowl by a veterinarian.
ANTENNA — Any system of wires, poles, rods, reflecting discs or
similar devices used for the transmission or reception of
electromagnetic waves, which is external to or attached to the exterior
of any building.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:684
ANTENNA, SATELLITE DISH — A device incorporating a reflective
surface that is solid, open mesh or bar configured and is in the shape
of a shallow dish, cone, horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used
to transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves between
terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This definition is meant to
include but not be limited to what are commonly referred to as satellite
earth station(s) and satellite microwave antenna(s).
ANTENNA, AMATEUR RADIO — An antenna or any combination of a
mast or tower plus an attached or mounted antenna, which transmits
noncommercial and nonprofessional communication signals and is
utilized by an operator licensed by the Federal Communications
Commission. Guy wires for amateur radio antennas are considered part
of the structure for the purpose of meeting development standards.
ANTENNA, COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS — A structure that
is partially or wholly exterior to a building, used for transmitting or
retransmitting electronic signals through the air. Such devices shall
include, but are not limited to, an antenna used for transmitting
commercial radio or television signals, or to receive such signals for a
cable system, or to retransmit wireless telecommunications.
APARTMENT — A dwelling unit within a multiple dwelling. This
classification includes apartments in apartment houses, bachelor
apartments, studio apartments and kitchenette apartments. Conversion
apartments are not included in the classification.
APARTMENT, CONVERSION — An existing dwelling unit that is or was
converted to a dwelling for more than one family, without altering the
exterior of the building.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
APARTMENT, GARDEN — A two story multifamily dwelling, containing
one story dwelling units.
APARTMENT HOUSE — See definition of "dwelling, multifamily."
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to the start of construction or development, including but not limited
to an application for a building permit for the approval of a subdivision
plat or plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AREA, BUILDING — See "building area."
AREA, LOT — The area contained within the property lines of a lot or
as shown on a subdivision plan, excluding space within any street, but
including the area of any easement.
AUTOMOBILE BODY SHOP — A building on a lot designed and/or used
primarily for mechanical and/or body repairs, storage, rental, servicing
or supplying of gasoline or oil to automobiles, trucks or similar motor
vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — Any area of land, including any
structures thereon, or any building or part thereof, that is used for the
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:685
retail sale of gasoline, oil, other fuel, or accessories for motor vehicles
and which may include facilities used for polishing, greasing, washing,
dry cleaning or otherwise cleaning or servicing such motor vehicles.
AUTOMOBILE WASHING (CAR WASH) — A building on a lot, designed
and used primarily for the washing, polishing, and/or detailing of
automobiles, and which may provide accessory services set forth herein
for automobile service stations.
BARBER/BEAUTY SHOP — An establishment which provides services
relating to the cutting and styling of hair, manicures and facials.
BASEMENT — That portion of a building that is partially or wholly
below ground level. This portion is not a completed structure and
serves as a substructure or foundation for a building. A basement
shall be counted as a story for the purpose of height measurement
if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average level of
the adjoining ground is more than five feet or is used for business or
dwelling purposes, other than a game or recreation room.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST ESTABLISHMENT — The use of an owneroccupied,
single-family, detached structure or portion thereof
providing, for compensation, sleeping accommodations and breakfast
for transient occupants.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
BLOCK — An area of land bounded by streets.
BUFFER YARD — See "yard, buffer."
BUILDING — Any structure having a roof supported by columns or
walls and intended for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons,
animals or chattels, and including covered porches or bay windows
and chimneys. Garages and sheds and similar structures are to be
considered a building under this chapter.
BUILDING AREA — The total of areas taken on a horizontal plane at the
main grade level of the principal building and all accessory buildings,
exclusive of uncovered porches, terraces and steps.
BUILDING, DETACHED — A building surrounded by open space on the
same lot.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the
average elevation of the proposed finished grade at the front of the
building to the highest point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deckline
of mansard roofs and to the mean height between eaves and ridge for
gable, hip and gambrel roofs.
BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to the front, side or rear lot line
so as to provide the required setback distances; the line of the face
of the building nearest an adjacent right-of-way, street line or lot line.
This includes sun parlors and covered porches, whether enclosed or
unenclosed, but does not include steps.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:686
BUILDING PERMIT — Written permission issued by the proper
municipal authority for the construction, repair, alteration or addition
to a structure.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — The building in which the principal use of a
lot is conducted. Any building that is physically attached to a "principal
building" shall be considered a part of that "principal building."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
required minimum distance permitted between any enclosed structure
and the adjacent right-of-way or lot lines.
CAMPING GROUND — A parcel of land used by campers for seasonal,
recreational, or other similar temporary living purposes, in buildings
of a movable, temporary or seasonal nature, such as cabins, tents or
shelters.
CARPORT — A covered space, open on three sides, for the storage of
one or more vehicles and accessory to a principal or accessory building.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street or alley which is improved,
designed or intended for vehicular use.
CELLAR — A story partly underground and having more than 1/2 of its
clear height below the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar
shall not be considered in determining the maximum number of stories.
CEMETERY — Land used or intended to be used for the burial of
the deceased, including but not limited to columbarium, crematoria,
mausoleums and mortuaries, when operated in conjunction with the
cemetery and within its boundaries.
CERTIFICATE OF USE AND OCCUPANCY — A certificate, issued and
enforced by the Zoning Officer upon completion of the construction of
a new building or upon a change or conversion of the structure or use
of a building, which certifies that all requirements and regulations as
provided herein, as well as all other applicable requirements, have been
satisfied.
CHURCH — A building used for public worship and/or education by
a congregation, excluding buildings used exclusively for residential,
burial, recreational or other uses not normally associated with worship.
For purposes of this chapter, the term "church" shall include
synagogue.
CLEAN WOOD — Natural, dry wood that has no paint, stains, or other
types of coatings, and natural wood that has not been treated with
substances, including, but not limited to, copper chromium arsenate,
creosote, alkaline copper quaternary or pentachlorophenol.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections. It is defined by lines of sight between points at a given
distance from the intersection of the street center lines.
CLUB and/or LODGE — A building and/or structure utilized as a private
club offering food and/or drink privileges.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:687
COMMON OPEN SPACE — See "open space, common."
COMMUNITY FAIR — The annual Elizabethtown fair held each
calendar year.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Part 15.
CONDOMINIUM — Real estate, portions of which are designated for
separate ownership and the remainder of which is designated for
common ownership solely by the owners of those portions. Real estate
is not a condominium unless the undivided interests in the common
elements are vested in the unit owners.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration or relocation of a building
structure, including the placement of manufactured homes.
CONTRACTED ANIMAL FOSTER CARE PROGRAM — A program and/
or service recognized through a contractual relationship with the
Borough to promote animal safety and public health by providing
temporary housing to animals defined in this Section as "pets" not to
exceed 48 hours.
COVERAGE — That portion or percentage of the lot area covered by
impervious materials.
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, or part of a facility, not in a private
residence, offering baby-sitting, nursery school and/or child-care
services, where tuition, fees or other compensation for the instruction
and/or care of the children is charged. Such facility shall meet all
applicable licensing and registration requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare.
DAY-CARE RESIDENCE — A residence offering baby-sitting and/or
child-care services for children unrelated to the resident household
and meeting all applicable licensing and registration requirements of
the Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare. The baby-sitting and/or
child-care services shall not commence earlier than 6:30 a.m. and shall
not continue beyond 7:00 p.m.
DENSITY — A term used to express the allowable number of dwelling
units per acre of land. "Net density" is the number of dwelling units per
net acre. "Gross density" is the number of dwelling units per gross acre.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
filling, grading, paving, excavation, mining, dredging or drilling
operations and the subdivision of land.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:688
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures,
intensity of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking
facilities, common open space and public facilities. The phrase
"provisions of the development plan," when used in this chapter, shall
mean the written and graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRIVE-THROUGH SERVICE — An establishment which, by design,
physical facilities, services or by packaging procedures, encourages or
permits customers to receive services, obtain goods or be entertained
while remaining in their motor vehicles.
DRIVEWAY — An improved cartway designed and constructed to
provide for vehicular movement between a street and a dwelling or
dwellings.
DUMP — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for disposal
by abandonment, dumping, burial or other means, and for whatever
purpose, of garbage, sewage, trash, refuse, junk, discarded machinery,
vehicles or parts thereof or waste material of any kind.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters
for one or more families, including industrialized housing and
manufactured homes which are supported either by a foundation or
are otherwise permanently attached to the land. A dwelling shall not
include transient occupancy unless otherwise permitted as a bed-andbreakfast
establishment or short-term lodging
accommodation.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
DWELLING GROUP — A group of two or more single-family, two-family
or multifamily dwellings occupying a lot in one ownership.
DWELLING, MANUFACTURED HOME — A transportable, single-family
detached dwelling intended for permanent occupancy, contained in one
unit, or in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit
capable of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives
at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and
incidental unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that
it may be used without a permanent foundation. For floodplain
management purposes, this definition includes park trailers, travel
trailers and other similar vehicles located on site for greater than 180
consecutive days.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more
families living independently of each other and doing their own
cooking, including apartment houses.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, ATTACHED (TOWNHOUSE) — A
dwelling used for one family and having two party walls in common with
other buildings (such as row house or townhouse).
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, DETACHED — A building used by one
family, having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:689
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY, SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by
one family, having one side yard and one party wall in common with
another single-family semidetached unit.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY, DETACHED (DUPLEX) — A building used by
two families, with one dwelling unit arranged over the other, and having
two side yards.
DWELLING UNIT — A single unit providing complete independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions
for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
DWELLING UNIT, GROUND-FLOOR — A single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more persons which
is located at grade or sidewalk elevation within a structure. A groundfloor
dwelling unit is located in the front portion (streetside) of a
building, rear position of a building or encompass the entire the entire
first floor of a building.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property
owner to and/or for the use by the public, a corporation or another
person or entity.
EATING ESTABLISHMENT — Any form of restaurant and/or tavern
open to the public, dispensing food and drink.
ELECTRIC SUBSTATION — An assemblage of equipment for purposes
other than generation or utilization, through which bulk electric energy
is passed for the purpose of switching or modifying its characteristics
to meet the needs of the general public. This definition includes
transformer substations.
ELECTRIC TRANSMISSION AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES —
Electric public utilities transmission and distribution facilities,
including substations.
EXISTING STRUCTURES AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE —
The Borough of Elizabethtown Existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code [Chapter 5, Part 1], as may be amended from time
to time.
FACADE — The exterior wall of a building exposed to public view or
that wall viewed by persons not within the building.
FACILITY OWNER, WIND ENERGY — The entity, person or entities
having equity interest in the wind generated energy system, including
their respective successors and assigns.
FAMILY — Any number of individuals living and cooking together as
a single housekeeping unit, including not more than three unrelated
individuals. The term "unrelated individual" shall include any individual
who is unrelated by blood, marriage, legal adoption or foster
relationship to any other individual in the dwelling unit. A family shall
also expressly include any number of unrelated persons who reside
within a licensed group home, as defined herein. It is the express
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:690
intent of the Borough to comply with all provisions of the Federal Fair
Housing Act, as amended, and regulations promulgated thereunder, in
the construction of this term.[Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
FARM MARKET — A retail market featuring foods such as fruits,
vegetables, meats, locally grown plants and/or imported produce items
approved by the United States Food and Drug Administration, baked
goods, prepared foods and beverages sold to consumers, on empty lots,
tables, stands, indoor and outdoor structures, by farmers or agents of
farmers. Live animals are excluded.[Added by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of
demarcation between lots or to enclose a lot or portion thereof. The
term "fence" shall be deemed to include a wall if the wall is used as a
fence.
FILL — Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other material
is placed, pushed, dumped, transported or moved to a new location
above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom. Fill can
also be defined as the difference in elevation between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of higher elevation on the final
grade or the material used to make a fill.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — Any commercial establishment that lends
money or engages in finance-related business, but not including
stockbrokerage firms, investment firms, and securities firms.
FITNESS CENTER — A facility that contains a full range of exercise
equipment and classes designed to promote cardiovascular and general
health conditioning. Such centers generally contain nautilus
equipment, free weights, conditioning machines, aerobic activities and
classes and locker room facilities.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD, BASE (FIVE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD) — A flood that, on the
average, is likely to occur once every 500 years.
FLOOD FRINGE — That portion of the floodplain outside the floodway.
FLOODPLAIN —
FLOODPLAIN ORDINANCE — The Borough of Elizabethtown
Floodplain Ordinance [Chapter 8], as may be amended from time to
time.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to proposed or existing structures
A relatively flat or low land area adjoining a river, stream or
watercourse which is subject to partial or complete inundation.
(1)
An area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any surface.
(2)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:691
which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry
and discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of
this chapter, the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of
the one-hundred-year magnitude without increasing the water surface
elevation more than one foot at any point.
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the floors
of a building and its accessory buildings on the same lot, excluding
cellar and basement floor areas not used as primary living and sleeping
quarters, but including the area of roofed porches and roofed terraces.
All dimensions shall be measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA, HABITABLE — The aggregate of the horizontal areas
of all rooms used for habitation, such as living room, dining room,
kitchen, and bedroom, but not including hallways, stairways, cellars,
attics, service rooms or utility rooms, bathroom, closets, nor unheated
areas such as enclosed porches, nor rooms without at least one window
or skylight opening onto an outside yard or court. At least 1/2 of the
floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of not less
than seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room where the
ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as part of the
habitable floor area.
FUNERAL HOMES — Establishments with facilities for the preparation
of the dead for burial, for the cremation of the dead, for the viewing of
the dead and for memorial services.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An enclosed or covered space for the storage of
one or more vehicles or vessels, provided that no business, occupation
or service is conducted for profit therein, nor space therein for more
than one vehicle or vessel is leased to a nonresident of the premises.
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any structure, other than a private garage, which
is used for storage, repair, rental, servicing or supplying of gasoline or
oil to motor vehicles for compensation.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, in keeping
with the Refuse and Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 20.
GARDEN APARTMENT — See definition of "apartment, garden."
GARDENING — The cultivation of herbs, fruits, flowers or vegetables,
excluding the keeping of livestock.
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM, CLOSED LOOP — A system that uses pipes
containing a heat transfer liquid. The closed loop is designed and
constructed so that the liquid does not come in contact with
groundwater.
GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM, OPEN LOOP — A system that pumps
groundwater to the heating and cooling equipment. The groundwater is
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:692
then discharged into the ground, to the ground surface or to a body of
water.
GOVERNING BODY — The Borough Council of Elizabethtown,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
GRADE, ESTABLISHED — The elevation of the center line of the
streets, as officially established by the municipal authorities.
GRADE, FINISHED — The completed surfaces of lawns, walks and
roads brought to grades as shown on official plans or designs relating
thereto.
GREENHOUSE — A building whose roof and sides are made largely
of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which
the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of
delicate or out-of-season plants for subsequent sale or for personal
enjoyment.
GROUND-FLOOR — The floor of a building nearest the mean grade of
the front of the building.
GROUP HOME — A facility or part of a facility providing shelter,
counseling and other rehabilitative services in a family-like
environment for residents who receive twenty-four-hour staff
supervision and which is licensed under an applicable State program.
Residents may not be legally related to the facility operators or
supervisors and, by reason of mental or physical disability, chemical or
alcohol dependency, or family or school adjustment problems, require
a minimum level of supervision but do not require medical or nursing
care. Group home activity shall not include housing of persons that
have been clinically diagnosed as prone to violence and shall not
provide housing and/or rehabilitative services to registered sexual
offenders. A group home shall also be licensed and approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare, the Pennsylvania
Department of Health and/or applicable bureaus within the respective
departments.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, sludge from an industrial
or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water supply
treatment plant, or air-pollution control facility and other discarded
material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial, institutional,
mining or agricultural operations and from community activities, or any
combination of the above, which, because of its quantity, concentration,
or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may:
Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an
increase in morbidity in either an individual or the total population.
(1)
Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health
or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of or otherwise managed.
(2)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:693
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See definition of "building height."
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily conducted entirely within
a dwelling or in a building accessory thereto and carried on by the
inhabitants residing therein.68
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building or group of buildings where more than
six individual sleeping quarters that may have separate entrances are
offered for compensation, to transient occupants as defined in this
Part, licensed under applicable laws and regulations. Such a use may
have ancillary services, such as recreational facilities, dining services,
meeting rooms, and/or fitness centers.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
IMPERVIOUS COVERAGE — See "coverage."
IMPERVIOUS MATERIAL — Any substance placed on a lot which covers
the surface in such fashion as to prevent natural absorption of surface
water by the earth so covered. The following items shall be deemed to
be impervious material: buildings, concrete sidewalks, paved driveways
and parking areas, swimming pools and other nonporous structures or
materials.
INCINERATOR — An approved device in which combustible material,
other than garbage, is burned to ashes.
INDOOR RECREATIONAL ACTIVITY — A commercial establishment
which offers leisure-time activities such as an entertainment or movie
theater, a bowling alley, a skating rink, indoor golf or other similar uses.
INDUSTRY — The manufacturing, compounding, processing, assembly
or treatment of materials, articles or merchandise.
INSTITUTION — A building or grounds, all or a portion of which is
used by persons who occupy the buildings for a common purpose,
including but not limited to hospitals, convents, school dormitories,
college campuses, nursing homes; the education, administrative and/or
recreational facilities of such organizations as the YMCA, YWCA, Boy
Scouts, Girl Scouts and Boys Clubs; not to include penal institutions and
similar facilities.
JUNKYARD — A lot, land or structure, or part thereof, used primarily
for the collecting, storage, and sale of wastepaper, rags, scrap metal
or discarded material or for the collection, dismantling, storage and
salvaging of machinery or vehicles not in running condition, and for the
sale of parts thereof. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more
unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles, or the major parts thereof,
shall be deemed to constitute a junkyard.
Meet the definition of hazardous waste as currently defined by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(3)
68.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "hotel," which immediately followed this definition,
was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:694
KENNEL(S) — An enclosed building or structure for the keeping,
sheltering, breeding, training, and/or selling of dogs, cats, or other
small animals as defined in this Section under "pets."
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land,
including the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or
not such option or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee, if he
is authorized under the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or
other persons having a proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE SCREEN — A completely planted visual barrier composed
of evergreen plants and trees arranged to form both a low-level and
high-level screen. Earthen embankments, as detailed in this chapter,
may be considered as a landscape screen.
LAUNDROMAT — A business premises equipped with individual clothes
washing and/or drying machines for the use of retail customers,
exclusive of laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in an
apartment house or an apartment hotel.
LIGHT INDUSTRIAL — The light assembly, disassembly, finishing or
packaging of a product, such as electronic, scientific, or communication
equipment or a product of similar character, publishing or photographic
processing, research or testing laboratories, within an enclosed
building and that do not produce the emission of noise, odor, gas, dust,
smoke, vibration, or refuse matter.
LIGHTING —
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or,
(a)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) A subdivision of land.
DIFFUSED — That form of lighting wherein the light passes from
the source through a translucent cover or shade.
(1)
DIRECT or FLOOD — That form of lighting wherein the source is
visible and the light is distributed directly from it to the object to
be illuminated.
(2)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:695
LOADING BERTH/SPACE — An off-street area on the same lot with
a building or contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary
parking of a commercial vehicle while loading or unloading
merchandise or materials, and which abuts on a street or other
appropriate means of access.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon
as a unit.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets or at the point of abrupt change of a single street,
where the interior angle is less than 135° and the radius of the street
line is less than 100 feet.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The average horizontal distance between the front
and rear lot lines.
LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE — An interior lot having frontage on two
streets.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINES — The lines bounding a lot, as defined herein.
LOT, MINIMUM WIDTH — The minimum lot width at the building
setback line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming lot."
LOT OF RECORD — A lot which has been recorded in the office of the
Recorder of Deeds of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
LOT, REVERSE-FRONTAGE — A lot extending between, and having
frontage on an arterial street and a minor street and with vehicular
access solely from the latter.
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot,
measured at right angles to its depth, along a straight line parallel to
the front lot line at the minimum required building setback line.
MAINTENANCE — Except as otherwise provided by state law, shall
constitute replacement or repair to a building or structure which
maintains original dimensions and use, to include but not be limited
to replacement of windows in the same dimensions, replacement of
existing flooring, wall coverings, painting, replacement of existing
countertops with those of the same dimension, replacement of existing
appliances, sinks or other existing plumbing fixtures with like
materials, repairs or replacement of existing HVAC or electrical
fixtures, roof shingles, or repaving existing paved surfaces.
Replacement of a roof structure shall not constitute maintenance and
shall require a permit.
INDIRECT — That form of lighting wherein the light source is
entirely hidden, the light being projected to a suitable reflector
from which it is reflected to the object to be illuminated.
(3)
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:696
MANUFACTURED HOME DWELLING — See definition of "dwelling,
manufactured home."
MANUFACTURING — The processing and/or converting of raw
unfinished or finished materials or products or of any combination, into
an article or substance of a different character, or for use for a different
purpose; industries furnishing labor in the case of manufacturing or the
refinishing of manufactured articles.
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external parts of the human body with the hands or with the aid
of any mechanical/electrical apparatus or appliances with or without
such supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, liniments, antiseptics, oils,
powders, creams, lotions, ointment or other such similar preparations
commonly used in the practice of massage, under such circumstances
that it is reasonably expected that the person to whom the treatment is
provided or some third person on his or her behalf will pay money or
give any other consideration or any gratuity therefor.
MEDICAL AND HEALTH SERVICES — A structure intended for
providing medical examination and service to the public, excluding
overnight care.
MEDICAL CENTER — Establishments primarily engaged in furnishing
medical, surgical or other services to individuals, including the offices
of physicians, dentists and other health care practitioners, medical
and dental laboratories, outpatient care facilities, blood banks and
oxygen and miscellaneous types of medical supplies and services. This
definition does not include a dentist's office, optician's office or similar
medical office that is housed in a single unit used exclusively for that
purpose (see "personal service establishment").
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof,
the removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement
of parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall
minor repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or
relocation of any standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader,
gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or
other work affecting public health or general safety.
MIXED USE — Occupancy of a building or land for more than one use.69
MUNICIPAL BUILDINGS AND FACILITIES — Municipal government
buildings or facilities designed and intended to be occupied by the
government or designed and intended for public use sponsored by such
government.
69.Editor’s Note: The former definition of "motel," which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:697
MUSEUM — An establishment of a noncommercial nature used for the
display of art, historic or science objects for the purpose of education
and research.
NIGHTCLUBS — A place where entertainment in the form of live or
prerecorded music is offered and/or dancing by the general public
occurs. The serving of food and/or alcoholic beverages may occur.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
or pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in
excess of those normally associated with residential use. The business
or commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which
fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent of
use provisions of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter
enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of this chapter or amendment or prior to the application of this chapter
or amendment to its location by reason of annexation. Such
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(1)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(2)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(3)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including
but not limited to parking, signs, or lights.
(4)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(5)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(6)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(7)
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:698
nonconforming structures include but are not limited to nonconforming
signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions herein or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was
lawfully in existence prior to the application of this chapter or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
NURSERY, HORTICULTURE — Any lot or parcel of land used to
cultivate, propagate and grow trees, shrubs, vines and other plants,
including the buildings, structures and equipment customarily
incidental and accessory to the primary use.
NURSING OR CONVALESCENT HOME — A building with sleeping
rooms where persons are housed or lodged and furnished with meals,
nursing care for hire and which is approved for nonprofit/profit
corporations licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare for such use.
OBSCENE MATERIALS — Any literature, book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing, drawing,
photograph, figure, image, motion picture, sound recording, article,
instrument or any other written or printed matter which depicts or
describes in a patently offensive manner sexual conduct, sexual
excitement or sadomasochistic abuse or (in the case of articles or
instruments) is designed or intended for use in achieving artificial
sexual stimulation; and, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient
interest; and, taken as a whole, does not have serious literary, artistic,
political or scientific value.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert, building, fence,
stockpile, refuse, fill, structure or matter in, along, across, or projecting
into any channel, watercourse or flood-prone area, which may impede,
retard or change the direction of the flow of water either in itself or by
catching or collecting debris carried by such water or is placed where
the flow of the water might carry the same down stream to the damage
of life and property.
OFFICE BUILDING — A building designed or used primarily for office
purposes, no part of which is used for manufacturing.
OFFICE, PROFESSIONAL — A room or rooms used for the carrying on
of a profession, to include but not be limited to physicians, dentists,
architects, engineers, accountants, attorneys, real-estate brokers,
insurance agents entitled to practice under the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or similar type.
OPEN SPACE — The unoccupied space open to the sky on the same lot
with the building, not including parking lots and stormwater facilities.
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of
water, or a combination of land and water, within a development site
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:699
and designed and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a
development, not including streets, off-street parking areas and areas
set aside for public facilities.
OPERATOR, WIND ENERGY GENERATED SYSTEMS — The person
or entity that will be responsible for the day-to-day operation and
maintenance of the wind generated energy system.
OUTDOOR EATING (CAFE) — An exterior seating area associated with
a restaurant or other place serving food and/or beverages, which is
under constant supervision of an employee of the business, or an
unsupervised seating area of a restaurant or other place serving food
and/or beverages.
OUTDOOR HYDRONIC HEATER — Any equipment, device or apparatus
which is installed, affixed or situated outdoors, and not situated within
a building intended for habitation by humans or animals, which is
used for the primary purpose of combustion of fuel to produce heat
for energy as a heating system or component thereof which provides
heat or hot water to a principal structure used for human or animal
habitation, or to any accessory uses or structures, including, but not
limited to, greenhouses, conservatories, and swimming pools. For the
purpose of this particular appliance, a chimney shall mean any vertical
structure enclosing a flue or flues that carry off smoke or exhaust
from an outdoor hydronic heater. Such appliances are also commonly
referred to as outdoor wood-fired furnaces, outdoor wood-burning
appliances, or outdoor solid-fuel-fired boiler heaters.
OWNER-OCCUPIED or OCCUPIED BY OWNER — A dwelling unit that
is the primary, permanent residence and domicile of a natural person
who is identified as the owner or one of the owners on the deed for the
property. In order for a dwelling unit to be considered owner-occupied,
the dwelling must be considered the domicile of the record owner or at
least one of the record owners under Pennsylvania law, and the owner
must physically reside in the dwelling not less than six months each
calendar year, and the owner cannot be registered to vote at any other
address, and the owner must use the dwelling at the owner's address
for payment of taxes, including, but not limited to, earned income
taxes.[Added by Ord. No. 990, 1/17/2019]
PARKING LOT — Any lot, municipally or privately owned, for off-street
parking facilities, providing for the transient storage of automobiles or
motor-driven vehicles. Such parking services may be provided as a free
service or for a fee.
PARKING SPACE — The space within a building, or on a lot or parking
lot, for the parking or storage of one vehicle.
PARTY WALL — A common shared wall between two separate
structures, buildings or dwelling units.
PAVED AREA — When required herein, that amount of land required
for the location of adequate parking spaces, driveways, or other access
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:700
roads. In the computation of a paved area, the actual building area shall
be excluded.
PERSON — Any individual or group of individuals, corporations,
partnership or any similar entity.
PERSONAL SERVICE ESTABLISHMENT — A structure, or portion
thereof, in which the services of a person, licensed to practice a specific
profession, are offered to the general public. Personal services shall
include but not be limited to agents, barbers, beauticians, cleaners,
doctors, lawyers, optometrists, funeral directors, licensed
psychologists, counselors/therapists, as well as photographers, post
offices, tailors, and utility collection offices. Personal service
establishments shall not include retail sales, arcades, amusements,
massage establishments, or tattoo parlors or other similar uses.
PETS — Small domestic animals, including but not limited to those
animals customarily raised, kept and maintained by people living in
developed, residential communities such as dogs, cats, rabbits, and
birds and fish. All wild or exotic mammals, reptiles, amphibians, fish,
insects or birds, especially predatory species, are prohibited as pets,
including livestock, poultry and wild animals as identified by the
Pennsylvania Wildlife Code, which include but are not limited to horses,
cows, pigs, goats, sheep, snakes over three feet long, pigeons,
poisonous tarantulas, venomous scorpions, skunks, chickens, roosters,
hens and any other animals that create a safety hazard and negatively
impact the ecological system(s).
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough
of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
PREMISES — Any lot, parcel or tract of land and any building
constructed there-on.
PRIVATE — Not publicly owned, operated or controlled.
PRIVATE ROAD — A legally established right-of-way, other than a public
street, which provides the primary vehicular and/or pedestrian access
to a lot.
PROFESSIONAL OCCUPATION — The practice of a profession by any
professional, including but not limited to attorney, physician, surgeon,
osteopath, chiropractor, dentist, optician, optometrist, chiropodist,
engineer, surveyor, architect, landscape architect, planner or similar
type, entitled to practice under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
PRURIENT INTEREST — Is to be judged with reference to average
adults unless it appears from the nature of the material or the
circumstances of its dissemination, distribution or exhibition that it is
designed for clearly defined deviant sexual groups, in which case the
predominant appeal of the matter shall be judged with reference to its
intended recipient group.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:701
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency
(Federal, State or local, including a corporation and/or board created by
law for the performance of certain specialized governmental functions).
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Public grounds include the following:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment prior to taking action in accordance herein.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."
PUBLIC NOTICE — A notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The
first publication shall not be less than seven days from the date of the
hearing.
PUBLIC USE — Public and semipublic uses of a welfare and educational
nature, including but not limited to hospitals, schools, parks, churches,
cemeteries, daycare centers, historical restorations, fire stations,
municipal buildings, essential public utilities which require enclosure
within a building, airports, fraternal clubs and homes, nonprofit
recreational facilities, easements for alleys, streets and public utility
rights-of-way, and radio and television transmission facilities.
PUBLIC UTILITY FACILITIES — Public utility transmission and
distribution facilities, including substations and the like.
RESIDENTIAL-CARE HOME — A building or buildings on contiguous
property housing six or more handicapped or socially dependent
persons and to include residential-care facility, residential-training
facility and residential-treatment facility.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — 1) A dwelling unit let for rent, or 2)
a rooming unit, or 3) a bed-and-breakfast establishment, or 4) a shortterm
lodging accommodation, or 5) an accessory dwelling unit, or 6) a
dwelling unit that is not occupied by the owner, is a residential rental
unit. Each individual townhouse dwelling, each individual apartment
unit, each individual unit in a multifamily building, each individual
bed-and-breakfast establishment, each individual boardinghouse, and
each individual short-term lodging accommodation shall be considered
a residential rental unit whether or not the owner or a relative of the
owner also resides in the structure. A residential rental unit includes
dwelling units under lease-purchase agreements or long-term (greater
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas;
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities; and
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:702
than six months) agreements for sale. A residential rental unit shall not
include a hotel/motel as defined herein or a hospital room utilized for
medical services. It shall include an institutional facility room, but only
as hereinafter set forth in § 309.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
RESTAURANT, CAFE or TEA ROOM — An establishment designed and
operated for the express purpose of providing food and beverage
service within the confines of a structure and generally excluding any
encouragement, orientation or accommodation of services or products
to the patrons' automobiles, on or within the premises.
RETAIL PET SHOP — An establishment that engages in selling dogs,
cats or other animals defined in this Section under "pets," as well as
other items for pet usage that shall include but be not limited to toys,
food and health and cosmetic products.
RETAIL SALES — A use in which merchandise, goods and commodities
are sold or rented to the general public, but not including pawn shops,
retail sales of motor vehicles, boats or any use meeting the definition of
an "adult movie theater" or "adult bookstore," nor manufacturing.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication,
forced dedication, prescription or condemnation and intended to be
used or occupied by a road, crosswalk, railroad, electric transmission
line, oil or gas pipeline, waterline, sanitary storm sewer and other
similar uses; generally, the right of one to pass over the property of
another.
RIGHT-OF-WAY, STREET — A public thoroughfare for vehicular traffic
and/or pedestrian traffic, whether designated as a street, highway,
thoroughfare, parkway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, alley or however
designated.
ROOMING UNIT — A portion of a dwelling unit including any room
or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit or intended to be
used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking purposes. Granting
of permission to use shared or common cooking facilities may be
associated with the leasing of a rooming unit. A rooming unit shall not
be leased for transient occupancy.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage, to include residue from burning of wood, coke, coal or other
combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior,
rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery, dust and other similar materials, in
keeping with the Refuse and Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 20.
SATELLITE DISH — See definition of "antenna, satellite dish."
SCHOOL — An elementary or secondary school that is public, private
and/or of a religious nature, that provides instruction for students
in grades K-12 and is recognized under the education laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:703
SCHOOL, CREATIVE AND PERFORMING ARTS — An establishment,
program, and/or institution that provides students with instruction to
master the skill of creative writing, dance, instrument arts, visual arts,
martial arts, drawing, painting and/or acting.
SCHOOL, NURSERY — See definition of "day-care center."
SCREEN PLANTING — A vegetative material of sufficient height and
density to conceal from the view of property owners in adjoining
residential districts the structures and uses on the premises on which
the screen planting is located.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Actual or simulated acts of human masturbation,
sexual intercourse or any touching of the clothed or unclothed genitals,
pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female or the breasts of
the female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite
sex or between humans and animals.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — The condition of human male or female
genitalia when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
SHOPPING CENTER — A group of stores planned and designed to
function as a unit for the lot on which it is located, with off-street
parking provided as an integral part of the unit.
SHORT-TERM LODGING ACCOMMODATION — An owner-occupied
dwelling unit that provides rooms for transient occupancy, as defined
in this Part, to individuals unrelated to the occupants of the dwelling
unit.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
SIGHT DISTANCE — The length of roadway visible to the driver of a
passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic.
SIGN — Any structure or device for visual communication that is used
for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the
public. See Part 17 for definitions.
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one
or more persons, which ownership is separate and distinct from that of
any adjoining property.
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A scaled graphical depiction of the
proposed development of a lot, parcel or tract of land describing all
covenants assigned, as well as accurately depicting the use, location
and bulk of all buildings and structures, intensity of use or density
of development, streets, driveways, rights-of-way, easements, parking
facilities, open space, public facilities and utilities, setbacks, heights of
buildings and structures, and other such data necessary for municipal
officials to determine compliance with this chapter and appropriate
provisions of other such ordinances, as they may apply.
SOLAR ACCESS — A property owner's right to have the sunlight shine
on his land.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:704
SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM — An energy conversion system, including
appurtenances, which converts solar energy to an electric or
thermodynamic form of energy to meet all or part of the energy
requirements of the on-site residential and commercial user.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of Part 14.
STORAGE FACILITY — A structure intended for lease for the sole
purpose of storing household goods, motor vehicles or recreational
equipment.
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any
floor and the ceiling or roof above it.
STORY, HALF — A story under a gabled, hipped or gambreled roof, the
wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls are not over
three feet above the finished floor of such story.
STREET — A public right-of-way constructed to municipal standards
which includes avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway, parkway and
viaduct and any other ways used or intended to be used by vehicular
traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private. A street shall not
include a lane or alley for purposes of this chapter.
STREET CENTER LINE — The center of the surveyed street right-ofway
or, where not surveyed, the center of the traveled cartway.
STREET, CUL-DE-SAC — A street intersecting another street at one end
and terminating at the other in a vehicular turnaround.
STREET GRADE — The officially established grade of the street upon
which a lot fronts or, in its absence, the established grade of the other
streets upon which the lot abuts, at the midpoint of the frontage of the
lot thereon. If there is no officially established grade, the existing grade
of the street at such midpoint shall be taken as the street grade.
STREET LINE — The street line is the right-of-way line of a public street
or the cartway line of a private street.
STREET, MAJOR —
STREET, MINOR — A street used primarily for access to abutting
properties.
STREET WIDTH — The distance between street lines measured at right
angles to the center line of the street.
ARTERIAL STREET — A major street or highway with fast or heavy
traffic of considerable continuity and used primarily as a traffic
artery for intercommunications among large areas.
(1)
COLLECTOR STREET — A major street or highway which carries
traffic from minor streets to arterial streets including the principal
entrance streets of a residential development and streets for
circulation within such a development.
(2)
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:705
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable
stationary location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to
the land. For floodplain management purposes, a walled and roofed
building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above
ground, as well as a manufactured home.
STRUCTURE, ACCESSORY — A structure that is clearly customary and
incidental to a principal use.
STRUCTURE, TEMPORARY — A structure without any foundation or
footings and which is removed when the designated time period,
activity or use for which the temporary structure was erected has
ceased.
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — See definition of "nonconforming
structure."
STUDIO — A building or portion of a building used as a place of work
by an artist, photographer or artisan, or used for radio or television
broadcasting or production.
STUDIO, DANCING or MUSIC — The use of a premises by a teacher of
music or dancing where students are taught these arts for a fee. This
term is synonymous with "dancing school" and "music school" and other
similar expressions.
SUBDIVISION — (See "land development"). The division or redivision of
a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts,
parcels or other divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines,
for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of lease, partition by
the court for distribution to heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership
or building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than 10
acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or residential
dwelling, shall be exempted.
SWIMMING POOL — A water-filled enclosure, permanently
constructed or portable, that has a depth of more than 24 inches of
water intended for recreational bathing or swimming. Includes spas
and hot tubs.
TATTOO PARLOR — A personal service for the injection or application
of ink to the skin, which is intended to be permanent or semipermanent.
This term shall encompass tattoos, permanent cosmetics, dermagraphic
art, body art, or other similar processes or terms.
TAVERN — A place where alcoholic beverages are served as a primary
or substantial portion of the total trade. The sale of food may also occur.
TEMPORARY — A limited, nonpermanent, provisional period.
THEATER — A building or part of a building devoted to the showing of
moving pictures or theatrical productions on a paid admission basis.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:706
TRANSIENT OCCUPANCY — Use, occupancy, and/or possession of a
dwelling unit or portion thereof for a period of 30 consecutive calendar
days or less.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
TRANSIENT OCCUPANT — A person, as defined in this Part, who uses,
possesses, or occupies a dwelling unit or portion thereof for a period
of 30 consecutive calendar days or less.[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
UNDEVELOPED LAND — Any lot, tract or parcel of land which has not
been graded or in any other manner prepared for the construction of a
building.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE — The Borough Uniform
Construction Code in effect on the date an application for a permit is
filed.
USE — The specific purpose for which land or a building is designated,
arranged, intended, or for which it is or may be occupied or maintained.
The term "permitted use" or its equivalent shall not be deemed to
include any nonconforming use.
USE, NONCONFORMING — See definition of "nonconforming use."
USE, PRINCIPAL — The primary or predominant use of any lot.
USE, TEMPORARY — A use established for a fixed period of time with
the intent to discontinue such use upon the expiration of the time
period.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Part 20.
VEGETATIVE COVER — Shall consist of trees, shrubs, flowers, grass,
ground or bank cover or suitable pervious decorative substitute.
VEHICULAR SALES ESTABLISHMENT — A building or lot or part
thereof used for the sale, hire or remuneration from automotive
equipment, including vehicular accessory sales, but not including the
sale of junked vehicular equipment.
WALL, ARCHITECTURAL AND DECORATIVE — A structure that is
erected for cosmetic and aesthetic purposes to compliment the context,
design and facade of the principal and/or accessory building(s) within
the neighborhood.
WALL, ENGINEERING RETAINING — A structure made of concrete,
masonry, ecology block, and/or steel that is constructed vertically to
resist lateral earth and/or fluid pressure, including any liquid
surcharges.
WALL, SCREENING — A color-consistent solid opaque structure made
out of brick, stone, board fencing, chain-linked fencing, screen planting
or decorative concrete block.
WIND ENERGY FACILITY — An electric generating facility, whose main
purpose is to supply electricity, consisting of one or more wind turbines
and other accessory structures and buildings, including substations,
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:707
meteorological towers, electrical infrastructure, transmission lines and
other appurtenant structures and facilities.
WINDMILL — A device that converts wind energy to mechanical or
electrical energy.
WIND POWER DEVICE — An electric generating facility or apparatus
whose main purpose is to supply electricity. These devices shall include
windmills, wind turbines and wind energy facilities.
WINDMILL ROTOR — The portion of the windmill that is intended to be
moved or activated by the wind.
WINDMILL TOWER — The supporting structure on which the rotor and
accessory equipment are mounted.
WIND TURBINE — A wind energy conversion system that converts
wind energy into electricity through the use of a wind turbine generator
and includes the nacelle, rotor, tower, and pad transformer, if any.
YARD — An unoccupied space, outside of the existing building line of
the principal use, on the same lot with a building or structure.
YARD, BUFFER — A strip of required yard space adjacent to the
boundary of a property or district, not less than the width designated
in this chapter, and on which is placed (planted) year-round shrubbery,
hedges, evergreens or other suitable plantings of sufficient height and
density to constitute an effective screen and give maximum protection
and immediate screening to an abutting property or district and may
include a wall, as provided for in this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — The open space between the street right-of-way and
the principal building.
YARD, INTERIOR — An open, unoccupied space between the buildings
of a dwelling group or its accessory buildings, not a front, side or rear
yard.
YARD, REAR — The open space between the rear line of the principal
building and the rear line of the lot and extending the width of the lot,
with the exception of a corner lot. (See § 1321.2.)
YARD, SIDE — The area(s) between a principal structure and any side
lot line(s) and extending from the front line to the rear of the principal
building except for a corner lot. (See § 1321.2.)
ZONING — The designation of specified districts within a community
reserving them for certain uses together with limitations on lot size,
heights of structures and other stipulated requirements.
ZONING MAP — The map setting forth the boundaries of the zoning
districts of the Borough which shall be a part of this chapter.
ZONING PERMIT — A permit stating that the purpose for which a
building and/or structure or land is to be used is in conformity with the
uses permitted and all other requirements under this chapter for the
district in which it is or will be located.
§ 201 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 201
FWD:708
ZONING OFFICER — The duly constituted Borough official designated
to administer and enforce this chapter in accordance with its literal
terms.
§ 201 FOREWORD § 201
FWD:709

Part 3
DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS
§ 301. Zoning Districts. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 3.0; as amended by
Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; and by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into districts
which shall be designated as follows:
§ 302. Zoning Map. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 3.1; as amended by Ord.
876, 8/17/2006; and by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
§ 303. Boundaries Between the OS&C, INS, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-CBD, GC,
L-I, G-I and MU Districts. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 3.2; as
amended by Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; and by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
A. OS&C — Open Space and Conservation District.
B. INS — Institutional District.
C. R-1 — R-1 Low-Density Residential District.
D. R-2 — R-2 Medium-Density Residential District.
E. R-3 — R-3 High-Density Residential District.
F. C-CBD — Commercial District; Central Business District.
G. G-C — Commercial District; General Commercial.
H. LI— Light Industrial District.
I. G-I — General Industrial District.
J. MU — Mixed-Use District.
1. The boundaries of the OS&C, INS, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-CBD, G-C, LI, G-I and
MU Districts shall be as shown upon the map attached to and made a
part of this chapter, which shall be designated "Zoning Map." Said map
and all the notations, references and other data shown thereon are
hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter as if all were fully
described herein. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
2. The boundaries of the Floodplain — Floodway and Flood Fringe
Districts are overlays to the underlying zoning districts as shown on the
official Zoning Map, and as specifically described in the Floodway Data
Table and five-hundred-year flood delineation in the Flood Insurance
Study (FIS) prepared for the Borough by the Flood Insurance
Administration (FIA). The said study and accompanying maps, all
notations, references and other data shown thereon are hereby
incorporated by reference into this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.
§ 301 FOREWORD § 303
FWD:711
§ 304. Interpretation of Boundaries. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 3.3; as
amended by Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; and by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
When an OS&C, INS, R-1, R-2, R-3, C-CBD, G-C, LI, G-I and MU District
boundary line divides a lot held in single and separate ownership at the
effective date of this chapter, the regulations of either abutting district may
be construed by the owner to be applicable to the portion of such lot in the
other abutting district for a distance of not more than 50 feet beyond the
district boundary line.
§ 305. Application of General Provisions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 3.4]
Under this chapter, Parts 13 through 20, inclusive, shall be considered as
general provisions that apply to all zoning districts, wherever applicable.
The Zoning Officer, Zoning Hearing Board, Planning Commission and/or
Borough Council shall administer this chapter in compliance with these
general provisions as detailed in the above mentioned Parts.
§ 306. Uses Not Provided For. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.21; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2006; and by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
If a use is neither specifically permitted nor prohibited under this chapter
and an application is made by a landowner to the Zoning Officer for such
use, the Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Zoning Hearing
Board to hear and decide such request as a special exception. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall permit the use or deny the use in accordance with the
standards for consideration of special exceptions contained herein. The use
may be permitted if it is of the same general character as the enumerated
permitted uses in the zoning district, in accordance with the intended
purpose of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the
zoning district, and shall comply with all performance standards applicable
to such permitted uses. The duty to present evidence and the burden of
proof shall be on the applicant to demonstrate that the proposed use is
of the same general character in accordance with the intended purpose
of the zoning district, compatible with the permitted uses in the zoning
district, and shall comply with all performance standards applicable to such
permitted uses in the zoning district.
1. The boundaries between these districts are, unless otherwise indicated,
either the center lines of streets, alleys, rights-of-way, lot lines or such
lines extended, or lines parallel thereto.
2. Where figures are shown on the Zoning Map between a street, alley,
right-of-way or lot line, and a district boundary line, they indicate that
the district boundary line runs parallel to that line at a distance
therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
3. Where district boundaries are not clearly fixed by the above methods,
they shall be determined by the use of the scale of the Zoning Map.
§ 303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 306
FWD:712
Part 4
OPEN SPACE AND CONSERVATION DISTRICT70
§ 401. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The purpose of the Open Space and Conservation District is to preserve
and/or conserve streams, creeks, drainageways and other vital waterways,
protecting sensitive natural resources for recreational and conservation
purposes. Limited uses are permitted which are consistent with the goal of
protecting sensitive natural areas and providing for public recreation and
open space.
§ 402. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.2]
§ 403. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.3]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted with the exception of
a home occupation. Each accessory use shall comply with the provisions
contained in the supplemental regulations.
§ 404. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.4]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 405. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.5]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less than
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
1. Public and private conservation areas and structures for the
conservation of open land, water, soil and wildlife resources and
historic preservation.
2. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
3. Park and recreation uses.
4. Municipal buildings and facilities.
A. Lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
70.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 4 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 401 FOREWORD § 405
FWD:713
§ 406. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.6]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 407. Off-Street Parking/Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 4.7]
Parking and access shall be provided in accordance with Part 16.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 20%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state.
A. Front yard: 50 feet.
B. Side yards: 20 feet.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet.
§ 405 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 407
FWD:714
Part 5
INS INSTITUTIONAL DISTRICT
§ 501. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The purpose of the Institutional District is to establish and accommodate
institutional development that will serve and benefit community
organizations and needs or entities of an institutional nature, such as
educational, recreational and religious uses.
§ 502. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.2; as amended by
Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 503. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; as amended by
Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations and the regulations of Part 14, Special Exceptions.
1. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
2. Public and private schools.
3. Day-care centers.
4. Institutional headquarters for educational, professional, religious and
other nonprofit organizations.
5. Municipal buildings and facilities.
6. Cemeteries.
7. Public and private parks, playgrounds, open spaces and recreational
uses.
8. Colleges.
9. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
10. Outdoor eating activity as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use.
11. School of creative and performing arts as defined in Part 2, § 201.
A. Annual community fair.
§ 501 FOREWORD § 504
FWD:715
§ 504. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996; as amended by Ord.
866, 12/15/2005, § 1; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations:
§ 505. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.3; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted. Each accessory use
shall comply with the provisions contained in the supplemental regulations.
§ 506. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.4; as amended
by Ord. 866, 12/15/2005, § 2; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
No principal building shall exceed 45 feet in height, provided that such
height limit may be exceeded by one foot for each additional foot by which
the width of front, rear and side yards exceeds the minimum yard
requirements, up to a maximum height of 60 feet.
§ 507. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.5; as amended by Ord. 866, 12/15/2005,
§ 2; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less than
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
A. Adaptive reuse of a building or group of buildings.
B. Structures, buildings and/or uses in excess of 10,000 square feet:
permitted uses that involve construction or the modification of
structures, buildings, and/or uses that result in structures, buildings,
and/or uses in excess of 10,000 square feet (gross floor area or gross
square footage for athletic fields and similar uses). This applies to new
structures, buildings and/or uses greater than 10,000 square feet and
existing structures when modified and/or when a structure, building
and/or use is added to the existing structure, building, and/or use to
result in greater than 10,000 square feet combined. Conditional use
review is pursuant to the standards and criteria set forth in § 1516.
A. Lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state.
§ 504 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 508
FWD:716
§ 508. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 5.6; as amended
by Ord. 866, 12/15/2005, § 2; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 509. Off-Street Parking/Access and Loading/Unloading. [Ord. 766,
5/16/1996, § 5.7; as amended by Ord. 866, 12/15/2005, § 2; and by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Off-street parking/access and loading/unloading shall be provided in
accordance with Part 16.
A. Front yard: 40 feet.
B. Side yards: 25 feet.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet.
§ 508 FOREWORD § 509
FWD:717

Part 6
R-1 LOW-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT71
§ 601. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The R-1 Low-Density Residential District is comprised of those areas where
single-family detached dwellings are predominant. This district generally
coincides with potential sewer and water utility service areas; however, the
actual availability of these services is likely to occur at different times, in
different areas. As a result, permitted densities and design standards have
been adjusted according to the availability of these public utilities.
§ 602. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.2; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
§ 603. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.3; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the conditional use regulations, Part 14:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Municipal buildings and facilities.
3. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
4. No-impact home occupations.
5. Short-term lodging accommodations not to exceed six transient
occupants in accordance with § 1332. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
6. Rooming units not to exceed three rooms which may house a maximum
of three individuals. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
7. Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with § 1333. [Added by Ord.
983, 11/16/2017]
A. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
B. Public and private schools.
C. Day-care residences for not more than four individuals, excluding
children who permanently reside at the residence.
71.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 6 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 601 FOREWORD § 604
FWD:719
§ 604. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.4; as amended by
Ord. 798, 6/17/1999, § 1; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 605. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.5]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted, with the exception of
a home occupation. Each accessory use shall comply with the provisions
contained in the supplemental regulations.
§ 606. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.6]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 607. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.7; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less than
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
A. Group homes for not more than three individuals, including staff and
supervisory personnel.
B. College-related uses, to include educational, visitor residential (defined
as a person residing in a structure on a temporary basis while a visitor
at or guest of the college for a period of time not to exceed 30
consecutive days in any ninety-day period), administrative or
institutional support services, offices and headquarters.
A. Lot area.
(1) Single-family detached dwelling: 10,000 square feet. [Amended
by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
(2) For a permitted nonresidential use: 8,000 square feet.
B. Lot width.
(1) Minimum lot width at street line: 60 feet.
(2) Minimum lot width at setback line: 75 feet.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 35%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover and
natural state, with at least 25% of the front yard area maintained as
grass.
§ 604 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 607
FWD:720
§ 608. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.8]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 609. Off-Street Parking/Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 6.9]
Parking and access shall be provided in accordance with Part 16.
D. Minimum lot depth: 100 feet.
A. Front yard: 30 feet.
B. Side yards: 10 feet.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet for residential uses; 35 feet for nonresidential uses.
D. Where required, buffer yards/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the supplemental regulations.
§ 607 FOREWORD § 609
FWD:721

Part 7
R-2 MEDIUM-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT72
§ 701. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The R-2 Medium-Density Residential District is comprised of a mix of
housing types and densities. The purpose of the district is to stabilize and
preserve areas of the community to provide for a suitable environment for
family life. Certain nonresidential uses are allowed by right, or by special
exception, to provide for convenient access to the higher concentration of
residents. This district generally coincides with public utility service areas.
As a result, permitted densities and housing types require the use of these
public utilities.
§ 702. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.2; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
§ 703. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.3; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Single-family semidetached dwellings. This permitted use applies only
to new construction. A single-family detached dwelling may not be
converted into a semidetached dwelling.
3. Municipal buildings and facilities.
4. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
5. No-impact home occupations.
6. Short-term lodging accommodations not to exceed four transient
occupants in accordance with § 1332. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
7. Rooming units not to exceed three rooms which may house a maximum
of three individuals. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
8. Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with § 1333. [Added by Ord.
983, 11/16/2017]
A. Home occupations.
72.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 7 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 701 FOREWORD § 703
FWD:723
§ 704. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.4]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted, with the exception of
a home occupation. Each accessory use shall comply with the provisions
contained in the supplemental regulations.
§ 705. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766. 5/16/1996, § 7.5; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 706. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766. 5/16/1996, § 7.6]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 707. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.7; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
C. Public and private schools.
D. Day-care residences for no more than six individuals, excluding
children who permanently reside at the residence.
A. Group homes for no more than six individuals, including staff and
supervisory personnel.
1. Lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements of not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within
this district. The minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth
requirements are established for each dwelling unit:
Use Lot Width
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Street
(feet)
Setback
(feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Single-family
detached
8,000 55 60 100
Single-family
semidetached
4,000/unit 40 40 100
Nonresidential
use
6,000 55 60 100
§ 703 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 707
FWD:724
§ 708. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.8]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 709. Off-Street Parking/Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 7.9]
Parking and access shall be provided in accordance with Part 16.
2. Coverage regulations. Lot coverage shall not exceed 45%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state, with at least 25% of the front yard area maintained as grass.
A. Front yard: 25 feet.
B. Side yards: eight feet for residential uses; 15 feet for nonresidential
uses.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet for residential uses; 35 feet for nonresidential uses.
D. Where required, buffer yards/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the supplemental regulations.
§ 707 FOREWORD § 709
FWD:725

Part 8
R-3 HIGH-DENSITY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT73
§ 801. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The R-3 High-Density Residential District is comprised of the highest
permitted density of residential uses. A mix of housing types is encouraged.
This district is located in proximity to the infrastructure to support higherdensity
development, such as transportation infrastructure, public water
and sewer utilities, and commercial districts. Certain nonresidential uses
are allowed by right, or by special exception, to provide for convenient
access to the higher concentration of residents. This district generally
coincides with public utility service areas. As a result, permitted densities
and housing types require the use of these public utilities.
§ 802. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.2; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
1. Single-family detached dwellings.
2. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
3. Two-family detached dwellings.
4. Single-family attached dwellings (rowhouses or townhouses).
5. Conversion apartments.
6. Bed-and-breakfast establishments (up to three rooms).
7. Municipal buildings and facilities.
8. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
9. No-impact home occupations.
10. Short-term lodging accommodations not to exceed two transient
occupants in accordance with § 1332. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
11. Rooming units not to exceed three rooms which may house a maximum
of three individuals. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
12. Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with § 1333. [Added by Ord.
983, 11/16/2017]
73.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 8 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 801 FOREWORD § 803
FWD:727
§ 803. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.3; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
§ 804. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.4]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use, with the exception of a home
occupation. Each accessory use shall comply with the provisions contained
in the supplemental regulations.
§ 805. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.5; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 806. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.6]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 807. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.7; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and
by Ord. No. 990, 1/17/2019]
A. Home occupations.
B. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
C. Day-care residences for not more than eight individuals, excluding
children who permanently reside at the residence.
A. Apartments, garden apartments, apartment houses.
B. Public and private schools.
C. Day-care centers.
D. Group homes for no more than eight individuals, including staff and
supervisory personnel.
E. Bed-and-breakfast establishments for more than four rooms.
F. Funeral homes.
G. Nursing homes.
H. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
§ 803 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 807
FWD:728
§ 808. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.8]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
1. Lot area, lot width and lot depth requirements of not less than the
following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within
this district. The minimum lot area, lot width and lot depth
requirements are established for each dwelling unit.
Use Lot Width
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Street
(feet)
Setback
(feet)
Lot Depth
(feet)
Single-family
detached
6,000 55 60 100
Single-family
semidetached
3,000/unit 30 30 100
Single-family
attached
2,500/unit 20 20 100
Two-family
detached
3,000/unit 551 601 100
Conversion
apartments
4,000 45 50 100
Apartment
dwellings on lots
with a net lot area
greater than or
equal to 10 acres
3,000/unit 55 60 100
Apartment
dwellings on lots
with a net lot area
less than 10 acres
4,500/unit 55 60 100
Nonresidential
uses
5,000 55 60 100
1 per dwelling unit
2. Coverage regulations. Lot coverage shall not exceed 50%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state, with at least 25% of the front yard area maintained as grass.
A. Front yard: 20 feet.
B. Side yards: eight feet for residential uses; 10 feet for nonresidential
uses.
§ 807 FOREWORD § 808
FWD:729
§ 809. Off-Street Parking/Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 8.9]
Parking and access shall be provided in accordance with Part 16.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet for residential uses; 35 feet for nonresidential uses.
D. Where required, buffer yards/screening shall be provided in accordance
with the supplemental regulations.
§ 808 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 809
FWD:730
Part 9
CBD CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
§ 901. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The purpose of the Central Business District is to provide for a unified and
organized arrangement of buildings, services and parking areas, together
with adequate circulation and open space planned and designed as an
integrated unit, in a manner so as to provide efficient, safe, convenient, and
attractive shopping retail and service areas and to encourage and preserve
the vitality of the Central Business District.
§ 902. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.2; as amended by
Ord. 814, 6/15/2000, § 1; by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and Ord. 946, 3/
21/2013]
1. Dwelling units, provided they are located on or above the second-floor
level of a nonresidential use in accordance with Part 13, supplemental
regulations, and § 907.
2. Financial institutions, excluding drive-in services and check-cashing
establishments.
3. Business and professional offices; professional occupations.
4. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other places serving food and/or
beverages. Drive through services regulated by Part 14, Special
Exceptions.
5. Retail businesses, excluding pawn shops, whose principal activity is the
sale of merchandise in an enclosed building.
6. Retail sales in which both a workshop and/or repair shop and retail
showroom are required.
7. Funeral homes.
8. Hotels and bed-and-breakfast establishments.
9. Studios or galleries for the display and/or instruction of dance, art,
music or similar cultural pursuits.
10. Movie theaters and performing arts theaters.
11. Indoor recreational facilities, excluding amusement arcades.
12. Bakery, candy, pastry, confectionery or ice cream retail sales permitted.
13. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
14. Municipal buildings and facilities.
§ 901 FOREWORD § 902
FWD:731
§ 903. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.3; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
§ 904. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.4]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted, with the exception
of a home occupation, outdoor eating activity or drive-through service.
Each accessory use shall comply with the provisions contained in the
supplemental regulations.
15. Post offices.
16. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
17. Personal service establishments, excluding tattoo parlors and body
piercing or branding establishments.
18. Reproduction or copying services.
19. Museums.
20. Public libraries and library facilities.
21. No-impact home occupations.
22. Retail pet shops.
23. Outdoor eating activity as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use.
24. Farm market. [Added by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
25. Short-term lodging accommodations in accordance with § 1332.
[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
A. Drive-through services.
B. Parking facilities as a principal use.
C. Churches and similar places of worship.
D. Home occupations.
E. Laundromats.
F. Nightclubs and taverns.
G. Demolition of buildings, excluding accessory structures. (See § 1415.)
§ 902 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 905
FWD:732
§ 905. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.5; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 906. Use Restrictions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.6]
The above-specified uses shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:
§ 907. Conversion of Accessory Structures into Residential Units.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996; as added by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001]
Accessory buildings, such as garages, barns and sheds, may not be
converted into residential units. Residential conversion can only occur
within the applicable regulations contained in this Part.
§ 908. Minimum Height Requirements. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.8;
as amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The minimum height requirement of a building shall be 35 feet.
A. Ground-floor dwelling units.
B. Group homes for no more than eight individuals, including staff and
supervisory personnel.
C. (Reserved)
D. Permitted uses utilizing greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area. Conditional use review is pursuant to the standards and criteria
set forth in § 1516.
A. Such stores, shops and businesses shall be conducted within an
enclosed building.
B. Such uses, operations or products are not obnoxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of gas, odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse
matter or other causes in accordance with § 1313.
C. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and
essential to a retail store, and when all such products are sold on the
premises.
D. Residential units, either new or conversions, must meet the regulations
of the Borough's Existing Structures/Property Maintenance Code
[Chapter 5, Part 1].
§ 905 FOREWORD § 909
FWD:733
§ 909. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.9; as amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 910. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 9.10; as
amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 911. Off-Street Parking/Access and Loading/Unloading. [Ord. 766,
5/16/1996, § 9.11; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord.
946, 3/21/2013]
The following off-street parking regulations shall apply.
1. Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less
than the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or
use hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted
within this district.
2. No minimum lot area, lot width or impervious coverage requirement
shall be required for any uses permitted within this district.
A. Front yard: none.
B. Side yards: none.
C. Rear yard: 10 feet from an alley.
D. In an effort to preserve the existing character of the buildings within
this district, those buildings located on North Market Street, between
Hummel-stown Street and Summit Street, and East High Street,
between Cherry Alley and Gladys Alley, may not encroach upon the
front yard or side yards as they presently exist.
E. Any new building constructed on a lot within this district or any
substantially reconstructed or altered building, must maintain front
yard and rear yard setbacks consistent with the predominant setbacks
of neighboring buildings within the same block.
A. New Residential Structures.
(1) Any permitted construction of a new residential structure shall
provide parking on the same lot as the proposed building.
(2) At least two off-street (nonpublic/nonmetered) parking spaces shall
be provided for each newly constructed residential unit.
B. Conversion of Existing Structures for Residential Units.
(1) At least two off-street (nonpublic/nonmetered) parking spaces shall
be provided for each residential unit created and existing
residential units within the structure.
§ 909 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 911
FWD:734
§ 912. (Reserved)74
(2) The required parking spaces shall be provided on the same lot as
the principal building or within 400 feet of the lot. When off-lot
parking is used to meet these requirements, the owners shall
provide evidence that such parking is reserved for the applicant,
and a written lease or agreement shall be submitted with a term
that is satisfactory to the Zoning Officer.
C. Loading and Unloading. No such facilities shall be designed,
constructed or used in any manner so as to constitute a nuisance, public
safety hazard or an impediment to traffic.
D. Authority to Reduce Parking Requirements. The Borough Council may
reduce the off-street parking requirements for residential structures as
a conditional use following review and recommendation by the Planning
Commission. Determination of parking requirements shall be based on
the following criteria:
(1) Average number of occupants on the lot during most of the day.
(2) Expected number of occupants for peak hours.
(3) Number of occupants using motor vehicles to be parked at the site.
(4) Availability of existing public spaces to meet peak day and peak
hour needs.
E. Parking Location. Parking for all buildings that front a public street
shall be to the rear or side of buildings, not in front of buildings, except
for on-street curbside parking. Curb cuts shall be limited as determined
by the Borough Council upon recommendation of the Borough
Engineer.
74.Editor's Note: Former § 912, Signs, as amended and renumbered, was repealed by Ord.
882, 2/15/2007. See now Part 17 of this chapter.
§ 911 FOREWORD § 912
FWD:735

Part 10
G-C GENERAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT75
§ 1001. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The General Commercial District seeks to accommodate the needs for
distribution of goods and services to the consumer in a retail and/or
professional office setting in accordance with the Regional Strategic Plan.
This district generally coincides with public utility service areas and is
within the Designated Growth Area. The district seeks to properly manage
business development to provide for efficient and safe transportation and
compatibility with neighboring uses. The uses provided in this district are
meant to serve local residents as well as those motorists passing through
the area.
§ 1002. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.2; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. Dwelling units when accessory and incidental to a permitted
nonresidential use.
2. Financial institutions; business and professional offices.
3. Eating establishments.
4. Any retail business whose principal activity is the sale of merchandise
in an enclosed building.
5. Funeral homes.
6. Retail sales in which both a workshop and repair shop and retail
showroom are required.
7. Motels, hotels, and bed-and-breakfast establishments.
8. Studios or galleries for the display and/or instruction of dance, art,
music or similar cultural pursuits.
9. Movie theaters and performing arts theaters.
10. Indoor recreational facilities, excluding video arcades.
11. Bakery, candy, pastry, confectionery or ice cream retail sales, with
minor related processing permitted.
12. Bus passenger stations.
13. Automobile service stations.
14. Automobile garages for the storage and repair of motor vehicles, but
not automobile body shops.
75.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 10 Was Amended Pursuant To Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 1001 FOREWORD § 1002
FWD:737
§ 1003. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.3; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
§ 1004. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.4; as amended
by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 2; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional use may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
15. Vehicular sales establishments.
16. Car washes.
17. Florists, greenhouses, roadside produce markets, or nurseries,
provided that all incidental equipment and supplies, including
fertilizers and empty cans, are kept within a building.
18. Fitness centers.
19. Medical centers, dental offices or chiropractic clinics.
20. Municipal buildings and facilities.
21. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
22. Laundromats.
23. Retail pet shops.
24. Outdoor eating activity as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use.
25. School of creative and performing arts as defined in Part 2, § 201.
A. Amusement arcades.
B. Adult bookstores, adult movie theaters or adult performing arts
theaters.
C. Billiards and pool rooms.
D. Tattoo parlors.
E. Adult massage establishments.
F. Kennel(s).
§ 1002 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1004
FWD:738
§ 1005. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.5]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted. Each accessory use
shall comply with the provisions contained in this Part and the supplemental
regulations.
§ 1006. Use Restrictions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.7]
The above specified uses shall be permitted only under the following
conditions.
§ 1007. Outside Storage and Display. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.7]
Outside storage and display when accessory to a permitted use shall be
allowed provided that the following provisions are met:
A. Shopping centers.
B. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
C. Permitted uses that involve construction or the modification of
structures, buildings, and/or uses that result in structures, buildings, or
uses in excess of 10,000 square feet (gross floor area or gross square
footage). Conditional use review is pursuant to the standards and
criteria set forth in § 1516.
A. Such stores, shops and businesses shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, except as otherwise permitted in accordance with
the supplemental regulations.
B. Such uses, operations or products are not obnoxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of gas, odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse
matter or other causes in accordance with the supplemental
regulations.
C. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and
essential to the retail store, and when all such products are sold on the
premises.
A. Outside storage or display shall not occupy any part of a street (or alley)
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for vehicular or
pedestrian use, required parking areas or required front yard.
B. Outside storage or display area shall occupy an area of less than 1/2 of
the existing building coverage. In no case shall more than 25% of the lot
area be used for outside storage or display.
C. Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from all public
streets in an appropriate manner.
§ 1004 FOREWORD § 1008
FWD:739
§ 1008. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.8]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet.
§ 1009. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.9]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less that
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
§ 1010. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 10.10]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 1011. Off-street Parking/Access and Loading/Unloading. [Ord.
766, 5/16/1996, § 10.11]
Off-street parking/access and loading/unloading shall be provided in
accordance with Part 16.
A. Lot area: 10,000 square feet.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 75%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state.
A. Front yard: 30 feet.
B. Side yards: 10 feet. No side yard shall be required where structures
abut one another, provided that a written agreement is entered into by
such property owners and submitted to the Zoning Officer. However, in
no case shall common party walls be permitted between properties of
separate ownership.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet.
D. Buffer yards/screen plantings shall be provided in accordance with the
supplemental regulations.
§ 1008 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1011
FWD:740
Part 11
LI LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT76
§ 1101. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
This district seeks to provide for a wide range of light industrial and
office development, while avoiding heavy industrial uses that are most
likely to cause nuisances and hazards; to also provide for commercial uses
compatible with neighboring residential areas; to encourage a coordinated
interior road system; and to control noise and annoyances.
§ 1102. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.2]
§ 1103. Permitted Secondary Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.3; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following secondary uses may be permitted when intended to
complement any of the above-permitted uses and are designated to be
primarily used by employees, visitors and/or clients of employees.
Secondary uses listed below shall not occupy more than 20% of the groundfloor
area. Signs for such establishments shall be in accordance with Part
17.
1. Business and professional offices.
2. Medical/dental centers.
3. Financial offices.
4. Research, engineering or testing laboratories.
5. Electrical or electronic equipment component and/or product assembly.
6. Scientific equipment component or product assembly.
7. Communication equipment component or product assembly.
8. Printing and publishing facilities.
9. Photographic processing facilities.
10. Municipal buildings and facilities.
11. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
A. Barber/beauty salons.
B. Pharmacies.
C. Drafting services or reproduction and copy services.
76.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 11 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 1101 FOREWORD § 1103
FWD:741
§ 1104. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.4; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
§ 1105. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 1106. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.5; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted. Each accessory use
shall comply with the provisions contained in this Part and in the
supplemental regulations.
§ 1107. Use Restrictions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.6; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The above specified uses shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:
D. Medical or dental laboratories.
E. Eating and drinking establishments (excluding drive-through and walkup
establishments).
F. Secretarial/telephone answering services.
G. Tobacco, candy, newspaper and magazine counters.
H. Day-care centers.
A. Health, fitness (exercise) centers, excluding amusement arcades.
A. Permitted uses that involve construction or the modification of
structures, buildings, and/or uses that result in structures, buildings, or
uses in excess of 10,000 square feet (gross floor area or gross square
footage). Conditional use review is pursuant to the standards and
criteria set forth in § 1516.
A. Such permitted uses shall be conducted within an enclosed building.
B. Such uses, operations or products are not obnoxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of gas, odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse
matter or other causes in accordance with § 902 herein.
§ 1103 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1107
FWD:742
§ 1108. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.7; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The height of a building shall not exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 1109. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.8; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less than
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
§ 1110. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 11.9; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 1111. Off-Street Parking/Access And Loading/Unloading. [Ord.
766, 5/16/1996, § 11.10; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Off-street parking/access and loading/unloading shall be provided in
accordance with Part 16 herein.
C. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental or
essential to a permitted use, and when all such work is performed on
the premises.
A. Lot area: one acre.
B. Minimum lot width: 250 feet.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 60%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural
state.
A. Front yard: 40 feet.
B. Side yards: 25 feet.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet.
D. Buffer yards/screen plantings shall be provided in accordance with the
supplemental regulations.
§ 1107 FOREWORD § 1111
FWD:743

Part 12
G-I GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT77
§ 1201. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.1; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The purpose of the General Industrial District is to provide for the orderly
development of a wide range of industrial uses; to encourage a coordinated
interior road system; to control nuisances and hazards; and to encourage
appropriate industrial growth in accordance with the Regional Strategic
Plan.
§ 1202. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.2; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
§ 1203. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.3; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following special exceptions may be permitted by the Zoning Hearing
Board, following review and comment by the Planning Commission,
pursuant to standards and criteria as set forth in supplemental regulations,
Part 13, and the special exception regulations, Part 14:
A. Any manufacturing, wholesaling, warehousing or distributing use
which meets the performance standards as set forth in the
supplemental regulations.
B. Lumber and coal yards, building material storage yards, contractor
equipment and storage yards.
C. Laundries, cleaning, dyeing, carpet or rug cleaning operations.
D. Welding or machine shops.
E. Self-service storage facilities as set forth in the supplemental
regulations, § 1316.
F. Municipal buildings and facilities.
G. Public utility and communication uses where operation requirements
necessitate locating within the district.
H. Retail sales established for the sale of the product(s) of the permitted
industrial use.
A. Automobile body shops, painting, tire retreading or recapping and
welding shops.
B. Day-care centers.
77.Editor’s Note: The Title Of Part 12 Was Amended By Ord. 975, 6/16/2016.
§ 1201 FOREWORD § 1204
FWD:745
§ 1204. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996; as amended by Ord.
856, 3/17/2005, § 3; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following conditional uses may be permitted by Borough Council,
following review and comment by the Planning Commission, pursuant to
standards and criteria as set forth in the supplemental regulations, Part 13,
and the conditional use regulations, Part 15:
§ 1205. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.4; as amended by
Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted. Each accessory use
shall comply with the provisions contained in this Part and in the
supplemental regulations.
§ 1206. Use Restrictions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.5; as amended
by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
The above specified uses shall be permitted only under the following
conditions:
§ 1207. Outside Storage And Display. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.6;
as amended by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
A. Clubs, lodges and fraternal organizations.
B. Permitted uses that involve construction or the modification of
structures, buildings, and/or uses that result in structures, buildings, or
uses in excess of 10,000 square feet (gross floor area or gross square
footage). Conditional use review is pursuant to the standards and
criteria set forth in § 1516.
A. Such stores, businesses and industries shall be conducted within an
enclosed building, except as otherwise permitted in accordance with
the supplemental regulations.
B. Such uses, operations or products are not obnoxious or offensive by
reason of the emission of gas, odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration, refuse
matter or other causes in accordance with the supplemental
regulations.
C. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental and
essential to a store, business or industry, and when all such work is
performed on the premises.
1. Outside storage or display shall not occupy any part of a street (or alley)
right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for vehicular or
pedestrian use, required parking areas or required front yard.
§ 1204 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1207
FWD:746
§ 1208. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.8; as
amended by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
The height of a building shall not exceed 75 feet.
§ 1209. Lot Area, Lot Width And Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.8; as amended by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005,
§ 4]
Lot area, lot width and impervious coverage requirements of not less than
the following dimensions shall be provided for each structure or use
hereafter erected, established or altered for any use permitted within this
district:
§ 1210. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 12.9; as
amended by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
The following setback regulations apply to all users permitted within this
district unless otherwise specified herein:
§ 1211. Off-Street Parking/Access and Loading/Unloading. [Ord.
766, 5/16/1996, § 12.10; as amended by Ord. 856, 3/17/2005, § 4]
Off-street parking/access and loading/unloading shall be provided in
accordance with Part 16 herein.
2. Outside storage or display area shall occupy an area of less than 1/2 of
the existing building coverage. In no case shall more than 25% of the lot
area be used for outside storage or display.
3. Outside storage areas shall be shielded from view from all public
streets in an appropriate manner.
A. Lot area: three acres.
B. Minimum lot width: 100 feet.
C. Coverage regulations: Lot coverage shall not exceed 75%. The
remainder of the lot must be maintained in vegetative cover or natural
state.
A. Front yard: 30 feet.
B. Side yards: 20 feet.
C. When a General Industrial District permitted use abuts another zoning
district, the side yard on the abutting side shall be 40 feet. [Amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
D. Rear yard: 50 feet.
E. Buffer yards/screen plantings shall be provided in accordance with the
supplemental regulations.
§ 1207 FOREWORD § 1211
FWD:747

Part 12A
MU MIXED-USE DISTRICT
§ 12A01. Intended Purpose. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as amended by
Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
The purpose of the Mixed-Use District is to permit coordinated development
that includes a mixture of retail, cultural, service, office, residential and
institutional uses in a single structure or complex of related structures;
to promote and sustain development of a neighborhood-type character; to
preserve and reuse existing buildings that represent the character of the
surrounding environment; to encourage conservation of land resources,
utilizing pedestrian facilities that minimize automobile travel and the mixeduse
projects by allowing greater densities than would otherwise be
permitted to the extent the proposed mix of uses, design and location
warrants.
§ 12A02. Permitted Uses. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as amended by Ord.
946, 3/21/2013]
1. The following are permitted uses in the Mixed-Use zoning district.
2. To promote and protect the intended nature of the Mixed-Use zoning
district, all permitted uses are limited to 10,000 square feet of gross
floor area per use. Permitted uses utilizing greater than 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area are by conditional use only. Multiple uses
located within one structure or complex of structures are limited to
10,000 square feet of gross floor area per use, unless a conditional use
is granted.
A. Restaurants, tea rooms, cafes and other eating places that serve
food and beverages.
(1) Excludes drive-through services.
(2) Nightclubs, taverns and other entertainment venues by
conditional use.
(3) Outdoor eating permitted by conditional use.
B. Financial institutions.
(1) Drive-through services by special exception.
C. Professional offices/professional occupations.
D. Personal service establishments.
E. Retail sales.
(1) Principle activity is the sale of merchandise in an enclosed
building.
§ 12A01 FOREWORD § 12A02
FWD:749
§ 12A03. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as amended by
Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The following uses are permitted in the Mixed-Use District by special
exception as follows:
(2) Single-purpose/specialty retailers and general retail sales.
(3) Excludes adult bookstores and adult entertainment.
F. Bakery, candy, pastry, confectionery or ice cream retail sales.
G. Retail sales, food.
H. Medical/health services.
I. Art studios/galleries and museums for the display and/or
instruction of dance, music, martial arts, or similar cultural
pursuits.
J. Municipal buildings and facilities, including parks, playgrounds,
trails, paths, and other public recreational areas and civic space.
K. No-impact home-based businesses.
L. Dry-cleaning service.
(1) Excludes laundromats.
M. Bed-and-breakfasts. (See § 1306.)
(1) Establishments with more than three rooms to rent by
conditional use.
N. Hotels/motels.
O. Residential uses existing at the time of ordinance adoption.
P. Retail pet shops.
Q. Outdoor eating activity as an accessory use to a permitted principal
use.
R. School of creative and performing arts as defined in Part 2, § 201.
S. Farm market. [Added by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
T. Short-term lodging accommodations not to exceed two transient
occupants in accordance with § 1332. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
U. Rooming units not to exceed three rooms which may house a
maximum of three individuals. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
V. Accessory dwelling unit in accordance with § 1333. [Added by
Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
§ 12A02 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 12A03
FWD:750
§ 12A04. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
The following uses are permitted in the Mixed-Use District by conditional
use as follows:
§ 12A05. Conversion of Existing Structure for Combined Residential
and Nonresidential Use. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as amended by Ord.
946, 3/21/2013]
A. Home occupations. (See § 1410.)
B. Day-care residences for not more than eight individuals, excluding
children who permanently reside at the residence. (See § 1407.)
C. Parking as a principal use. (See § 1411.)
D. Churches or similar places of worship, parish houses, and convents.
(See § 1406.)
E. Drive-in banking services. (See § 1408.)
F. Demolition of buildings, excluding accessory structures. (See § 1415.)
A. Permitted uses utilizing greater than 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area.
B. Outdoor eating activity. (See § 1328.)
C. Residential-care homes/facilities.
D. Day-care centers. (See § 1507.)
E. Movie theaters/performing arts theaters.
F. Clubs, lodges, and fraternal organizations. (See § 1506.)
G. Nightclubs, taverns, and other entertainment venues.
H. New construction residential structures.
I. Funeral homes. (See § 1508.)
J. Public and private schools. (See § 1513.)
K. Bed-and-breakfast establishments with four or more rooms to rent. (See
§ 1505.) [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
1. When converting an existing residential structure into a nonresidential
permitted use occupying some of the existing dwelling, with the
remainder of the property used for residential purposes, the following
apply:
A. The residential use shall not be permitted to occupy any of the
ground-floor space of the structure.
§ 12A03 FOREWORD § 12A05
FWD:751
§ 12A06. Construction of Residential Units. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as
amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
B. Each residential unit shall meet the requirements of the Borough's
Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code,78 and the
occupancy shall comply with the definition of "family" in the Zoning
Ordinance.79
C. No conversion shall result in a dwelling unit that has less than 300
square feet of habitable floor area.
D. The principal structure shall be on a minimum of 5,000 square feet
of lot space.
E. The proposed uses shall comply with the parking requirements of
Part 16.
F. Sewer/water tapping fees apply for each new residential and
nonresidential unit and/or additional use added to the building.
G. Fire escapes, where required, shall be in the rear of the building
and shall not be located on any wall facing a street.
2. Any existing commercial structure within the Mixed-Use District, as a
principal structure on a lot, may be combined with residential dwelling
units. The individual dwelling unit shall not be less than 300 square feet
of habitable floor space. The dwelling units shall not be permitted to
occupy space on the ground-floor space and sub-ground-floor space of
the structure. The principal commercial structure shall be on a
minimum of 5,000 square feet of lot space. The proposed uses shall
comply with the parking requirements of Part 16. Furthermore,
residential units shall not exceed 25% of the structure's use.
1. New construction of residential buildings is permitted by conditional
use for the following:
A. Single-family detached dwellings.
B. Single-family semidetached dwellings.
C. Single-family attached dwellings.
D. Two-family detached dwellings.
E. Apartment houses/apartment dwellings.
2. Conversion apartments are excluded and not permitted except as
outlined in § 12A05.
78.Editor's Note: See Ch. 5, Part 1.
79.Editor's Note: See Ch. 27, Zoning.
§ 12A05 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 12A06
FWD:752
§ 12A07. Use of Existing Nonresidential Buildings. [Ord. 876, 8/17/
2006]
Any nonresidential building, as a principal structure on a lot, may be
used for any of the permitted nonresidential uses of this zoning district in
accordance with the guidelines of this chapter.
§ 12A08. Construction of Nonresidential Units. [Ord. 876, 8/17/
2006; as amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
Construction of a nonresidential unit shall comply with the guidelines of
this Chapter and receive appropriate review and approval according to the
provisions of the Borough's Zoning Ordinance and Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance.80
§ 12A09. Accessory Uses. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
3. All construction of residential units must comply with the lot area, lot
width, lot depth, and coverage regulations as outlined in Chapter 27,
Part 8, § 807, Subsections 1 and 2, as they apply to the uses above.
1. An accessory structure or use on the same lot which is customarily
incidental to a permitted principal use is permitted and shall comply
with the provisions contained in the supplemental regulations of this
chapter.
2. Outside storage and display shall comply with the following:
A. Outside storage or display shall not occupy any part of a street or
alley right-of-way and no other area intended or designed for
vehicular or pedestrian use, required parking areas or required
front yard.
B. Any outside storage and display is limited to items for sale by retail
establishments, shall be displayed behind the building front
setback line and shall not block or impede in any way a curb,
sidewalk, or thoroughfare commonly used by the public, whether
private or public.
C. Outside storage or display areas shall occupy an area of less than 1/
2 of the existing building coverage. In no case shall more than 25%
of the lot area be used for outside storage or display.
D. Outside storage areas shall be fully shielded from view from all
public streets and other properties with fencing or adequate
plantings.
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 12A06 FOREWORD § 12A10
FWD:753
§ 12A10. Performance Standards. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
These performance standards apply to all uses in the Mixed-Use Zoning
District:
§ 12A11. Design Standards. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
A. Such uses, operations, or products shall not be obnoxious or offensive
by reason of the emission of gas, odor, dust, smoke, noise, vibration,
refuse matter or other causes in accordance with § 1313.
B. Residential units must meet the requirements of the Borough's Existing
Structures and Property Maintenance Code. (Chapter 5, Part 1).
C. There shall be no manufacturing, compounding, processing or
treatment of products other than that which is clearly incidental to a
retail store and when all products are sold on the premises.
D. Stores, shops and businesses shall be conducted within an enclosed
building, unless permitted otherwise as outlined by the regulations in
this chapter.
E. Commercial uses shall be designed and operated, and hours of
operation limited where appropriate, so that neighboring residents are
not exposed to offensive noise, especially from traffic or late-night
activity. No amplified music shall be audible to neighboring residents.
F. All uses shall conform to the performance standards outlined in the
Borough's Zoning Ordinance, Part 13, § 1313.
1. All buildings will maintain a pedestrian-oriented street frontage in
design. Solid walls and an unbroken series of garage doors are not
permitted on any street frontage.
2. Buildings shall be oriented to the street. In a development of multiple
buildings that takes shape as a complex or campus, the buildings and
landscaping shall be oriented in a manner to preserve the character of
the public streetscape and compliment the intentions of the Mixed-Use
Zoning District ordinance. Refer to § 12A14 for front-yard setback
regulations.
3. Pedestrian amenities, such as sidewalks to front and side entrances of
buildings, shall be provided for all nonresidential uses.
4. Landscaping and buffer yards are required.
A. If the Borough has an adopted official plan of improvements for
within the right-of-way and public space, to include such amenities
as sidewalks, street trees, streetlighting, etc., the property owner
does not have the right to alter these without specific prior
approval from the Borough.
§ 12A10 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 12A11
FWD:754
§ 12A12. Minimum Height Requirements. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as
amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The minimum height requirement of a building shall be 35 feet.
§ 12A13. Lot Area, Lot Width and Impervious Coverage Regulations.
[Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
§ 12A14. Setback Regulations. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
B. Screening of mechanical equipment, trash, and loading areas shall
be provided through the use of walls, fences, and/or dense,
evergreen plant materials.
C. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses,
streets and walkways using trees and shrubs.
D. The interior parking area shall be landscaped with sufficient shade
trees to provide 50% shade within 15 years of installation.
E. Completion of landscaping requirements may be postponed, due to
seasonal weather conditions, for a period not to exceed six months
from the time of project completion.
F. All landscaping and screening shall be maintained by the property
owner.
1. Residential uses.
A. Lot area, width, and depth regulations as set forth in Chapter 27,
Part 8, § 807, Subsections 1 and 2, apply for residential uses in this
district.
2. Nonresidential uses.
A. No minimum lot area or lot width requirement shall be required for
any nonresidential uses permitted within this district, except to
maintain adequate side-yard setbacks when adjacent to a
residential use.
1. The following setback regulations apply to all uses permitted within this
district, unless otherwise specified herein:
A. Front yard: none.
(1) Any new building constructed on a lot within this district or any
substantially reconstructed or altered building shall maintain a
front-yard setback consistent with the predominant setbacks of
neighboring buildings within the same block.
(2) A new building constructed or an altered building on a lot with
partial street frontage shall have a front-yard setback of 20
feet.
§ 12A11 FOREWORD § 12A14
FWD:755
§ 12A15. Impervious Coverage. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
Lot coverage for all uses in the district shall not exceed 65%. The remainder
of the lot must be maintained in a vegetative cover or natural state.
§ 12A16. Off-Street Parking Requirements. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006]
B. Side yard.
(1) A nonresidential use, when adjacent to a residential use(s) on
one or both sides, must maintain a side-yard setback of at least
10 feet on both sides. Screening requirements apply for
nonresidential uses adjacent to a residential use.
(2) When a nonresidential use is adjacent to nonresidential uses
on both sides, no side-yard setbacks apply.
(3) A residential use must maintain a side-yard setback of eight
feet on both sides.
C. Rear yard: 25 feet.
1. Parking and access shall be provided in accordance with Part 16, as
applicable to the permitted uses in this district.
2. Parking for conditional uses with a combined floor area more than
10,000 square feet shall be determined by a study to be prepared by the
developer and recommended by the Zoning Officer.
3. Shared parking for uses within one development or complex may be
approved, provided that adequate parking is provided for all uses
within the development or complex based on the following information:
A. Type of use and estimated number of total spaces needed during
peak conditions.
B. Estimated parking duration per vehicle trip (turnover rate).
C. Estimated number of employees; adequate spaces provided for
employees working on any given shift.
D. Based on estimated number of trips generated and average parking
duration per trip, plus the number of employees, calculate number
of spaces required and which spaces, if any, could be adequately
shared between uses.
4. Parking for all buildings that front a public street shall be to the rear or
side of buildings, not in front of buildings, except for on-street curbside
parking. Curb cuts shall be limited as determined by the Borough
Council upon recommendation of the Zoning Officer.
5. Change of occupancy or use of a building or unit necessitates
compliance with parking regulations and, if necessary, a review by the
Zoning Officer and approval by Borough Council.
§ 12A14 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 12A16
FWD:756
§ 12A17. (Reserved)81
6. Parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses, streets
and walkways using trees and shrubs.
7. The interior parking area shall be landscaped with sufficient shade
trees to provide 50% shade within 15 years of installation.
81.Editor's Note: Former § 12A17, Demolition of a Building in the Mixed-Use Zoning District
(Ord. 876, 8/17/2006), was repealed by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013.
§ 12A16 FOREWORD § 12A17
FWD:757

Part 13
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
§ 1301. Use Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.0]
The following supplementary regulations shall qualify or supplement the
district regulations appearing elsewhere in this chapter.
§ 1302. Accessory Uses And Structures. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 13.1; as amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007;
and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. General. Accessory uses or structures that are clearly customary and
incidental to a principal use are permitted provided the requirements of
this Section are met.
2. Setback Requirements. Any accessory building may be erected within
one of the side yards or within the rear yard provided:
(1) In nonresidential zoning districts, except the CBD, any accessory
building or structure shall not be less than five feet from the rear of
the main building nor less than 15 feet from any lot line and shall
not be located in the front yard.
(2) In residential zoning districts, any building or structure accessory
to a residential use shall be located within the rear yard of the
principal building and shall not be located less than three feet from
any rear or side lot line. Where such side or rear yard is along an
alley, the accessory building or structure shall not be located less
than five feet from the alley and/or within the fourteen-foot right-ofway
of the alley. Private garages with entrances fronting an alley
shall not be located less than 10 feet from any lot line and/or within
the fourteen-foot right-of-way of the alley.
(3) In the Central Business District, setbacks for accessory buildings or
structures and uses shall be the same as the requirements for
principal buildings and uses.
(4) In the Mixed-Use District, setbacks for accessory buildings or
structures shall be the same as the requirements for the types of
principal buildings and uses.
(5) No accessory structure, building or use shall be permitted in a
required front yard in any district, unless specifically permitted in
this chapter. On corner lots, an accessory building is not permitted
within the front yard setback established for each street on which
the lot abuts.
(6) The maximum height of any accessory structure within a
residential zone is 15 feet. The height of an accessory structure
within a nonresidential zone is 20 feet.
§ 1301 FOREWORD § 1302
FWD:759
(7) All accessory structures must meet the requirements of the special
yard, lot and screening requirements of this Part.
(8) Any pond or pool with a water depth of less than 24 inches is
considered an accessory structure and must be located in the side
or rear yard only. A pond or pool with a water depth of 24 inches or
more shall follow the regulations established for swimming pools
contained in this Part. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
3. Accessory Uses Permitted by Right in All Districts.
A. The following accessory uses are permitted outside, provided that
the use is placed against the structure, it shall be displayed behind
the building front setback line and shall not block or impede in any
way a curb, sidewalk, or thoroughfare commonly used by the
public, whether private or public. These are permitted in all
districts except R-1 Low-Density, R-2 Medium-Density and R-3
High-Density Residential Districts. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/
2016]
(1) Pay phones.
(2) Beverage and snack machines.
(3) Newspaper sales machines.
B. Air conditioners.
C. Fences, walls or hedges, subject to the permit regulations as
required under § 2003, Subsection 1, and the regulations as set
forth in § 1302, Subsection 5.
D. Signs, as permitted by Part 17.
E. Off-street parking.
F. Home gardening.
G. Satellite dish antennas, radio and television antennas and amateur
radio antennas in accordance with the regulations contained in
§ 1303 of this Part.
H. Flagpoles.
I. Recreational facilities that are clearly limited to the exclusive use
of the residents of a development and their occasional invited
guests.
J. Solar energy systems, subject to the provisions prescribed in
§ 1325.
K. Commercial or industrial outdoor storage and display as a principal
or accessory use, provided that:
§ 1302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1302
FWD:760
(1) Location. Shall not occupy any part of the existing or future
right-of-way, area intended or designed for pedestrian use,
required parking area, or part of the required paved area of
parking setback.
(2) No outside industrial storage shall be located on land with an
average slope in excess of 15%.
L. No-impact home occupations shall be permitted as a matter of right
in all zoning districts. Any home occupation that does not meet all
of the criteria as outlined in the definition of a "no-impact home
occupation" may be permitted, subject to the provisions of § 1410.
The definition of "no-impact home occupation" is set forth in
§ 1410.
M. Regulations governing erection of energy generating wind power
devices, subject to the provisions prescribed in § 1326.
N. Geothermal systems, subject to the provisions prescribed in § 1327.
O. Outdoor eating in accordance with Part 13, § 1328.
P. Retail pet shops in accordance with Part 13, § 1329.
4. Essential Services.
A. Essential services are permitted by right as principal or accessory
uses in all districts.
B. Only uses specifically listed in this subsection shall be considered
to be essential services.
C. The following are essential services not required to meet the
accessory or principal setback, lot area or other lot requirements of
this chapter, unless future building or subdivision could be possible
on the lot:
(1) Oil pipelines and natural gas transmission and distribution
lines and accessory compressing stations.
(2) Electrical transformers as an accessory use to dwellings.
(3) Electrical, telephone and street light poles.
(4) Electrical transmission and distribution lines and meters.
(5) Wells, standpipes, water transmission lines, cisterns and
meters.
(6) Cable television and telephone lines.
(7) Stormwater pipes, outfalls, detention basins, swales and
catchbasins.
§ 1302 FOREWORD § 1302
FWD:761
(8) Shelters and benches for buses that transport school children
or that are owned, operated or financed by a public transit
authority, but without off-premises signs.
(9) U.S. mailboxes.
(10) Boxes for receiving individual newspapers.
(11) Fire hydrants and emergency call boxes.
(12) Engineering retaining walls that are clearly necessary to hold
back slopes.
(13) Household air conditioners.
(14) Sidewalks.
(15) Propane storage tanks, subject to the requirements of § 1322.
(16) Handicap ramps or wheelchair lifts are primarily intended to
be used by people with mobility impairments for access to a
structure.
(a) The construction of a handicap ramp or wheelchair lift that
falls within the building setback area maybe constructed
for commercial purposes when the following are met:
[1] Shall require a zoning permit and construction permit.
[2] The design, construction and location of the handicap
ramp or wheelchair lift shall be appropriate to the
context of the existing structure and neighborhood.
[3] Must be constructed outside of the public right-of-way.
[4] Shall meet the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
(b) Handicap ramps or wheelchair lifts constructed on
residential lots shall meet the accessory structure setback
for side and lot lines and:
[1] Not be located in a place that negatively impacts
adjacent property owners, commercial and/or
residential tenants.
[2] Shall require a zoning permit.
[3] Be constructed of material that allows for the
structure to be removable and easily dismantled.
[4] Permission to construct a handicap ramp and/or
wheelchair lift shall not be transferrable to new
ownership or occupancy and must be dismantled
within 60 days unless a new permit is issued.
§ 1302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1302
FWD:762
[5] Must be constructed outside of the public right-of-way.
[6] Shall meet the requirements of the Uniform
Construction Code.
(17) Outside entrance to a basement of a dwelling.
D. The following are essential services that are required, except as
may be exempted by the Municipalities Planning Code, to meet all
the requirements of this chapter, as principal or accessory uses, as
applicable:
(1) Emergency and other electrical generators and compressors.
(2) Solid waste bulk dumpsters and bulk compactors.
(3) Telephone switching stations.
(4) Construction. Temporary storage of vehicles and materials
and/or construction office trailers used for current
construction on the same or an adjacent lot or within the same
subdivision.
(5) Industrial or commercial air conditioners.
(6) Electrical substations and bulk transformers that are not an
accessory use to dwellings.
5. Fences and Walls.
A. Fences for Residential Purposes.
(1) Any fence located in the front yard in a residential district shall
be decorative, such as a picket, split rail or wrought iron fence,
rather than one which will serve to screen off a portion of the
front of the lot, such as a stockade fence. Such decorative
fence shall have a maximum height of three feet, be
constructed entirely of wood or wrought iron, PVC or plastic
fencing, or aluminum, and have at least half the fence open.
Chain-link and closed wooden (privacy) fences are expressly
prohibited in the front yard.
(2) Fences are not required to meet accessory structure setbacks
and may be located on the side or rear lot line. Fences that
abut a public alley shall be located five feet from the alley
right-of-way and shall not impede sight distance at the
intersection(s).
(3) A fence located anywhere except the front yard of a use in a
residential district shall have a maximum height of six feet.
(4) A fence of up to 10 feet shall be allowed in a rear yard in any
zoning district for the sole purpose of enclosing a court for
tennis or a similar racquet sport.
§ 1302 FOREWORD § 1302
FWD:763
B. Fences for Commercial Purposes.
(1) In nonresidential districts, fences shall be permitted a
maximum height of 12 feet on the rear and side yard(s) and
three feet on the front yard.
(2) Fences that are constructed in nonresidential districts that
abut a public alley shall be located five feet from the alley
right-of-way and shall not impede sight distance at the
intersection(s).
C. Engineering Retaining Walls.
(1) Any engineering retaining wall shall be architecturally
compatible with the structure and the landscape.
(2) Engineering retaining walls shall comply with the Uniform
Construction Code.
D. Architectural and Decorative Walls.
(1) The design, construction and location of the architectural and
decorative wall shall be appropriate to the context of the
existing structures and neighborhood.
(2) Architectural and decorative walls are permitted by right in all
districts.
(3) Architectural and decorative walls in any residential district
constructed on the side and rear lot lines must set back two
feet for every one foot in height of the proposed wall.
(4) In all other districts, there are no accessory structure setback
requirements. The height of an architectural and decorative
wall shall not exceed 10 feet.
(5) Architectural and decorative walls shall comply with the
standards prescribed in the Uniform Construction Code.
E. Screening Walls. All yards located within the General Industrial,
General Commercial, and Light Industrial Districts that will be
used for approved storage of any material needed for the operation
or commercial enterprise shall construct an enclosed solid wall,
uniformly painted board fence, chain-link fence in conjunction with
a screen planting or screen planting on all sides which face upon a
street or face upon a lot in any district. No storage shall occur
within the front yard in any district. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/
2016]
6. Special Standards for Certain Accessory Uses.
A. Garage Sales.
§ 1302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1302
FWD:764
(1) Shall include only the occasional sale of household goods and
furniture and items of a similar character. A garage sale shall
not include wholesale sales.
(2) No dwelling unit shall hold garage sales or auctions during
more than four days total in any calendar year.
(3) Shall be clearly accessory to a dwelling unit.
(4) Shall be defined to include yard sale, porch sale, auction or
sheriffs sale.
(5) Sales shall be held only between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and
8:00 p.m.
(6) Signs erected by the operation and placed in various locations
on and off the lot must be removed by the operation within 12
hours of the sale. Signs erected on telephone poles may only be
constructed of paper and shall be placed with string or tape
only. These signs must be securely attached to the pole and
erected no more than five days prior to the sale.
B. Keeping of Pets.
(1) Keeping of pets shall be permitted by right in all districts.
(2) No use shall involve the keeping of animals in such a manner
that it creates a serious nuisance, including but not limited to
noise, odor, danger or threat to the public.
(3) Animals shall not be kept or used for fighting purposes.
(4) In all districts, no more than four animals shall be kept at one
time. No more than three dogs shall be housed in a residential
unit at any time and shall not be exceeded even for temporary
purposes. No numerical restrictions shall apply to cats and
dogs less than six months old of age and fish in an aquarium.
(5) It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, breed or raise any
dangerous animals, any animal creating, threatening or risking
a hazardous, perilous or unsafe condition and/or any mammals,
reptiles, amphibians, fish, insects or birds that will negatively
impact the ecological system(s). This shall include but is not
limited to poisonous or venomous creatures and/or insects,
bobcats, large game cats, wolves, alligators, primates,
crocodiles or any other wild or exotic animals which present a
danger to life and limb. Animals that are prohibited as pets are
defined in § 201.
(6) Contracted animal foster care program(s) shall be relieved of
numerical restrictions on the keeping of pets for a period not to
exceed 48 hours for the purposes of proving temporary
housing assistance to abandoned, surrendered and/or lost
§ 1302 FOREWORD § 1302
FWD:765
§ 1303. Antennas, Radio and Television Devices. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 13.2; as amended by Ord. 798, 6/17/1999, §§ 3,4; by Ord.
882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
pets. Only facilities, services and/or programs that have
lawfully entered into a contractual agreement with the
Borough shall be allowed relief of numerical restrictions of
animals.
1. Satellite Dish Antennas.
A. Satellite dish antennas, not including commercial communications
antennas and towers, shall be permitted by right as an accessory
use in all districts for all uses, subject to the following restrictions.
B. Location and Number.
(1) In the Central Business District, a satellite dish antenna shall
not be located on the street front of the building, whether
detached or attached to the building. In all districts, a satellite
dish antenna shall meet the accessory structure setback
requirements listed in § 1302 of this Part Satellite dish
antennas may be attached to the front of the structure. A
residential structure with more than four residential dwelling
units is permitted to have up to four mounted satellite dish
antennas on the front of the structure. Additional satellite dish
antennas shall be located in the side or rear yard or may be
roof mounted.
(2) A satellite dish antenna may be mounted to the rooftop of a
principal or accessory structure.
(3) A satellite dish antenna shall be constructed in such a manner
so that it will not fall into or onto adjoining properties, land
parcels, and/or accessory structures.
C. Size and Height.
(1) A satellite dish antenna shall have a maximum diameter of
three feet in a residential district and nine feet in a
nonresidential district.
(2) A satellite dish antenna shall have a maximum possible height
of 12 feet above ground level in all districts. Satellite dish
antennas that are roof mounted or attached to a building shall
not exceed 10 feet above the roofline.
D. Mobile Stands. Satellite dish antenna(s) on mobile stands are
prohibited except as may be initially needed to determine the best
location for an antenna.
E. Wind Resistance. Any satellite dish antenna shall be properly
secured so that it will be resistant to high winds and other forces.
§ 1302 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1303
FWD:766
2. Radio and Television Antennas.
A. Radio and television antennas, not including commercial
communications antennas and towers, shall be permitted by right
as an accessory use in all districts for all uses, subject to the
following restrictions.
B. The antenna and associated structures shall be securely anchored
in a fixed position, and the applicant shall provide qualified
evidence that the proposed structure will withstand wind and other
forces.
C. The antenna and its associated supports, such as guy wires, or the
yard area containing the structure, shall be protected and secured
to guarantee the safety of the general public. Associated supports
and guy wires shall not be located any closer than five feet to any
property line.
D. No radio and television antenna shall exceed 10 feet above the
roofline of the structure. No radio and television antenna that is
placed inside or attached to an existing or proposed projection
shall exceed the height of that projection.
E. Proof that the antenna will not disrupt or interfere with normal
transmission or communication systems in the area shall be
submitted as part of the application. If interference or disruption is
experienced after the communications structure is operational, the
applicant shall be granted 30 days to correct the problem, or the
permit will be revoked.
F. Amateur radio antennas shall not exceed 65 feet in height from the
ground level. Amateur radio antennas shall comply with the
standards and provisions within this Section and applicable State
and Federal rules, regulations and statutes. No more than two
support structures can be permitted on a lot, the applicant must
meet the requirements of the Uniform Construction Code and there
must be an anti-climbing device and/or fence. The facilities shall be
removed when the ownership of the residential lot changes or when
the facilities are no longer being used. Amateur radio antennas
shall be subject to the accessory structure setback requirements
listed in § 1302 of this Part.
3. Commercial Communication Antenna and Towers. Commercial
communication antennas and towers shall be permitted as a special
exception that is granted by the Zoning Hearing Board. The approved
use through a special exception shall conform to the regulations
prescribed in § 1413.
4. General Standards. All antennas are subject to the following provisions:
A. Antennas shall meet all manufacturers' specifications.
§ 1303 FOREWORD § 1303
FWD:767
§ 1304. Apartments, Conversion. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.5; as
amended by Ord. 780, 7/17/1997, § 5; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Where permitted, or permitted by special exception, any building existing
at the effective date of this chapter may be converted to a dwelling for more
than one family, provided that:
B. No antenna shall be located where damage would be caused to
electrical power lines if the antenna should fall.
C. Every antenna must be adequately grounded for protection against
a direct strike of lightning, with an adequate grounding system.
D. The antenna, including guy wires, supporting structures and
accessory equipment, shall be located and designed so as to
minimize the visual impact on surrounding properties and from
public streets.
A. The proposed conversion shall conform to the regulations for the
district in which it is located. The minimum habitable floor area of such
converted dwelling unit shall be provided in accordance with the
Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code [Chapter 5, Part
1]. However, no conversion shall result in a dwelling unit which has less
than 300 square feet of habitable floor area.
B. There is no exterior evidence of change in the building except as
required by State or local building or housing codes or regulations.
C. Fire escapes, where required, shall be in the rear of the building and
shall not be located on any wall facing a street.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16; provided, however, if an apartment conversion unit has more
than two bedrooms, one off-street parking space in addition to that
required by Part 16 shall be provided for such dwelling unit. [Amended
by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
E. No conversion apartment unit shall exceed three bedrooms. [Amended
by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
F. The building in which the conversion apartment units are located shall
have adequate street frontage and shall comply with the requirements
of § 1318. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
G. There shall be no more than three dwelling units per building. [Added
by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
H. No conversion apartment building shall exceed three stories in height.
[Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
I. No conversion apartment building shall contain a dwelling unit in the
basement or below ground level of the building. [Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
§ 1303 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1304
FWD:768
§ 1305. Automobile Service Stations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.4]
Such uses, where permitted, shall comply with the following:
§ 1306. Bed-and-Breakfast Establishments. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 13.5; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; Ord. 975, 6/16/2016;
and by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
Bed-and-breakfast establishments shall meet the following additional
requirements:
J. The facade of the building containing conversion apartment units shall
be maintained in a manner consistent with the streetscape of the
neighborhood and/or the applicable residential district. This shall
include, but not be limited to, maintaining the entrance on the street,
maintaining any existing front porch or stoop, and maintaining the
appearance of the building as a single-family dwelling. [Added by Ord.
983, 11/16/2017]
A. No equipment for the service of motor vehicles shall be closer than 25
feet to any side or rear property line.
B. Canopies shall be located no less than 10 feet from the street right-ofway
line.
C. Fuel pumps shall be located at least 25 feet from any right-of-way or 50
feet from the street center line, whichever is greater.
D. Vehicles stored at a service station due to an accident shall remain no
longer than is permitted by the Existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code [Chapter 5, Part 1] from the date of arrival.
E. The width of any entrance driveway leading from the public street to
such service station or other drive-in use shall not exceed 30 feet at its
intersection with the curbline or edge of pavement.
F. No two driveways leading from a public street to such service station or
other drive-in use shall be within 15 feet of each other at their
intersection with the curb or street line.
A. Sleeping accommodations shall be limited to no more than three rooms
for rent, excluding establishments with four or more rooms within the
R-3 High-Density Residential District and Mixed-Use District, which
shall be permitted as a conditional use (see § 1505).
B. The length of stay for transient guests, as defined in this Part, shall not
exceed 30 consecutive calendar days.
C. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Part 16 herein.
D. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to guests of the bed-andbreakfast
establishments.
§ 1304 FOREWORD § 1307
FWD:769
§ 1307. Churches, Similar Places of Worship, Public/Private Schools
and Other Public Buildings. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.6]
In districts where permitted, or permitted as a special exception, these uses
shall meet the following requirements:
§ 1308. Height Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.7]
Height regulations shall not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, or domes not
used for human occupancy, chimneys, ventilators, skylights, water tanks,
utility poles or towers, solar collectors and ornamental or necessary
apparatus.
§ 1309. Medical Centers. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.8]
Where permitted, a building for use as a medical center may be erected and
used, provided that:
A. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements listed below, and parking requirements, but in no case
shall the lot area be less than 40,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage shall not be greater than that required within the
respective district.
C. The lot width at the front building setback line shall be based on the
building size and yard requirements, but in no case shall be less than
100 feet in width.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16 herein.
A. The building shall be occupied and used only by persons licensed to
practice the healing arts in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
their staffs.
B. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements, parking and access requirements and other applicable
standards.
C. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than 25
feet.
D. Lot width shall be determined by the size of the building and setbacks.
E. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than five feet in depth shall be
maintained along side and rear lot lines abutting a residential use. Said
buffer yard/screening planting shall be provided within the required
side and/or rear yard.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16 herein.
§ 1307 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1310
FWD:770
§ 1310. Mixed Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.9]
§ 1311. Motels/Hotels. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.10]
Where permitted, motels/hotels shall be subject to the following safeguards
and regulations:
§ 1312. Municipal Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.11]
In any district a building may be erected, altered or extended and land may
be developed which is arranged, intended or designed for any municipal
use, including municipal recreation uses.
§ 1313. Performance Standards. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.12]
1. When two or more principal uses occupy the same lot but not the same
building, all parking, lot area, lot width, building setbacks, height, and
building area requirements shall be provided so that the requirements
pertaining to each use will be met in full.
2. No building to the rear of and on the same lot with the principal
building shall be erected and/or used in a manner inconsistent with the
use of the principal building on the same lot. [Amended by Ord. 975,
6/16/2016; and by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
3. When two or more principal uses occupy the same building on the same
lot, all parking, lot area, and building area requirements shall be
provided so that the requirements pertaining to each use will be met in
full. Refer to land development regulations in the Borough's Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] for regulations.
4. On a corner lot (a lot which fronts on two streets) containing two
principle structures, each structure must conform completely to all
regulations as if it were two separate lots.
A. Off-street parking and loading spaces for other facilities developed as
part of the motel/hotel premises shall be provided as required by Part
16 of this Part.
B. Every unit shall be provided with complete bathroom facilities.
C. The minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than
25 feet, except for a motel/hotel located in the Central Business
District.
D. A valid Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry certificate shall
be maintained for each use.
1. All uses shall comply with the requirements of this section. Compliance
shall be determined by the Zoning Officer with respect to permitted
uses, by the Zoning Hearing Board with respect to special exceptions
and by the Borough Council with respect to conditional uses. The
§ 1310 FOREWORD § 1313
FWD:771
Zoning Officer shall monitor compliance on behalf of the Zoning
Hearing Board and Borough Council.
2. In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the
requirements of this chapter, the Borough may obtain a qualified
consultant's report, whose cost for services shall be borne by the
applicant.
3. Vibration. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
properties in any district shall be prohibited, with the exception of
temporary vibrations associated with new construction.
4. Air Pollution. No pollution of air by flyash, dust, vapors or other
substance(s) shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals,
vegetation or other property or that can cause soiling of property.
5. Fire and explosives protection. Fire-protection and fire-fighting
equipment, acceptable to the Board of Fire Underwriters, shall be
readily available for any activity involving the handling or storage of
flammable or explosive materials.
6. Light, glare and heat.
A. Lighting devices which produce objectionable direct or indirect
glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be
permitted.
B. Streetlighting exempted. This section shall not apply to
streetlighting or lighting of municipal or municipal recreational
facilities that are owned or maintained by the Borough.
C. No use shall generate glare in such a way that light shines into the
eyes of motorists and create a safety hazard or that is seriously
offensive to persons of ordinary sensibilities within a dwelling.
D. Height of Lights.
(1) No outside luminaire, spotlight or other light source in a
residential district, including lights attached to a post or a
building and lights that are part of signs, shall have a height
greater than 20 feet above the surrounding average finished
ground level. In nonresidential districts, this maximum height
shall be 60 feet.
(2) This shall not limit lights needed for air travel safety or lights
aimed directly towards a tower or steeple.
E. Diffused. All light sources, including signs, shall be properly
diffused with a translucent or similar cover or shield or reflecting
device to prevent exposed bulbs from being directly visible from
abutting streets or lots.
§ 1313 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1313
FWD:772
F. Shielding. All light sources, including signs, shall be shielded
around the light source and carefully directed and placed to
prevent the lighting from creating a nuisance to adjacent dwellings
or residentially zoned areas and to prevent the dwellings or
residentially zoned areas and to prevent the lighting from shining
into the eyes of passing motorists.
G. Maximum Candlepower. No lighting source, including signs, shall
cause an illumination of greater than the following amounts,
measured at the lot line of the receiving lot or street:
(1) Two-tenths footcandle at the residential lot line between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2) One footcandle at a residential lot between the hours of 7:00
p.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(3) Three footcandles at any lot line other than a residential lot
line or at the existing right-of-way line of a public street.
H. Flickering. Flickering or strobe lighting is prohibited.
I. Measurement. The maximum illumination levels of this section
shall be measured with a photoelectric photometer having a
spectral response similar to that of the human eye. The standards
of the International Commission on Illumination shall serve as a
general guide in measurements in case of uncertainty. A footcandle
is defined as a unit of measurement equaling the illumination on a
surface one square foot in area where there is a distribution of light
having a candlepower of one candela.
J. There shall be no emission or transmission of heat or heated air
that is discernible at the lot line.
K. Where commercial uses abut a residential district, lighting on the
property shall be limited to security and safety purposes only after
standard business hours. Lighting beyond standard business hours,
or for special sales events, must be approved by the Zoning Officer.
7. Nonradioactive Liquid or Solid Wastes. There shall be no discharge at
any point into any public or private sewage disposal system or stream
or into the ground of any liquid or solid materials except in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the United States, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Lancaster County and Borough of Elizabethtown.
8. Radioactivity or Electrical Disturbances. No activity shall emit
radioactivity at any point or cause electrical disturbance adversely
affecting the operation of radio, television or other equipment in the
vicinity.
9. Noise.
§ 1313 FOREWORD § 1313
FWD:773
A. No person shall operate or cause to be operated on private or
public property any source of continuous sound in such a manner
as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in the
following table when measured at or within the property boundary
of the receiving land use:
Sound Limits by Receiving Land Use and Time
District or Land Use Time
Sound Level
Limit
(dBA)
Residential or
institutional zoning
district or existing
dwellings
7:00 a.m. — 9:00 p.m. 57
9:00 p.m. — 7:00 a.m.
plus Sundays and
State holidays
52
All other district and
land uses
At all times 64
B. The maximum permissible sound level limits set forth shall not
apply to any of the following noise sources:
(1) The emission of sound for the purpose of alerting persons to
the existence of an emergency.
(2) Repair or construction work to provide electricity, water or
other public utilities within the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00
p.m., except for clearly emergency repairs which are not
restricted by time.
(3) Household power tools and lawn mowers between the hours of
7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
(4) Motor vehicles traveling on State-owned streets.
(5) Public celebrations specifically authorized by the Borough.
(6) Railroad and aircraft.
(7) The unamplified human voice.
(8) Bells or chimes of places of worship.
C. Air-conditioning units are specifically regulated by this section.
10. Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
11. Smoke. The maximum amount of smoke emission permitted shall be
determined by the use of the Standard Rigglemann Chart issued by the
§ 1313 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1313
FWD:774
§ 1314. Prohibited Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.13; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The following uses are prohibited in all districts throughout the Borough:
U.S. Bureau of Mines. No smoke of a shade darker than No. 2 shall be
permitted.
A. The incineration, reduction or storage of garbage, offal, animals, fish or
refuse, the storage of hazardous waste (as defined herein), unless by
the authority of or under the supervision of the Borough.
B. Dumps and dumping of any kind, unless by the authority of or under the
supervision of the Borough.
C. The stripping of topsoil for sale, exclusive of the process of grading a lot
preparatory to the construction of a building for which a building
permit has been issued.
D. Junkyards.
E. The operation of any business which has as a substantial or a significant
portion of its stock-in-trade obscene materials or offers live
entertainment appealing to the prurient interest.
F. Kennels.
G. Massage Parlors. The operation of any massage parlor in which any of
the following activities are carried on:
(1) The treatment of any person, except upon the signed order of a
licensed physician, osteopath, chiropractor, or registered physical
therapist, which order shall be dated and shall specifically state the
number of treatments. The date and hour of each treatment given
and the name of the operator shall be entered on such order by the
establishment where such treatments are given and shall be
subject to inspection by the police. The requirements of this
provision shall not apply to treatments given in the residence of a
patient, the office of a licensed physician, osteopath, or registered
physical therapist, chiropractor, or in a regularly established and
licensed hospital or sanitarium.
(2) The massage of, or physical contact with, the sexual or genital
parts of one person by any other person. Sexual or genital parts
shall include the genitals, public area, buttocks, anus or perineum
of any person, or the vulva or breasts of a female.
(3) The failure to conceal with a fully opaque covering the sexual or
genital parts of the body of any person.
H. The indoor use of fireworks, pyrotechnics, and/or open fires shall be
prohibited inside any building or structure of the Borough.
§ 1313 FOREWORD § 1315
FWD:775
§ 1315. Public Utility Facilities. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.14]
Public utility facilities shall be permitted in any district provided that
buildings or structures erected for these utilities shall be subject to the
following regulations:
§ 1316. Self-Service Storage Facilities. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 13.15]
Where permitted, self-service storage facilities shall comply with the
following conditions:
A. Front, side and rear yards shall be provided in accordance with the
regulations of the district in which the facility is located.
B. Height restrictions shall be as required by the district regulations.
C. Unhoused equipment shall be enclosed within a chain link fence six feet
in height and locked.
D. When equipment is totally enclosed within a building, no fence or
screen planting shall be required and the yards shall be maintained in
accordance with the district in which the facility is located.
E. If located within the Open Space and Conservation District,
Institutional District, Residential Districts and Commercial Districts,
screen plantings shall be required in accordance with the special yard
lot and screening requirements of this Part. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/
16/2016]
F. The external design of the building shall be in conformity with the
buildings in the district.
A. Buildings shall be so situated and/or screened that overhead doors are
not visible from off the site.
B. No business activity (other than rental of storage units), including
miscellaneous or garage sales, and transfer/storage businesses that
utilize vehicles as part of said business shall be conducted on the
premises.
C. Servicing or repair of motor vehicles, boats, trailers, lawnmowers, or
any similar equipment shall not be conducted on premises.
D. All self-service storage facility contracts shall include clauses
prohibiting the storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or
explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals, and the use of the
property for uses other than dead storage.
§ 1315 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1317
FWD:776
§ 1317. Solid Waste Storage Facilities. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 13.16; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
All multifamily, commercial and industrial buildings or uses shall include
adequate facilities on site for the proper storage of solid wastes in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough refuse and recycling
collection regulations and as hereinafter provided:
§ 1318. Structures to Have Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.17; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Every building hereafter erected, moved, or modified into apartments shall
be on a lot adjacent to a public street. Vehicular or pedestrian access
shall be provided to the public street or to an approved private street.
Vehicular access to the property, including the driveway and off-street
parking, is permitted from a public alley if the building fronts a public
street. The erection of buildings without approved access shall not be
permitted. Approved access shall also be defined in terms of the Subdivision
and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] and Ord. 667 [Chapter 21],
as may be amended from time to time for street design.
§ 1319. Swimming Pools. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.18; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
Swimming pools shall be a permitted as an accessory use in all districts and
shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
A. Storage areas shall have hardened, stabilized surfaces with outdoor
areas constructed to prevent accumulation of rainfall.
B. Storage areas shall be located such that collection vehicles will not
obstruct the public street or otherwise violate Borough regulations
while parked for collection of refuse and shall be provided with
accessways facilitating ready deposit and collection of refuse.
C. Storage areas shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the container
capacity required to store the refuse accumulation between collections,
but shall not be less than four by eight feet in size or of other
dimensions providing an approved equal space.
D. Dumpsters. Placement of a dumpster for commercial or residential uses
not covered under the Refuse and Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 20, on
any public street or within a public right-of-way shall require permit
approval by the Chief of Police and shall be subject to the restrictions
and limitations set by the Chief of Police. Placement of a dumpster on
any lot or street shall require a use permit issued by the Codes
Compliance Official. Placement of such a dumpster shall not exceed 30
days. Verbal approval may be extended upon request, for successive
additional thirty-day time periods but shall not exceed a total time of six
months. For continued placement after the expiration of six months, the
permit may be considered for renewal upon application.
§ 1317 FOREWORD § 1319
FWD:777
§ 1320. Townhouses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 13.19]
Where permitted, all townhouses shall comply with the following:
§ 1321. Special Yard, Lot and Screening Requirements. [Ord. 766,
5/16/1996, § 13.20; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
A. The pool is intended, and is to be used, solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located
(including guests).
B. It may not be located, including any walks or paved areas or accessory
structures adjacent thereto, closer than five feet to any property line;
nor shall it be nearer to any street upon which the residence abuts than
the existing setback line of the residence. In no case shall it be any
closer than 20 feet to any street line.
C. All swimming pools require a zoning permit and a construction code
permit. Swimming pools shall comply with all regulations as outlined in
the Uniform Construction Code. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
D. All materials used in the construction of pools shall be waterproof and
so designed and constructed as to facilitate emptying and cleaning and
shall be maintained and operating in such a manner as to be clean and
sanitary at all times.
E. Water may not be discharged from a swimming pool unless discharged
directly into a storm sewer facility and, in so doing, does not flow onto
adjacent properties or rights-of-way.
F. Enclosed indoor pools must comply with applicable regulations
pertaining to accessory structures.
G. Outdoor lighting, if any, shall be shielded and/or reflected away from
adjoining properties so that no beam of light, only diffused or reflected
light, enters adjoining properties.
H. If the swimming pool discontinues use, the pool shall be properly
emptied and dismantled within 30 days after receiving notice from the
Codes Compliance Official.
A. There shall be not more than six attached units in a row.
B. A visual structural break shall be provided between every other
dwelling unit. This architectural break in the structure is for the
expressed purpose of providing access from the front of the unit to the
rear of the unit.
C. All other applicable provisions of this chapter.
1. Principal Uses and Structures on a Lot.
§ 1319 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1321
FWD:778
A. Structures to have access. Every building hereafter erected,
moved, or modified into apartments shall be on a lot adjacent to a
public street. Vehicular or pedestrian access shall be provided to
the public street or to an approved private street. Vehicular access
to the property, including the driveway and off-street parking, is
permitted from a public alley if the building fronts a public street.
The erection of buildings without approved access shall not be
permitted. Approved access shall be defined in terms of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22] and
Ord. 667 [Chapter 21], as may be amended from time to time for
street design.
B. More than one principal structure may be erected on a single lot,
provided that a land development plan is submitted for approval
and is in compliance with the following provisions:
(1) On any single lot containing residential uses, more than one
structure containing a permitted principal use may be erected
on a lot, provided that:
(a) The lot is in excess of four acres.
(b) The yard and other requirements of this chapter shall be
met for each structure as though it were on an individual
lot.
(c) The front of any building (containing the front entrance)
which contains two or fewer dwelling units shall face the
street, or, in the case of a corner lot, a street on which the
corner lot abuts. [Amended by Ord. No. 990, 1/17/
2019]
(2) On any single lot containing only nonresidential uses, more
than one structure containing a permitted principal use may be
erected, provided that the yard and other requirements of this
chapter shall be met for the entire lot regardless of the number
of structures.
2. Corner Lots.
A. Yard requirements for corner lots. A front yard (as provided for in
the lot requirements for the various districts) shall be required on
each street on which a corner lot abuts. The remaining two yards
shall be side yards.
B. Obstruction to vision.
(1) Special Yard, Lot and Screening Requirements. Walls, fences,
signs or other structures shall not be erected or altered and
hedges, trees or other growth shall not be planted or
maintained in a manner which may cause danger to vehicular
§ 1321 FOREWORD § 1321
FWD:779
traffic on a street or road by obstructing the view. [Amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
(2) A clear-sight triangle of 100 feet, measured along the street
lines of intersecting streets, shall be maintained. No structures
or plantings, other than ground cover, may be located or
planted within the clear sight triangle.
3. Yard Regulations.
A. Front Yards.
(1) An accessory building shall not be erected within any front
yard.
(2) Parking shall not be permitted in front yards in residential
districts except on paved driveways. All driveways and other
paved surfaces shall comply with the provisions regarding
driveways located in § 1323 and in the impervious coverage
provisions of the respective zoning district.
(3) Where buildings exist in the same block on either side, of an
undeveloped lot, the setback line of the building to be
constructed shall be at least the average of buildings
constructed within the same block. In measuring to determine
said building line, open porches shall not be construed as part
of the building.
B. Side Yards (for garage use only). No side yard setback shall be
required where two garages are designed to abut in semidetached
dwellings.
4. Projections into Required Yards, Porches, Patios, Decks, etc. In all
districts except the Central Business District, no building nor any
portion of a building may project into any required yards, except as
provided for below:
A. An unenclosed projection with or without a roof in the nature of any
entry, portico, platform, walkway or stoop extending not more than
four feet out from the wall of a building shall be exempt from the
requirements of its particular district when the building is
otherwise in conformity. Chimneys, flues, columns, sills and
ornamental architectural features may project not more than two
feet into a required yard. Flagpoles shall be the exception.
B. An unenclosed porch, deck, patio or platform and the
accompanying steps to the ground or other structures, including
but not limited to carports, must conform to the setbacks of its
particular district but may be permitted as a special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board, provided that:
(1) The building is otherwise in conformity with the regulations of
its particular district.
§ 1321 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1321
FWD:780
(2) The special exception would not conflict with the obstruction to
vision requirements of this section.
(3) A minimum setback of five feet from any side lot yard is
maintained.
(4) A minimum setback of 10 feet from any front or rear yard is
maintained.
C. A carport, open on three sides, may be erected within one of the
side yards when attached to a main building existing at the
effective date of this chapter, provided that the carport shall be not
less than five feet from the side lot line.
5. Buffer Yards and Screen Plantings.
A. Buffer Yards.
(1) Unless otherwise provided, where a commercial or industrial
use adjoins a residential district or where a multifamily use,
located in R-1 Low-Density and R-2 Medium-Density
Residential Zoning Districts, adjoins a single-family residential
use, a buffer yard of not less than 15 feet in width shall be
provided along the lot lines in addition to the yard required for
the district in which it is located. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/
16/2016]
(2) If a front yard is provided, the buffer yard may coincide with
the front yard.
(3) All buffer yard areas shall be planted and maintained with a
vegetative material, and where required for multifamily,
commercial and industrial uses, a screen planting shall be
planted and maintained to the full length of side and rear lot
lines which do not abut streets. All buffer yards shall be
planted with grass or ground cover and, where required, a
dense screen planting. Buffer yards shall be maintained and
kept free of all debris and rubbish.
(4) No structure, manufacturing or processing activity, or storage
of materials shall be permitted in buffer yards. However,
access roads, service drives, and utility easements not more
than 35 feet in width are permitted to cross a buffer yard
provided that the angle of the center line of the road, drive, or
easement crosses the buffer yard at an angle not less than 60°.
(5) No parking shall be permitted in buffer yards.
(6) Prior to the issuance of a building permit, plans for buffer
yards shall be submitted for review and approval to the Zoning
Officer. Said plans shall show the arrangement of all of the
buffer yards and the placement, species and size of all plant
materials to be placed in such buffer yards. Said plan must be
§ 1321 FOREWORD § 1321
FWD:781
reviewed by the Planning Commission and approved by the
Zoning Officer before a building permit may be issued.
B. Screen Plantings. Screen plantings shall be located in the exterior
portion of the required buffer yards and shall be in accordance with
the following requirements:
(1) Plant materials used in screen planting shall be at least four
feet in height when planted, shall be planted no more than
three feet apart, and be of such species as will produce, within
three years, a complete year-round visual screen of at least six
feet in height.
(2) The screen planting shall be maintained permanently and any
plant material which does not live shall be replaced within one
year.
(3) The screen planting shall be so placed that at maturity it will
be no closer than three feet from any ultimate right-of-way or
property line.
(4) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all street
intersections and at all points where vehicular accessways
intersect public streets.
(5) The screen planting shall be broken only at points of vehicular
or pedestrian access.
(6) Trees that shall not be used in planting of buffer yards are:
(a) Poplars — all varieties.
(b) Willows — all varieties.
(c) White or silver maple (acer saccharinum).
(d) Aspen — all varieties.
(e) Common black locust.
(7) Screen plantings shall be provided between the property line
and any off-street parking area and any outdoor solid waste
storage area for any multifamily, townhouse, commercial or
manufacturing use where the parking or solid waste disposal
area abuts a residential zoning district or a lot occupied by a
residential use.
(8) A natural earthen berm of at least four feet in height may be
utilized in conjunction with the screening material.
(9) Any existing multifamily, commercial or industrial use and/or
structure shall not be required to comply with the screening
requirements except in cause of enlargement or exterior
§ 1321 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1321
FWD:782
§ 1322. Propane Storage Tanks. [Ord. 822, 2/15/2007; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
Propane storage tanks shall be installed in accordance with all applicable
federal and state laws, rules and regulations.
§ 1323. Driveways. [Ord. 822, 2/15/2007]
Placement of driveways or expansion of existing driveways shall meet the
impervious coverage requirements of the zoning district.
§ 1324. Unenclosed Storage. [Ord. 822, 2/15/2007]
alteration of same, including alterations to total impervious
coverage.
A. Number per Lot. No more than one per lot, unless approval for a
variance is obtained. Two driveways are permitted on a corner lot,
provided that there is only one driveway per street and the driveways
are located outside of the clear-sight triangle.
B. Setbacks. Driveways shall not connect with a public street within 40
feet of the right-of-way lines of any intersecting streets nor within three
feet of adjoining lot lines.
C. Slope. A driveway shall not exceed a slope of 8% within 25 feet of the
street right-of-way line.
D. Driveway width. No driveway shall provide a curb cut exceeding 24 feet
in width.
E. Surfacing. All driveways shall be paved with concrete or bituminous
paving material.
F. Driveways or off-street parking access from a public alley is permitted,
provided that the building and lot fronts a public street and vehicular or
pedestrian access is provided to the public street. All other regulations
for driveways apply.
1. Recreational Vehicles, Boats, Campers, Trailers, and Trucks. Within any
residential zone or upon any property used principally for residential
purposes, the storage of recreational vehicles, travel trailers, trucks,
boats, and trailers used solely for the transport of the residents'
recreational vehicle(s) owned by the resident of the property is
permitted only according to the following requirements:
A. The temporary parking of one such vehicle or trailer, for periods
not exceeding 72 hours during any seven-day period, is permitted
on a paved surface in any yard, so long as the vehicle is set back no
less than 10 feet from any street right-of-way and five feet from
adjoining property lines.
§ 1321 FOREWORD § 1324
FWD:783
§ 1325. Solar Energy Systems. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
B. The storage of such vehicles shall be permitted behind the building
setback line, so long as the unit is set back no less than five feet
from any adjoining lot line. All areas used for storage shall be
maintained as to keep vegetation properly trimmed and debris or
litter disposed of regularly. All vehicles shall maintain required
licensure and registration and prevent leakage of fuels and/or
lubricants into the ground.
C. No such vehicle shall be stored in the front of the building setback
line. On vacant lots, the vehicle must be stored behind the required
front yard setback line, as specified for principal uses.
D. Screening shall be provided along any side and rear lot lines. Such
screening shall not extend into the required front yard. Screening
shall not be required along a common side lot line when the owner
resides on one lot and stores the vehicle on an adjacent vacant lot
owned by the same owner.
E. The storage or parking of any commercial truck upon any
residentially zoned lot or lot used principally for residential
purposes is prohibited. For purposes of this section, commercial
trucks shall include those that exceed a gross vehicle weight (truck
plus rated payload) of 10,000 pounds. In addition, the parking or
storage of any trailer other than those accessory to a principal
residential use is expressly prohibited on any residentially zoned
lot or a lot used principally for residential purposes.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this regulation is to provide guidelines for the
construction and use of solar energy systems while providing for the
health and safety of all residents.
2. Installation and Construction. The installation and construction of a
solar energy system shall be subject to the following development and
design standards:
A. A solar energy system is permitted in all zoning districts as an
accessory to a residential or a commercial use.
B. A solar energy system may be roof-mounted and/or groundmounted.
C. A solar energy system shall provide power for the principal
residential and commercial use and/or residential accessory use or
commercial use of the property on which the solar energy system is
located and shall not be used for the generation of power for the
sale of energy to others, although this provision shall not be
interpreted to prohibit the sale of excess power generated from
time to time to the local utility company.
§ 1324 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1325
FWD:784
D. A solar energy system connected to the utility grid shall provide
written authorization from the local utility company acknowledging
and approving such connection.
E. A roof-mounted system may be mounted on a principal building or
accessory building. However the solar energy system must be
located no closer than three feet to the edge of the roofline. The
solar energy system must comply with the building height
requirements that are specified in each zoning district.
F. A ground-mounted system shall not be mounted in the front yard of
any principal or accessory building. The surface area shall be
considered part of the building or structure's impervious coverage.
The ground-mounted system shall not exceed 360 square feet of
allowable lot coverage and must meet the accessory height
regulations of that zoning district.
G. The solar panels and supporting equipment shall be considered as
one solar energy system.
H. All mechanical equipment associated with and necessary for the
operation of a solar energy system shall comply with the following:
(1) Mechanical equipment shall be screened from any adjacent
property that is residentially zoned or used for residential
dwelling purposes. The screen shall consist of shrubbery, trees,
or other plant materials which provide a visual screen. A
decorative fence shall meet the requirements of this Section.
(2) The mechanical equipment shall not be located within the front
yard of any structure.
I. Solar panels shall be constructed in such a manner so as not to
direct solar radiation and/or glare onto nearby properties.
J. All power transmission lines from a ground-mounted solar energy
system to any building shall be located underground.
K. The design of the solar energy system shall meet the requirements
of the Uniform Construction Code. The local utility provider must
be contacted in order to determine grid interconnection and net
metering policies. The applicant shall submit certificates of design
compliance obtained by the equipment manufacturers from a
certifying organization and any such design shall be certified by an
engineer registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
L. The solar energy system shall be kept in good repair and sound
condition. If the system remains unused for a period of six
consecutive months, the device and all related structures shall be
dismantled and removed from the lot within 60 days after being
properly notified by the Zoning Officer.
§ 1325 FOREWORD § 1326
FWD:785
§ 1326. Regulations Governing Erection of Energy Generating Wind
Power Devices. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this regulation to promote the safe,
effective and efficient use of wind power devices that are installed to
reduce the on-site consumption of utility-supplied energy. Wind power
devices are subject to reasonable conditions that will protect the
public's health and welfare.
2. Installation and Construction. The installation and construction of wind
power devices is subject to the following development and design
standards;
A. Usage of wind power devices for residential and commercial
purposes shall be permitted in all zoning districts within
Elizabethtown Borough.
B. Wind power devices for residential use on a residential lot shall be
considered an accessory use.
C. Wind power devices shall not be permitted to be mounted on
rooftops in the R-1 Low-Density, R-2 Medium-Density and R-3 High-
Density Residential Zoning Districts. The devices shall not be
permitted to be mounted on the rooftops in the Mixed-Use and
Central Business Districts. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
D. The minimum lot size for the construction of a wind power device
shall be one acre.
E. Wind power devices are not permitted to be constructed in the
front yard of a residential or commercial building.
F. The height of a wind power device shall include the device's tower,
rotor and the point where a blade is perpendicular to the ground.
The height shall not exceed 75 feet in length.
G. The required setback for the structure to be erected is 150% of the
height of the device.
H. The wind power device as well as all mechanical equipment
associated with the device's operation shall be enclosed within a
six-foot-high fence.
I. Noise from any wind power device shall not exceed 60 decibels
when measured from any property line where the unit is located.
J. All electrical and utility lines associated with the wind power device
shall be buried underground.
K. The wind power device shall be kept in good repair and sound
condition. If the wind power device remains unused for a period of
six consecutive months, the device and all related structures shall
be dismantled and removed from the lot within 60 days after being
§ 1326 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1326
FWD:786
§ 1327. Geothermal Systems. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
properly notified by the Borough Zoning Official or the designee of
the Borough Zoning Official.
1. Purpose. The intention of this Section is to enable the Borough of
Elizabethtown to promote the general health and welfare of the
residents of the Borough by regulating and restricting the type of
geothermal systems which may be installed and operated within the
Borough, in order to protect and conserve the supply of underground
water and prevent pollution.
2. Permitting. In addition to all other requirements to obtain a zoning
permit, the application shall state the kind of system to be installed; the
name, address and telephone number of the proposed installer; and the
plot plan of the lot, indicating the size of lot and location of the
geothermal boreholes for heat pump systems. Said site shall be
available for inspection prior to completion.
3. Open Loop Geothermal System Prohibited. No person shall install or
maintain an open loop system within the Borough.
4. Closed Loop Geothermal System Permitted. A person may install and
operate a closed loop geothermal system only in accordance with the
requirements of this Section.
A. No person shall (1) construct or install a geothermal system; (2)
dig, bore, drill, replace, modify, repair or destroy a well that is
intended to be or was part of a geothermal system; or (3) make any
other excavation that may intersect groundwater without first
obtaining a permit from the Borough.
B. The only type of geothermal boreholes permitted to be drilled
within the Borough are:
(1) Air to air.
(2) Closed loop (horizontal).
(3) Closed loop (vertical).
C. The only heat transfer fluids to be used in said system are a
nontoxic environmentally safe material approved by the Borough
Engineer.
D. The only pipe which may be used for installation is geothermal
polyethylene pipe or pipe material meeting the most current
standard of the industry as approved by the Borough Engineer.
E. Certified test results shall be provided to the Borough Engineer and
provided and maintained by the property owner.
§ 1326 FOREWORD § 1327
FWD:787
§ 1328. Outdoor Eating Areas. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
F. All boreholes shall be drilled by Pennsylvania registered/licensed
water well drillers.
G. The property owner shall maintain a well log of the borehole and
"as built" plans showing the location and specifications of closed
loop geothermal components.
H. The contractor shall provide data sheets indicating that the grout
meets the requirements of NSF/ANSI Standard 60, Drinking Water
Treatment Chemicals — Health Effects.
5. System Testing. All geothermal systems installed under the provisions
of this Section must be tested.
A. The system shall be tested hydrostatically at 1 1/2 times the
maximum system design pressure but not less than 200 psi.
B. The duration of each test shall be not less than 15 minutes.
C. All geothermal systems must be pressure checked to the original
standard by a geothermal contractor licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania once every three years from the
system's certification date. Results of the test shall be submitted to
the Borough's Building Code Inspector.
D. No person shall operate a system if a test reveals that it is likely to
leak the heat transfer liquids.
6. System Abandonment.
A. Heat transfer fluid must be removed by displacement with grout.
B. The top of the borehole must be uncovered and capped with grout.
1. Outdoor dining areas shall be kept clean and clear of trash and/or
spilled food. The dining establishment shall provide an appropriate
trash receptacle for its customers to properly discard trash.
2. The dining establishment and/or customers of the establishment shall
comply with the provisions listed in Chapter 10, Part 2, Noise Nuisance.
3. Dining establishments that abut a public roadway shall provide a
physical barrier around the tables and chairs in the form of bollards,
chains, ropes or some other system that will appropriately ensure
safety for all pedestrians. In the Central Business District, the proposal
to create a physical barrier shall conform to the district's architectural
design and must be presented to Borough for approval before being
constructed.
4. Outdoor dining establishments shall maintain 48 inches of sidewalk
area so as not to impede the pedestrian thoroughfare commonly used
by the public.
§ 1327 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1328
FWD:788
§ 1329. Retail Pet Shops. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 1330. Outdoor Hydronic Heaters. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
5. Outdoor dining establishments shall abide by and comply with the
standards and regulations enacted and promulgated by State and
Federal agencies.
6. Restrictions upon outdoor eating, as defined, shall not apply to a
municipally sponsored event(s).
7. Owners of outdoor dining establishments shall safely secure all tables
and chairs during nonbusiness hours.
1. A retail pet shop shall consist of no more than 15 dogs and/or cats, but
may house an unlimited amount of fish, rabbits, gerbils, birds and other
small animals as defined in Part 2, § 201, "pets."
2. A retail pet shop sales area shall not be located closer than 250 feet
from a residential zoning district. Animals shall not be permitted to use
outdoor stalls or runs from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m. The section in which
the animals are temporarily housed shall be adequately soundproofed
so as to prevent the generation of sound.
1. Outdoor hydronic heaters shall be permitted as an accessory use to a
principal use, by right, within all districts on lots that are one acre or
larger. All outdoor hydronic heaters shall comply with the regulations of
this section. It shall be the joint responsibility of the landowner and the
applicant to prove compliance with this Section. This shall include the
requirements of submitting manufacturer's specifications and
maintenance documents, certification testing results, and any other
required documents at the time of the application for both a
construction and zoning permit.
2. Treated or painted wood, furniture, trash, rubbish or garbage, tires,
lawn clippings, woody yard waste(s), plastic materials, waste petroleum
products, paints and paint thinners, chemicals, hazardous wastes, coal,
paper wastes, construction or demolition debris, plywood, animal waste
and/or carcasses shall not be burned in an outdoor hydronic heater.
3. All outdoor hydronic heaters shall have a permanent attached stack.
The minimum height of all stacks shall be 20 feet above the ground and
otherwise installed according to the manufacturer's specifications.
4. Clean wood, corn, wood pellets made from clean wood, home heating
oil, natural gas, or propane that complies with all applicable sulfur
limits and is used as a starter or supplemental fuel for dual-fired
outdoor hydronic heaters or any other materials located in a
manufacturer's list of specifications so long as the material is not
prohibited by federal and state regulation(s) may be burned in an
outdoor hydronic heater.
§ 1328 FOREWORD § 1330
FWD:789
§ 1331. Oil and Gas Operations. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
It is the intent of the Borough to comply with Chapter 33, Local Ordinances
Relating to Oil and Gas Operations, of Title 58 Oil and Gas, of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as added by Act 13 of 2012. Oil and gas
operations, as defined in 58 Pa. C.S.A. § 3301, shall be permitted within the
Borough to the extent of and in the manner required by 58 Pa. C.S.A. § 3304.
All provisions of this Zoning Ordinance shall apply to oil and gas operations
to the maximum extent allowed by Chapter 33 of Title 58.
§ 1332. Short-Term Lodging Accommodations. [Added by Ord. 983,
11/16/2017]
5. Any outdoor hydronic heater shall be located on the same lot on which
the principal use is located.
6. All outdoor hydronic heaters shall meet the certification standards of
the voluntary program of the EPA for Phase I air emission levels of no
more than 0.60 pound of fine particulates per million British thermal
units (BTUs) heat input and any amendments or modifications made
hereafter.
7. All outdoor hydronic heaters that are Phase 1 certified shall contain an
orange hangtag on the boiler structure at all times. Phase 2 certified
outdoor hydronic heaters shall contain a white hang tag on the boiler
structure at all times.
8. All outdoor hydronic heaters shall be located 150 feet from any side or
rear lot lines and/or public road or alley rights-of-way.
9. No signage or any form of advertising shall be utilized or attached to an
outdoor solid-fuel-fired boiler. This requirement shall not include the
make and model description of the outdoor hydronic heater,
manufacturer's required hangtags or warning signs, the hangtags
indicating EPA air quality specifications; or other signage that is
required by law.
10. Outdoor hydronic heaters shall comply with all applicable regulations
of the Uniform Construction Code.
11. In the event that an outdoor hydronic heater is damaged or it is
physically deteriorated or decayed to the point where it no longer is
compliant with this Section, said heater must be removed and or
replaced with a new unit within 60 days of the date that notice is
received from the Zoning Officer. In the event of replacement, all
provisions of this Chapter in effect at the time of replacement shall be
complied with.
12. In the event that the outdoor hydronic heater is abandoned, the boiler,
electrical wires, and any related equipment and structures shall be
dismantled and removed from the property within 60 days of the date it
was abandoned.
§ 1330 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1332
FWD:790
§ 1333. Accessory Dwelling Units. [Added by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
1. Operators of short-term lodging accommodations shall conform to the
following standards:
A. Shall not provide meals for compensation.
B. Shall apply for and receive a residential rental license.
C. The length of stay per transient occupant shall be limited to a
maximum of 30 days.
D. Short-term lodging accommodations shall not exceed the number
of transient occupants allowed within the applicable zoning
district.
E. Operator(s) of short-term lodging accommodations shall not
operate more than 150 cumulative days in a year and must operate
such uses in strict conformance to all applicable provisions of the
Elizabethtown Borough Code of Ordinances.
1. No lot shall contain more than one accessory dwelling unit.
2. If the accessory dwelling unit is a separate structure, the accessory
dwelling unit shall be smaller in both building footprint and height than
the principal building on the lot.
3. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the prescribed conditions
within the residential rental license program, Chapter 5, Part 3.
4. The owner of the lot shall maintain his or her principal primary
residence in either the principal dwelling unit on the lot or in the
accessory dwelling unit.
5. The accessory dwelling unit shall not be sold separately from the
principal building on the lot.
6. The owner of the lot containing an accessory dwelling unit shall be
responsible to secure electric, water and sewer service and shall tender
payment of connection fees and applicable service fees for said utilities.
7. Accessory dwelling units shall comply with the requirements of Chapter
5, Part 1.
8. Accessory dwelling units are not permitted within the Central Business
District.
9. Accessory dwelling units that are detached from the principal building
on the lot shall have a minimum setback of six feet from the rear and
side lot line. Accessory dwelling units that are attached to the principal
building shall meet the setback requirements of the applicable zoning
district.
§ 1332 FOREWORD § 1333
FWD:791
10. The construction of or conversion of an accessory structure, attic or
basement area into an accessory dwelling unit shall meet the most
current form of the Uniform Construction Code. A zoning permit and
construction code permit application shall be required prior to
commencing construction work.
11. An accessory dwelling unit shall comply with all other applicable
provisions of the Elizabethtown Borough Code of Ordinances.
§ 1333 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1333
FWD:792
Part 14
SPECIAL EXCEPTION USES
§ 1401. Special Exception Procedures. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.0]
Special exceptions may be granted or defined by the Zoning Hearing Board
pursuant to the expressed standards and criteria contained herein. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall hear and decide requests for such special
exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria as herein set
forth and on the prescribed application form. In granting a special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter,
as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter. The
Zoning Hearing Board shall pursue the following procedure:
A. The Zoning Hearing Board's decision to grant a permit for a special
exception shall be made only after public notice and public hearing.
Such permit shall apply specifically to the application and plans
submitted and presented at said public hearing. Any subsequent
amendments or additions shall be subject to review and public hearing
by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
B. No application for a permit shall be granted by the Zoning Hearing
Board for any special exception use until said Board has first received
and considered an advisory report thereon from the Planning
Commission with respect to the location of such use in relation to the
needs and growth pattern of the Borough of Elizabethtown, where
appropriate, with reference to the adequacy of the site area and the
arrangement of buildings, driveways, parking areas, off-street loading
and unloading spaces, and other pertinent features of the proposal. The
Zoning Officer may waive this requirement if it is determined that the
use will not have an impact on either current or future uses in the
immediate vicinity, or the normal conduct of residential or
nonresidential uses.
C. The Planning Commission shall have 30 days from the date of its receipt
of the application within which to file its report thereon. In the event
that the Planning Commission shall fail to file its report within 30 days,
such application shall be deemed to have been approved by the
Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may have
representation at the public hearing held by the Zoning Hearing Board
on such application. After receipt of the report, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall hear the application in the same manner and under the
same procedure as it is empowered by law and ordinance to hear cases
and make exceptions to the provisions of this chapter. The Zoning
Hearing Board may thereafter direct the Zoning Officer to issue a
permit if, in its judgment, the request will not be detrimental to the
health, safety and general welfare of the Borough of Elizabethtown.
§ 1401 FOREWORD § 1401
FWD:793
§ 1402. Standard for Specific Special Exception Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/
16/1996, § 14.1]
The following standards shall be met for lack of the uses listed in this
section. Each use shall meet all other requirements of this chapter. In the
case of conflict, the structure regulations shall rule.
§ 1403. Adult Bookstores, Movie Theaters and Performing Arts
Theaters. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.3; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/
15/2007]
D. A special exception use for which a permit is granted by the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be
construed to be a conforming use.
E. A special exception use approval is not transferable either to another
site or for the next occupant of the structure where the use was
granted.
1. No such use shall be located within 800 linear feet of any primary or
secondary school, place of worship, public park, day-care center/child
nursery, library, residential district or any site marked as a proposed
future park location on the Borough Map.
2. No such use shall be located within 1,000 linear feet of any existing
adult bookstore, adult movie theater, or adult massage establishment.
3. A forty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning district,
along the side and rear lot lines but with plantings of an initial minimum
height of six feet unless the use is attached to a building that includes a
minimum of 15 other uses.
4. No obscene or pornographic material or words shall be placed in view
of persons who are not inside of the establishment. Definite precautions
shall be made to prohibit minors from entering the premises.
5. The applicant must prove to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing
Board that such use would not adversely affect the desirable character
of the surrounding area, including property values.
6. No such use shall be used for any purpose that violates any federal,
state or Borough law. Any violation of this zoning requirement involving
a serious criminal offense that the proprietor has or clearly should have
had continuing and/or preknowledge of and allows to occur shall be
sufficient reason for the borough to withdraw the permit under this
chapter.
7. No such use shall be allowed in combination with the sale or
consumption of alcoholic beverages.
§ 1401 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1403
FWD:794
§ 1404. Amusement Arcades. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.3]
§ 1405. Automobile Body Shop. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.4]
Where permitted, or permitted as a special exception, automobile body
shops may be established in accordance with the following:
8. The use shall not include the sale or display of obscene materials.
"Obscene materials" shall be as defined by applicable Federal and State
law.
9. These uses are specifically prohibited in all districts except the
Commercial District.
10. Any private viewing booths shall be completely enclosed and limited to
one person per booth.
11. No use may involve live actual or simulated sex acts for exhibition or
similar purposes.
1. Amusement arcades shall be located at least 1,000 feet from school
buildings, school playgrounds, church buildings and any other
amusement arcade.
2. The amusement arcade shall be located in a separate room, separated
from other uses on the premises and from pedestrian circulation to and
from such other uses.
3. Adequate space shall be provided for each machine so as to allow its
use without overcrowding. A minimum width of two feet shall be
provided per machine where the machine is designed for use by two
players. The depth of the space in front of the machine shall be at least
five feet, and there shall be a minimum aisle width beyond this five feet
of an additional three feet.
4. Readily visible signs shall be installed, with their location, size and text
shown in plans submitted to the Zoning Officer, stating that the use of
machines by persons under 16 years of age shall be prohibited during
normal school hours and, where the premises are used primarily for the
serving or consumption of alcohol, that the use of video games by
persons under the age of 21 is prohibited at all times.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Part 16 herein.
A. All repair and paint work shall be performed within an enclosed
building with sufficient ventilation equipment so that fumes and/or
paint are not evidenced beyond any property line.
B. Buffer yard/screen plantings shall be provided in accordance with the
special yard, lot and screening requirements of this chapter.
C. Stored and/or repaired vehicles shall remain no longer than 30 days
from the date of arrival.
§ 1403 FOREWORD § 1406
FWD:795
§ 1406. Churches, Similar Places of Worship. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 14.5]
§ 1407. Day-Care Residence. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.6]
Not more than the number of children prescribed within the particular
zoning district, excluding children who permanently reside at the residence,
are permitted. In addition, the following requirements shall be met:
A. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements listed below and parking requirements, but in no case
shall the lot area be less than 40,000 square feet.
B. Lot impervious coverage shall not be greater than that required within
the respective district.
C. The lot width at the front building setback line shall be based on the
building size and yard requirements, but in no case shall be less than
100 feet in width.
D. Each lot shall have yards not less than the following depths or widths:
(1) Front yard depth: 100 feet.
(2) Side yards: two in number, width not less than 50 feet.
(3) Rear yard: 100 feet.
E. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than 10 feet in depth shall be
maintained along all property lines and shall be placed in accordance
with the special yard, lot and screening requirements of this chapter.
F. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16 herein.
A. Lot area shall be determined on the basis of type of structure, parking
and access requirements and other applicable standards. In any case, a
day-care residence shall only be permitted in either a single-family
detached, semidetached or attached dwelling.
B. A minimum of 100 square feet of usable outdoor play space on the
premises and 40 square feet of usable indoor space must be provided
for each child present at the facility, including resident children.
C. Outside play shall be limited to the rear yard of such facility and shall
be limited to the hours between 8:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
D. A buffer yard of no less than 10 feet in depth shall be established along
rear and side lot lines in accordance with the special yard, lot and
screening requirements of this chapter. Said buffer yard shall be
provided in addition to required side and rear yards and shall not be
included in determining usable outdoor play area.
§ 1406 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1407
FWD:796
§ 1408. Drive-Through Services. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.7; as
amended by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 1409. Fitness (Exercise) Center. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.8]
§ 1410. Home Occupation. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.9; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
E. Operators are responsible for compliance with all Pennsylvania
Department of Public Welfare licensing/registration requirements and
any other local, State or Federal regulations. The owner shall submit
proof of compliance prior to receiving a permit to operate a day-care
residence.
1. Any drive-in window for any use shall have driveway lanes and waiting
lanes with capacity for sufficient number of vehicles to ensure that
traffic conflicts and hazards are avoided within the site and along the
streets adjoining the use.
2. The drive-through service shall not block or impede in any way a curb,
sidewalk or thoroughfare commonly used by the public whether private
or public.
3. The total number and area of the signs for the drive-through service
shall not exceed the standards prescribed for the zoning district.
4. Lighting will only be permitted to meet minimum safety concerns for
customers and shall not filter into residential zones.
1. Adequate parking must be provided for the total maximum number of
customers and staff that will use the facility at any one time. Public
parking facilities and on street parking shall not be used to meet the
total number of required spaces.
2. Lighting will only be permitted to meet minimum safety concerns for
customers and shall not filter into residential zones.
3. The sole purpose of any health, fitness or exercise center shall be to
improve the physical fitness of the customer, i.e., free weights, tread
mills, variable resistance equipment, nautilus equipment, aerobics,
shower and locker facilities, sauna, steam rooms and the like.
1. A home occupation shall be carried on completely within the dwelling
unit or accessory building.
2. No more than one home occupation per lot shall be permitted.
3. No person other than permanent residents of the dwelling unit shall be
employed in the home occupation with the exception of part-time,
clerical assistance not to exceed 20 hours per week.
4. Not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling unit shall be
devoted to a home occupation.
§ 1407 FOREWORD § 1410
FWD:797
5. There shall be no exterior display or sign (except as permitted in the
regulation of signs in this chapter), no exterior storage of materials, and
no other exterior indication of the home occupation or variation of the
residential character of the main building. Refer to § 1705(1)(G).
6. No offensive noise, vibration, smoke or other particulate matter, heat,
humidity, glare or other objectionable effects shall be produced.
7. A home occupation may include but is not limited to art studios;
dressmaking or alterations; barbershop; beauty parlor; teaching, music
or dance instruction limited to a single pupil at a time; real estate or
insurance office; the professional office of a dentist, physician, lawyer,
engineer, planner, accountant, architect; or any other activities of a
similar nature.
8. A home occupation shall under no circumstances be interpreted to
include a commercial stable or a kennel, video game/arcade, retail
store, weapons sales or repairs, restaurant, funeral parlor or animal
hospital.
9. No expansion of a home occupation, either within the home or to an
adjacent property, shall be permitted.
10. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16 herein.
11. All home occupation uses shall be limited to the owner of the property
and immediate family members of the owner, provided that the property
remains owner-occupied.
12. No-impact home occupations shall be permitted as a matter of right in
all zoning districts. A no-impact home occupation must meet all of the
following criteria:
A. No customer, client, or patient traffic, either vehicular or
pedestrian.
B. No pickup, delivery or removal functions in excess of normal
residential use.
C. Business activity must be compatible with residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
D. Only immediate family members residing in the dwelling may be
employed.
E. No display or sale of retail goods or inventory of a substantial
nature.
F. No outside appearance of a business use, such as parking, signs, or
lights.
§ 1410 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1410
FWD:798
§ 1411. Parking Facilities as a Principal Use. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 14.10]
§ 1412. Public/Private Schools. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 14.11]
All requirements as listed in § 1405 above shall be applied to public/private
school uses.
§ 1413. Commercial Communication Antennas and Towers. [Ord.
766, 5/16/1996; as added by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
G. No equipment or process may create noise, vibration, glare, fumes,
odors, or electrical or electronic interference detectable in the
neighborhood.
H. No solid or sewage discharge, in volume or type, not typical for
residential use.
I. The occupation may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable
floor area within the dwelling.
J. No illegal activity may be engaged in.
K. All home occupation uses shall be limited to the owner of the
property and immediate family members of the owner, provided
that the property remains owner-occupied.
1. Lighting will only be permitted to meet minimum safety concerns for
customers and shall not filter into residential zones.
2. Adequate screening in buffer areas shall be provided to shield vehicles
from the view of nearby properties and normal pedestrian traffic.
3. The design of the structure shall give maximum attention to the safety
of pedestrians in and around the parking facility.
4. Ease of vehicular access, including two means of ingress and egress, to
and from the facility shall be demonstrated.
5. All lot setback requirements shall be adhered to for the particular
zoning district.
6. The hours of operation and staffing requirements must be addressed in
an effort to provide minimum disruption of adjacent properties and to
provide adequate safety for customers.
7. If the proposed use involves the demolition of a structure(s), the
requirements of § 907 shall be followed.
1. If a communication tower, communication equipment, building or
antenna cease being used or are abandoned for a period of one year, the
§ 1410 FOREWORD § 1413
FWD:799
owner, lessor or operator shall dismantle and remove all improvements
within six months following notice to do so by Borough Council.
2. The following criteria apply to all communication antennas and
communication antenna sites. Antennas for radio and television shall
also comply with the regulations in § 1303.
A. Any applicant for erection, alteration or use of a commercial
communication antenna or proposed site shall be by special
exception, and the applicant shall bear the burden of clearly
demonstrating compliance with all of the following standards and
criteria:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate, through technological
evidence and data, that the proposed location is absolutely
necessary for the operation of the system.
(2) Any stand-alone structure not attached to an existing building
shall be set back from each property line that is adjacent to a
residential use, but in no circumstance less than 50 feet from
any property line or any such building. This setback shall be
applicable to guide wire anchors for the structure. Any
structure shall be provided with warning signage for potential
radiation danger, if any. Shielding shall be installed if there is
any potential radiation.
(3) All commercial communication towers shall be completely
enclosed by an eight-foot-high nonclimbable fence with selflocking
gate.
(4) There shall be no electrical, electromagnetic or microwave or
other interference or pollution off-site.
(5) The applicant shall demonstrate that surrounding areas will
not be affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other
debris. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing
devices as approved by the manufacturer.
(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna and
commercial communications tower is the minimum height
required to function satisfactorily. This requirement shall not
be applicable to antennas located upon an existing structure
where the total height of the structure and antenna does not
exceed 150 feet.
(7) If the applicant proposes to erect a new commercial
communication tower, the applicant shall demonstrate that he
or she has contacted the owners of nonresidential structures
within a one-mile radius of the proposed site and has requested
permission to install the antenna on those structures. The
applicant shall clearly demonstrate that it is not feasible to
erect the antenna on these existing structures. The applicant
§ 1413 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1413
FWD:800
shall make a good-faith effort to install the antenna on existing
structures, including but not limited to flagpoles, bell towers,
smokestacks, water towers, silos, electrical transmission
facilities, tall commercial or industrial buildings, previously
existing commercial communication towers of other
communication companies and similar structures.
(8) In order to reduce the number of commercial communication
towers needed in the Borough in the future, any new proposed
commercial communication tower shall be designed to
accommodate other users, including but not limited to police,
fire and emergency services. Applicants shall submit an
agreement with the Borough whereby they agree to negotiate
in good faith with subsequent lessees to lease the commercial
communication tower for co-usage.
(9) If the use of the site requires licensing by any State or Federal
agency, the applicant shall present a copy of the application to
such entities and all decisions by such entities.
(10) If the site operation is fully automated, the applicant shall
provide off-street parking required for two maintenance
workers. If the operation is not fully automated, the applicant
shall provide off-street parking spaces equal to the largest
number of persons on the largest shift working on the property,
but no less than two.
(11) The applicant shall install landscaping to screen the fence and
site and any ground-level features, including but not limited to
buildings, which may be installed. Landscaping shall consist of
evergreen trees to be planted on ten-foot centers maximum,
which shall have a minimum height of six feet at the time of
planting. The Board may require further deciduous plantings
to mitigate the impact of the development on the surrounding
neighborhood. All landscaping must be installed prior to the
issuance of the certificate of use and occupancy by the Zoning
Officer. Existing vegetation on and around the site shall be
preserved unless absolutely necessary to be removed for
functioning of the equipment. This requirement shall not be
applicable to antennas located upon an existing structure
where the total height of the structure and antenna does not
exceed 150 feet.
(12) Commercial communication towers shall be painted with paint
such as to significantly reduce the visual impact thereof;
provided, however, these requirements shall not apply to an
antenna which is installed upon an existing structure that is
not exclusively an antenna support structure. Support
structures shall be painted an acceptable color that will lessen
visual impact. Commercial communication towers shall meet
all minimum Federal Aviation Administration regulations. No
§ 1413 FOREWORD § 1413
FWD:801
commercial communication tower may be artificially lighted
except when required by the Federal Aviation Administration
or by State regulations. All lighting shall be shielded and
provide an antiglare screen to prevent glare from reaching the
surface of the land.
(13)No commercial communications antenna site shall be used for
holding advertising signage.
(14) Use of any structure, other than the commercial
communication tower, shall be limited to that clearly necessary
for functioning of the equipment.
(15) The applicant shall submit proof of compliance with the
Pennsylvania Aviation Act, together with a letter from all
operators of airports located within 30 miles of the proposed
commercial communication antenna site as to their
nonopposition to the construction of the commercial
communication tower or antenna site(s).
(16) All access drive(s) to the commercial communication antenna
site(s) shall contain a right-of-way of at least 20 feet, 10 feet of
which shall be improved with a hard surface in compliance
with the driveway requirements of the Borough of
Elizabethtown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
B. In the case of roof-mounted communication antenna sites, the
following additional criteria shall apply:
(1) Unless communication requirements absolutely require
another location, any roof-mounted antenna site shall be
installed only on that portion of the roof facing the rear of the
property.
(2) No roof-mounted commercial antenna site shall project more
than five feet above the roofline unless the applicant shall
demonstrate that unique site constraints create interference
which mandates a higher placement in order to provide for
proper reception. The applicant shall provide clear and
convincing evidence of the interference which mandate a
higher placement and clear and convincing evidence that the
placement required is the minimum necessary for proper
reception:
(3) If there is any radiation potential, the applicant shall provide
shielding and warning signage.
(4) The applicant shall provide written proof that the site
constraints prohibit placement of a commercial satellite dish
directly on the ground and therefore require the dish to be
elevated.
§ 1413 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1413
FWD:802
§ 1414. Annual Community Fair. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; as amended
by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 1415. Demolition of Buildings. [Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
(5) No roof-mounted commercial communication antenna shall be
located upon a residential unit.
(6) Omni-directional or whip commercial communications
antennas shall not exceed 20 feet in height and seven inches in
diameter.
(7) Directional or panel commercial communications antennas
shall not exceed five feet in height and three feet in width.
C. The applicant shall submit a plan for the removal of the facility
when it becomes functionally obsolete or is no longer in use. If a
commercial communication tower, equipment, building or antenna
cease being used or are abandoned for a period of one year, the
owner, lessor or operator shall dismantle and remove all
improvements following notice.
1. The annual Elizabethtown Fair held each calendar year:
A. Must meet all applicable regulations of the Institutional Zoning
District.
B. Must meet all applicable requirements of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
C. Provide adequate safety on the site, to include certification from
the Elizabethtown Fire Company and Northwest EMS regarding
adequacy of first responder access; identification of all pedestrian
and vehicular access; and written approval of a security plan by the
Elizabethtown Police Department.
D. Parking must comply with the standards set forth in Part 16.
E. No outside storage or display or materials, products, or other
equipment shall occur when the event is not in progress.
F. Shall be designed and operated so that neighboring properties are
not exposed to offensive or excessive noise, amplified music or
vibration, especially from traffic or late-night activity.
2. Any expansion, modification, or additional occurrence of use shall
require separate Zoning Hearing Board approval and shall be subject to
criteria in effect at the time of application.
1. The applicant shall produce a report from a structural engineer
describing the condition of the building necessitating demolition.
§ 1413 FOREWORD § 1415
FWD:803
2. The minimum height for a building replacing a demolished structure
shall be 35 feet.
3. The applicant shall produce, if applicable, official documentation of any
effort to sell the building.
4. The applicant shall provide a plan for proposed disposition of
salvageable material(s).
5. The applicant shall provide photographs of the exterior and interior of
the property.
6. The building shall not be demolished until there is a recorded
subdivision or land development plan for the property and any zoning
approvals for the proposed new use have been obtained.
§ 1415 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1415
FWD:804
Part 15
CONDITIONAL USES
§ 1501. Conditional Use Procedures. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.0]
Where provided for in this chapter, the Borough Council shall hear and
decide requests for conditional uses in accordance with stated standards
and criteria. In granting a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach
such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed
in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended, and
this chapter. The Borough Council may grant approval of a conditional
use, provided that the applicant complies with the following standards
for conditional uses and that the proposed conditional use shall not be
detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the neighborhood.
§ 1502. Standards. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.1; as amended by Ord.
946, 3/21/2013]
1. The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with all conditions
for such conditional use as provided for in this Part.
2. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed conditional use
shall be properly serviced by existing streets. The peak traffic
generated by the use shall be accommodated in a safe and efficient
manner or improvements made in order to effect the same. For a
nonresidential conditional use application, the applicant shall
demonstrate, through the use of traffic studies or other applicable data,
that the granting of the conditional use shall not increase traffic
congestion on streets within the Borough.
3. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed conditional use
shall not negatively impact upon utilities, police protection, fire
protection and parks and recreation facilities. The applicant may
demonstrate, through offsite improvements, the ability to minimize or
remove any potential impact on the surrounding area.
4. The applicant shall submit a site plan, drawn to a scale of not more than
100 feet to one inch, containing the following information:
A. Location of all existing floodplains, watercourses, wetlands, rightsof-
way, easements, areas of subsidence, wooded areas and other
significant natural features on the tract.
B. The location of all streets, adjacent tracts and buildings within 200
feet of the tract.
C. Location of all proposed land uses, including residential uses, by
type.
D. Number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units or nonresidential
structures and lot sizes.
§ 1501 FOREWORD § 1502
FWD:805
§ 1503. Standards For Specific Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 15.2]
The following standards shall be met for each of the uses listed in this
section. In addition, each use listed in this section shall meet all other
requirements of this chapter. In the case of conflict, the stricter regulation
shall rule.
§ 1504. Apartments (Garden Apartments/Apartment Houses). [Ord.
766, 5/16/1996, § 15.3; as amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
E. Location of public water and sewer lines.
F. All proposed site grading and drainage provisions.
G. Zoning data.
H. Certification of site plan by professional engineer/surveyor.
I. Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plans signed by
owner.
5. The applicant shall provide Borough Council with sufficient plans,
studies or other data to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
regulations.
6. The proposed conditional use shall not significantly detract from the
use of neighboring properties or from the character of the
neighborhood and that the use of adjacent property is adequately
safeguarded.
7. Unless otherwise specified by Borough Council or by law, a conditional
use shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning permit or
commence work on the proposed use within one year from the date of
authorization thereof by Borough Council or by the court if such
conditional use has been granted after an appeal, or fails to complete
any erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or change in use
authorized by the conditional use within one year from the date of
issuance of a zoning permit. Borough Council, may for reasonable
cause, extend the time periods of up to five years and/or can impose
different time periods to obtain a zoning permit and to complete
construction for each phase of a multi-phase development authorized
by conditional use approval. An applicant desiring an extension of
either time period and/or desiring that Council shall establish different
time periods for different phases of a development shall make a written
request for the extension specifying the requested length of the
extension sought and the reasons for the requested extension.
8. Conditional use approval is not transferable from the applicant to any
successive owner, heir, assign or lessee.
§ 1502 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1504
FWD:806
§ 1505. Bed-and-Breakfast Establishments with Four or More
Rooms for Rent. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.4; as amended by Ord.
882, 2/15/2007]
Where permitted, or permitted as a conditional use, bed-and-breakfast
establishments with four or more rooms for rent may be established, subject
to the following conditions:
1. Where permitted, or permitted as a conditional use, all newly
constructed apartments shall comply with the following:
A. There shall be not more than eight dwelling units per building.
B. No garden apartment/apartment house building shall be in excess
of three stories in height.
C. No garden apartment/apartment house building shall have an
apartment in the basement and/or below ground level of the
structure.
D. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
provisions of Part 16.
E. A visual structural break in building face shall be provided between
every four dwelling units with separate entrances and/or
townhouse-type structures, such as a walkway or an offset.
F. Trash and recycling receptacles shall not be visible from the street
or adjoining properties.
G. The facade of the building shall be maintained in a consistent
manner so as not to disrupt the streetscape of the neighborhood
and/or applicable residential zoning district.
H. The minimum habitable floor area of each dwelling unit shall be
provided in accordance with the Borough's Existing Structures and
Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 5, Part 1, and § 116). In
addition, the structures in general and each unit shall conform to
the Borough's Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code
(Chapter 5, Part 1), as amended from time to time.
A. Accommodations shall be limited to no more than 10 guest rooms for
rent.
B. Sleeping accommodations shall be located only within the dwelling, and
each guest room shall be a minimum of 250 square feet of habitable
floor space.
C. Each sleeping room shall be limited to two adults each.
D. Meals for compensation shall be provided only to guests of the bed-andbreakfast
establishment. No cooking facilities shall be provided or
permitted in the individual guest rooms.
§ 1504 FOREWORD § 1505
FWD:807
§ 1506. Clubs, Lodges and Fraternal Organizations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 15.5]
In districts where permitted, or permitted as a conditional use, these and
similar uses are restricted to those not conducted primarily for gain,
although a dining room may be operated for the benefit of club members,
provided that no permanent sign advertising the sale of food or beverages
will be permitted. Buildings or structures hereafter converted or erected for
such use are subject to all applicable regulations for the district in which
the facility is to be located. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than
five feet in depth shall be maintained along all property lines abutting a
residential use.
§ 1507. Day-care Centers. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.6]
§ 1508. Funeral Homes. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.7]
E. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Part 16 herein.
F. Signs shall be in compliance with Part 17 herein.
1. Operators shall comply with all Pennsylvania Department of Public
Welfare licensing/registration requirements and any other local, State
or Federal regulations. The owner shall submit proof of compliance
prior to receiving a permit to operate a day-care center.
2. Lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements, parking and access requirements and other applicable
standards but in no case shall be less than 8,000 square feet plus 500
square feet for every child over 10.
3. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be in compliance
with applicable district requirements.
4. Outside play shall be limited to the hours between 7:00 a.m. and 7:00
p.m. If an outside play area is to be provided, it shall be completely
enclosed with a chainlink or closed wooden fence.
5. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Part 16 herein.
6. No outdoor storage of materials which may be construed as a potential
hazard shall be permitted.
7. If play equipment or toys are used outside the structure, the entire lot
shall be cleaned and free of the equipment or toys at the end of each
business day.
8. In residential districts, day-care centers shall maintain an exterior
appearance that resembles and is compatible with any existing
dwellings in the neighborhood.
9. Each center shall include adequate measures to insure the safety of
children from traffic or other nearby hazards.
§ 1505 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1508
FWD:808
§ 1509. Group Homes. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.8; as amended by
Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements, parking and access requirements and other applicable
standards, but in no case shall be less than 5,000 square feet in any
residential district.
2. Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks shall be 15 feet.
3. Lot width shall be determined by the size of the building and setbacks.
4. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than five feet in depth shall be
maintained along rear and side lot lines abutting a residential use.
1. Lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements, parking and access requirements and other applicable
standards, but in no case shall be less than 12,000 square feet.
2. The minimum front, side and rear yard setbacks shall be no less than 25
feet.
3. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with Part 16 herein.
4. All other applicable provisions of this chapter and the following
standards:
A. Dwelling type. A group home shall only be allowed in a singlefamily
detached house.
B. The use shall be licensed under the applicable State rules and
regulations.
C. No more than one group home per block is permitted, and no group
home shall be located nearer than 500 feet from the lot on which
another group home is located (such distance shall be measured in
a horizontal straight line from the nearest point on one lot to the
nearest point on the other lot).
D. One off-street parking space shall be provided for:
(1) The supervisor.
(2) Each additional employee per shift.
(3) Every resident reasonably capable of driving a vehicle.
E. The group home activity shall not be related to and include the
criminal rehabilitation of either juveniles or adults, nor the
criminally insane, nor serious alcohol or drug addiction, nor the
care or housing of any persons clinically diagnosed as prone to
violence, nor the rehabilitation of registered sexual offenders and/
or violent sexual predators.
§ 1508 FOREWORD § 1509
FWD:809
§ 1510. Ground-Floor Dwelling Unit in the Central Business
District. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.9]
Ground-floor dwelling units, in the Central Business District, may be
granted as a conditional use, in the rear of the structure only, if no other
reasonable use can be found or demonstrated for the unit or part of the
structure. The unit shall have a commercial facade, and the appearance
of the overall structure shall be maintained as a commercial unit in
appearance.
§ 1511. Nursing Homes. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.10]
F. If the group home is located in a residential district or subdivision,
it shall be maintained and/or constructed to ensure that it is closely
similar in appearance, condition and character to the other
residential structures in the area.
G. The group home shall register its location, number of residents and
sponsoring agency with the Borough and such information shall be
available to the public. The group home shall be subject to the
residential inspection program or any safety standard as adopted
by formal resolution and/or ordinance of Borough Council.
H. A statement setting forth full particulars on the operation to be
conducted and to include any needed approvals of the Pennsylvania
Departments of Health, Labor and Industry, Aging and Public
Welfare shall be filed with the Borough.
I. The group home shall notify the Borough immediately if there is a
change in the type of clients in the home, or if State certification
expires or is withdrawn.
J. Minimum lot area. The minimum lot area requirements for the
zoning district shall be met, but in no case shall the lot size be less
than 12,000 square feet for each group home in a single-family
detached dwelling.
K. Off-street parking areas of more than five spaces shall be buffered
from adjacent existing single-family dwellings by an appropriate
planting screen.
A. Each unit shall have two off-street parking spaces subject to the
requirements of § 911.
B. The applicant needs to clearly demonstrate that the proposed space
cannot be used for commercial purposes due to location, size or other
limiting circumstances.
C. A ground-floor dwelling unit cannot be created through a building
renovation or alteration.
§ 1509 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1511
FWD:810
§ 1512. (Reserved)82
§ 1513. Public/Private Schools. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.12]
§ 1514. Shopping Center. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.13]
1. The facility shall be constructed and operated in accordance with
applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations.
2. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than five feet in depth shall be
established along rear and side lot lines.
3. The use shall provide for passive recreation on at least 15% of the lot.
This area may include outdoor sitting areas and pedestrian or
wheelchair pathways.
4. There shall be a minimum of 500 square feet of total lot area per
resident.
5. Principal and accessory buildings shall be set back a minimum of 50
feet from the lot line of an existing dwelling.
1. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements listed below, and parking requirements, but in no case
shall the lot area be less than 40,000 square feet.
2. Lot impervious coverage shall not be greater than that required within
the respective district.
3. The lot width at the front building setback line shall be based on the
building size and yard requirements, but in no case shall be less than
100 feet in width.
4. Each lot shall have yards not less than the following depths or widths:
A. Front yard depth: 100 feet.
B. Side yard: two in number, width not less than 50 feet.
C. Rear yard: 100 feet.
5. A buffer yard/screen planting of no less than 10 feet in depth shall be
maintained along all property lines and shall be placed in accordance
with the special yard, lot and screening requirements of this chapter.
6. Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the provisions
of Part 16 herein.
1. The center must be a totally planned and coordinated commercial
development located on contiguous land under single ownership or
82.Editor's Note: Former § 1512, Outdoor Eating Activity (Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 15.11, as
amended by Ord. 876, 8/17/2006), was repealed by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013.
§ 1511 FOREWORD § 1514
FWD:811
§ 1515. College-Related Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996; as amended by
Ord. 798, 6/17/1999, § 2; and by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
Where permitted as a conditional use, certain structures within the R-1
Low-Density Residential Zoning District may be used for college-related
uses subject to Borough Council's review of and satisfaction with all of the
following standards and also subject to an applicant's compliance with all
other provisions of this chapter and other applicable Borough ordinances
and codes.
control; all proposed uses shall be submitted on the total development
of the site.
2. The center must be located on a collector or arterial road as defined in
the Borough's Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter
22].
3. The lot area shall be determined on the basis of building size, yard
requirements of the zoning district but in no case shall the lot area be
less than five acres.
4. A land development plan must be submitted in accordance with the
Borough's Subdivision/Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
5. Review of a proposed shopping center as a conditional use, shall
include but not be limited to the following issues: market research and
feasibility information, traffic and circulation study, lighting of all
buildings and parking areas, stormwater runoff and screening, off
street parking, signage and access regulations as listed in this chapter.
6. The Borough Council may require sufficient studies and information to
adequately review a proposed shopping center plan.
A. The application and plans presented in accordance with the conditional
use standards set forth in this chapter must specify the number of
employees — full-time, part-time and temporary — that will occupy or
use the structure, their specific function and the anticipated amount of
staff, visitor and/or guest traffic expected.
B. The application and plans submitted in accordance with the conditional
use standards set forth in this chapter must make provision for
adequate parking for the site/structure. Borough Council shall, in its
sole discretion, determine and approve the plan for the adequacy of
parking for the site/structure. Parking for the site/structure may be on
the site or off site as required by Council in its sole discretion.
C. The proposed use for the structure and the hours of operation for the
use within the structure shall be submitted as part of the application. If
a visitor residential use is proposed for the structure, there shall be no
less than 500 square feet of habitable floor space for each proposed
visitor in residence. All other applicable sections of the Borough
Existing Structures and Property Maintenance Code (Chapter 5, Part 1)
§ 1514 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1515
FWD:812
shall apply to the structure. At no time shall more than five persons be
permitted to be in residence within any structure, no matter how many
square feet may be available in it. If the provisions of this condition
relating to square feet would ever be deemed to be invalid or
unenforceable by any court of competent jurisdiction considering the
matter, any prior approval for visitor residential use of the structure will
be no longer permitted.
D. A plan which details the type and size of all proposed signs shall
accompany the application.
E. Proof that the proposed use has been reviewed and discussed with all
adjacent property owners of the proposed site and/or structure shall be
submitted with the application.
F. If the structure is to be used as a residence for students, there must be
500 square feet of habitable floor space for each student. All other
applicable sections of the Borough Existing Structures and Property
Maintenance Code (Chapter 5, Part 1) shall apply to these units and/or
structure. In no instance shall more than five students be permitted to
be housed within any proposed residence.
G. The outside appearance of the structure must remain residential in
character regardless of the use proposed for the site. The maintenance
of the structure and the yard shall be performed at the same level and
intensity as those residences adjacent to the proposed college-related
use.
H. All external lighting of the structure and lot must remain residential in
nature and be consistent with the type and intensity of the residential
exterior lighting throughout the greater neighborhood.
I. Proof must be presented by the applicant that the applicant holds legal
title to the property in fee simple. A certificate of title from an attorney
or reputable title insurance company regularly doing business in the
County of Lancaster and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall be
sufficient to establish such ownership along with a copy of the recorded
deed of conveyance.
J. Borough Council shall decide the appropriateness of each application
for the college-related use of a residential structure on a case-by-case
basis. Borough Council is solely responsible for determining whether
the proposed use is compatible with the site and with neighboring
structure and may approve or disapprove any conditional use request
submitted under this section.
K. Any change, modification, alteration or change in type or level of
intensity pertaining to any aspect of a previously approved collegerelated
conditional use shall be a basis for a new hearing. Borough
Council is under no obligation to grant such a conditional use
application based upon a change, modification, alteration or change in
type or level of intensity in a previously approved college-related use.
§ 1515 FOREWORD § 1515
FWD:813
§ 1516. Construction or Modification of Structures, Buildings, and/
or Uses that Result in Structures, Buildings or Uses in Excess of
10,000 Square Feet. [Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; as amended by Ord. 882,
2/15/2007]
For construction or modification of structures, buildings and/or uses which
result in structures, buildings, or uses in excess of 10,000 square feet, the
following shall be provided for review:
Any change, modification, alteration or change in type or level of
intensity for an approved conditional use under this section, without
prior notification and subsequent approval by Borough Council, shall be
deemed sufficient justification for revocation of an approved use of a
structure or site.
A. A complete description of the intended use of the property and/or
building, including a ground-level elevation plan and sketch plan.
B. A description of any intended building renovations, modifications,
demolition, or new construction, both interior and exterior.
C. Review and approval of a comprehensive traffic impact study detailing
traffic flow and movement both on and off site, parking requirements
and ability of emergency vehicles to access the site. The traffic study
shall detail the effect that the proposed or expanded use and/or
structure will have on the adjoining streets and neighborhood. It shall
include data demonstrating the flow of traffic based on points of origin
and destination for employees, visitors, and customers for each building
or use on the property. The applicant must demonstrate that the site for
the proposed use or structure can accommodate the required elements
to mitigate off-site traffic and parking concerns that may result from the
proposed use.
D. A parking study must be submitted detailing the number of parking
spaces required in accordance with Part 16 of this chapter. Council will
consider the proximity of the proposed parking to the use or structure
for appropriateness for the intended use. In no event shall on-street
public parking be considered a part of the required parking spaces for
the proposed use.
E. The impact of the proposed or expanded structure or use on any
historically significant structures or land.
F. A landscape plan for the intended use must be submitted, with a
particular focus on screening for parking lots, the planting of trees in
accordance with the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance,83
and the aesthetics of the proposed use in relation to neighboring
properties.
83.Editor's Note: See Ch. 22, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 1515 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1516
FWD:814
§ 1517. Adaptive Reuse as a Conditional Use. [Ord. 866, 12/15/2005,
§ 3; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Adaptive reuse is a process that adapts a building or a group of buildings
for new uses in order to retain their historical, architectural, and economic
features and provide environmental, social, and economic benefits to the
neighborhood and community. Adaptive reuse applies when 1) the proposed
use of the building or group of buildings does not meet zoning requirements
for the zoning district in which the building or group of buildings is located
and 2) the long-term benefits of the proposed adaptive reuse to the
neighborhood or community of the proposed project outweigh the
alternative of demolition, vacancy or underutilization of the building or
group of buildings. Where permitted, or permitted as a conditional use,
adaptive reuse of a building or group of buildings may occur subject to the
following conditions:
G. Any outside storage or display areas shall not occupy any portion of a
public street or alley, right-of-way, or any other area intended for
vehicular or pedestrian use, required parking areas or required front
yard.
H. Outside storage areas shall be fully shielded from view from all public
streets and other properties with adequate landscaping and/or fencing.
I. All proposed structures or buildings shall maintain a pedestrianoriented
street frontage design.
J. All proposed uses shall conform to the performance standards as
detailed in Part 13 of this chapter.
K. All parking areas shall be screened from adjacent residential uses,
streets, and pedestrian walkways using an adequate arrangement of
trees and/or shrubs and meet the regulations in § 1321 in the
supplemental regulations.
L. Certification for appropriate access for emergency vehicles shall be in
writing by the Friendship Fire and Hose Co. No. 1 and Northwest
Emergency Medical Services.
M. The proposed or expanded use or structure shall not impact any
planned improvement, if any, detailed on the Official Map.
N. All other regulations of the district, including permitted uses, height
regulations, lot area, width and impervious coverage must be met.
A. The building or group of buildings proposed for adaptive reuse must
have historical, architectural, or economic significance to the
neighborhood and community, justifying renovation and preservation,
as determined by recommendation of the Borough's Planning
Commission and decision of Borough Council.
§ 1516 FOREWORD § 1517
FWD:815
B. A detailed written proposal for the adaptive reuse, the type of use
proposed, and explanation of how the proposed adaptive reuse presents
long-term benefits to the neighborhood and community where the
building or group of buildings is located must be provided. The
application package must also include a sketch plan, architectural
elevations, and landscaping design plans for proposed changes to the
building(s) or lot.
C. The proposed adaptive reuse must be a commercial or residential use
as permitted by right or conditional review, not including special
exception uses, in the Borough's CBD and/or residential zoning districts
as outlined by the Borough's zoning ordinance or a use of essentially
the same impact and character as determined by recommendation of
the Borough's Planning Commission and decision of Borough Council.
D. If the proposed parking for the adaptive reuse does not meet the
requirements of Part 16 of this chapter, the applicant must provide for
Planning Commission review and Borough Council approval a detailed
parking proposal for each proposed use, including 1) the projected
number of all tenants and employees occupying the building(s) and the
projected number of other occupants of the building(s) at peak times of
use, and 2) a plan for how the parking needs for each proposed use are
to be met.
E. The proposed adaptive reuse of a building or group of buildings
encourages the rehabilitation and reuse of the building in a manner that
preserves features of historical, architectural, or economic significance.
F. The proposed adaptive reuse does not displace viable uses for the
zoning district in which it is located.
§ 1517 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1517
FWD:816
Part 16
OFF-STREET PARKING
§ 1601. General Parking Regulations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 16.0;
as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
§ 1602. Off-Street Parking Facilities Requirements. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 16.1; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
Any of the following facilities hereafter erected or enlarged, or any facility
hereafter converted into one of the following uses, or any open area
1. Off-street parking facilities shall be provided to lessen congestion in the
streets. The facilities required herein shall be available for patrons/
employees throughout the hours of operation of the particular business
or use for which such facilities are provided for residents and visitors of
residential uses. The term "parking space" includes either covered
garage space or uncovered parking space located off the public right-ofway
(and not a municipally owned parking lot or space). All parking
spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicle for which the use is
intended. The net parking space per vehicle shall not be less than nine
feet wide and 18 feet long. Parking spaces and the approaches thereto
shall be paved surfaces or stabilized surface subject to a favorable
recommendation for approval by the Borough Engineer. For purposes of
this Chapter, a stabilized surface is hereby defined as an approved allweather,
dustless surface.
2. All parking spaces shall be ample in size for the vehicle for which the
use is intended. The net parking space per vehicle shall not be less than
nine feet wide and 18 feet long. Parking spaces and the approaches
thereto shall be paved surfaces or stabilized surface subject to a
favorable recommendation for approval by the Borough Engineer. For
purposes of this chapter, stabilized surface is hereby defined as an
approved all-weather, dustless surface.
3. Handicapped Parking.
A. The latest Federal standards for handicapped parking must be met.
The minimum size shall be 13 feet by 18 feet for each space.
B. Number of spaces. Any lot including at least 10 off-street parking
spaces shall include a minimum of one handicapped space. A
minimum of 2% of all off-street parking spaces required for use
shall be handicapped spaces.
C. Location. Handicapped parking spaces shall be located where they
would result in the shortest possible accessible distance to an
accessible building entrance.
4. Parking in the Central Business District must comply with the
regulations in § 911.
§ 1601 FOREWORD § 1602
FWD:817
hereafter used shall be provided with not less than the minimum parking
spaces and loading/unloading areas as set forth below, together with
adequate accessways, driveways or other means of circulation and access
to and from a street.
A. Specific Parking Space Requirements. [Amended by Ord. 983, 11/16/
2017]
Uses Required Parking Spaces
1. Automobile body shop;
automobile service
station
6 per service bay, plus 1 space for
every employee (full time and part
time).
2. Automobile wash 2 per washing lane.
3. Bank/financial institution 1 per 150 square feet, plus 2
convenient spaces for each automatic
banking transaction machine.
4. Bed and breakfast
establishment, accessory
dwelling units, rooming
units, and short-term
accommodations
1 per bedroom plus 2 for the
dwelling unit
5. Convenience store 1 per 200 square feet of floor area.
6. Day-care center (nursery
school)
1 per employee (full time or part
time), plus 1 safe off-street loading/
unloading space per 5 children.
7. Funeral home/mortuary 1 per 50 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
8. Group home 1 per 4 residents, plus 1 per
employee in the maximum working
shift and 1 per advisor residing
within the home (if any).
9. Hotel and motel 1 per room plus 1 per employee (fulltime
or part-time)
10. Industrial use
(manufacturing or
assembly plant)
1 per 800 square feet.
11. Laundromat 1 per 2 washing machines, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
12. Medical center 1 per 250 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
13. Nursing home 1 per 3 beds, plus 1 space per
employee (full time or part time).
14. Office 1 per 300 square feet.
§ 1602 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1602
FWD:818
Uses Required Parking Spaces
15. Places of public or
private assembly
(church, community
center, theater or similar
meeting and assembly
use)
1 per 3 seats or 1 per 100 square
feet where no seats are provided,
plus 1 per employee (full time or part
time).
16. Residential use 2 per dwelling unit.
17. Restaurant, bar and
tavern, fast-food
establishment
1 per 30 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
18. Retail store and shop 1 per 200 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
19. School 1 per 5 students, plus 1 per
employee, volunteer, and visitor (full
time and part time).
20. Shopping centers 1 per 250 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
21. Vehicular sales 1 per 15 vehicles on display, inside or
outside, plus 1 space for every
employee (full time or part time).
22. Warehouse distribution 1 per 1,000 square feet, plus 1 per
employee (full time or part time).
B. All Other Uses Not Provided for Herein. For all other uses not provided
for herein, required parking spaces shall be determined by a study to be
prepared by the developer and approved by the Borough Engineer. The
study shall include the following:
(1) Type of use and estimated number of total trips generated during
peak conditions (inbound and outbound).
(2) Estimated parking duration per vehicle trip (turnover rate).
(3) Based on estimated number of trips generated and average parking
duration per trip, calculate number of spaces required.
(4) Estimated number of employees; one space to be provided for
every employee working on any given shift.
C. Additional parking in certain situations. As part of any required review,
the Planning Commission or Zoning Officer or Zoning Hearing Board
may require a use to provide off-street parking beyond what is required
by this Part where such Commission/Zoning Officer/Board clearly
demonstrates that such parking is needed because of the particular
circumstances of the use.
§ 1602 FOREWORD § 1603
FWD:819
§ 1603. Location and Management Requirements. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 16.2]
1. Existing Parking. Structures and uses existing on the effective date of
this chapter shall not be subject to the requirements of this Part so long
as the type or extent of use is not changed, provided that any parking
facility now serving such structures or uses shall not in the future be
reduced below such requirements.
2. Changes in Requirements. Whenever there is an alteration of a
structure or a change or extension of a use or a change in the floor area,
number of employees, number of units or seating capacity which
increases the parking requirements according to the standards, the
total additional parking required for the alteration, change or extension
shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of that section.
3. Conflict with Other Uses. No parking area shall be used for any use that
interferes with its availability for the parking need it is required to
serve.
4. Continuing Obligation. All required parking facilities shall be provided
and maintained so long as the use exists which the facilities were
designed to serve. Off-street parking facilities shall not be reduced in
total extent after their provision. Reasonable precautions are to be
taken by the owner of particular uses to assure the availability of
required facilities for the employees or other persons whom the
facilities are designed to serve. They shall at no time constitute a
nuisance, hazard or unreasonable impediment to traffic.
5. Drainage, Surfacing and Maintenance. Drainage, surfacing and
maintenance of off-street parking areas, including driveways and
access drives, shall be completed in accordance with the Elizabethtown
Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance [Chapter 22].
6. Computation of Spaces. Where the computation of required parking
space results in a fractional number, any fraction shall be counted as
one.
7. Location of Spaces.
A. Single- and two-family residential off-street parking spaces shall be
provided on the same lot or premises with the use served.
B. Parking spaces for multiple-dwelling buildings, commercial and
industrial uses shall be readily accessible to the buildings served
thereby. Such spaces shall be in the same zoning district as the
principal building or open area and conform to the following
regulations:
(1) The required parking spaces shall be located within 600 feet of
the principal building or open space in question measured from
§ 1603 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1603
FWD:820
§ 1604. Design Standards. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 16.3; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
the edge of structure to edge of parking lot closest to
structure.
(2) The applicant for a use or building permit shall submit, with his
application, a document duly executed and acknowledged
which subjects such parcels of land to parking uses in
connection with the principal use to which it is accessory. Upon
issuance of a permit, the Zoning Officer shall cause such
document to be recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds.
8. Lighting.
A. All public parking areas shall be adequately lighted during afterdark
operating hours. All light standards shall be located on raised
parking islands and not on the parking surface.
B. Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking or loading areas
shall be shielded from any street or residential use.
C. Lighting used for normal hours of operation shall not be used after
the close of business. Only low-level security lighting may be used
after the close of business.
1. The Borough requires the following for commercial uses:
A. The interior parking area shall be landscaped with sufficient shade
trees to provide fifty-percent shade within 15 years of installation.
B. All landscaping and screening shall be maintained by the property
owner.
C. Parking for commercial uses, as defined in this chapter, shall be
screened from adjacent residential uses, streets and walkways
using trees and shrubs.
D. Completion of landscaping requirements may be postponed, due to
seasonal weather conditions, for a period not to exceed six months
from the time of project completion.
E. Off-street parking facilities shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the Elizabethtown Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 22) in addition to complying with
the provisions of this Part.
2. Where the required amount of parking spaces conflicts with the
requirements listed in § 1604, the applicant, upon approval from the
Zoning Officer, may substitute parking spaces with approved bike
racks.84
84.Editor's Note: For specific requirements for parking spaces, see § 1602.
§ 1603 FOREWORD § 1605
FWD:821
§ 1605. Motor Vehicle Access. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 16.4]
Motor vehicle access to lots shall be provided in accordance with the
Elizabethtown Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
[Chapter 22].
§ 1606. Reduction in Off-Street Parking Areas. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 16.5; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
1. The Borough recognizes:
A. The importance of providing adequate, well-designed off-street
parking areas.
B. The need to limit the amount of paved parking areas to preserve
open space and limit stormwater runoff.
C. That unique circumstances associated with a land use may justify a
reduction in the parking requirements of § 1602.
2. Reduction of parking requirements may be permitted as a conditional
use by the Borough Council upon recommendation by the
Elizabethtown Borough Planning Commission if the following
conditions are met:
A. The design of the parking lot on the subdivision or land
development plan identifies the ability to provide the required
number of spaces. The plan identifies actual spaces provided and
with justifying documentation.
B. A conditional reduction to 80% of the required number of parking
spaces.
C. The balance of the area is conditionally reserved as open space for
the intent of this section. The reserved area may not be buffer area
and must be suitable to provide parking space.
D. A reduction of spaces may be approved where there are multiple
uses of parking spaces (shared parking) and because of the nature
of business have different peak uses and/or the additional use is
supplemental to the primary use.
E. Area reserved for parking must remain as open space and cannot
be used for additional use parking.
F. A written agreement between the Borough and the developer will
identify the various conditions of parking reduction requirements,
provide for a review one year after last occupancy certificate is
issued of parking needs and identify if additional parking is
required.
G. As part of the agreement, the Borough may require the developer
to:
§ 1605 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1606
FWD:822
§ 1607. Off-Street Loading/Unloading. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 16.6]
(1) Require a study of traffic flow, parking, parking requirements
and recommendations performed by a registered professional
engineer agreeable to both parties.
(2) Post a bond, escrow account or other assurance to cover the
cost of a traffic study.
H. Provide that additional spaces, if needed, will be supplied at the
owner's expense.
1. General Requirements.
A. Each use shall provide off-street loading facilities, which meet the
requirements of this Part, sufficient to accommodate the maximum
demand generated by the use.
B. At the time of site plan review, the applicant shall prove that the
use will have sufficient numbers and sizes of loading facilities and
that no conflicts will be created. For the purposes of this Part,
loading shall include unloading.
2. Design and Layout of Off-Street Loading Facilities. Off-street loading
facilities shall be designed to conform to the following specifications:
A. Each off-street loading space shall be of sufficient size to provide
for the largest vehicle that will load or unload to serve the use. This
size shall be at least 14 feet in width by 60 feet in depth for a
tractor-trailer, and 12 feet in width and 35 feet in depth for smaller
trucks.
B. Each space shall have sufficient maneuvering room separate from
other parking and loading areas to avoid traffic conflicts within and
outside of the lot.
C. Each space and the needed maneuvering room shall be located
entirely on the lot being served and be located outside of required
buffer areas, off-street parking setbacks and street rights-of-way.
D. An appropriate means of access to a street or alley shall be
provided.
E. No such facilities shall be designed or used in any manner so as to
constitute a significant nuisance, public safety hazard or an
unreasonable impediment to traffic.
3. Fire Lanes. Fire lanes shall be provided where required by State or
Federal regulations or other local ordinances. The specific locations of
these lanes are subject to review by the Borough.
§ 1606 FOREWORD § 1607
FWD:823

Part 17
SIGNS85
§ 1701. Signs. [Ord. 882, 2/15/200786]
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
provisions of this Part and all other ordinances and regulations relating to
the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices. A sign
shall be any structure or device for visual communication that is used for
the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
§ 1702. Sign Definitions. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; as amended by Ord.
946, 3/21/2013]
ADVERTISING AND REAL ESTATE SIGN — A sign intended:
BILLBOARD SIGN — Same as "individual business freestanding signs."
DEVELOPMENT SIGN — A sign advertising the development of a premises,
tract or property by a builder, developer or contractor or other party
interested in such sale or development.
DIRECTIONAL SIGN — A sign indicating the direction or location of
premises. Also included are real estate directional signs, which indicate
the direction or location of a property for sale or lease, including signs for
special real-estate-related events such as tours or open houses or similar
events.
ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER SIGN — A sign that repetitively indicates
the time, temperature, and date.
FLASHING SIGN — A sign whose illumination is not kept constant in
intensity at all times when in use and which exhibits changes in light, color,
direction or animation. Flashing signs shall include signs which blink on or
off, strobe lighting and the like. Electronic message center signs are not
flashing signs.
GARAGE/YARD SALE SIGN — A sign advertising the sale of personal items
at a premises.
HOME OCCUPATION SIGN — A sign advertising the business, occupation,
activity or use conducted within a residential dwelling or unit.
To display information regarding any contractor or other service or
business performing work on a lot or premises provided that such sign
is removed immediately after the work is completed; or
A.
To relate information regarding a lot or property for sale, lease or rent,
excluding real estate directional signs.
B.
85.Editor's Note: The Table Of Sign Requirements Is Included At The End Of This Chapter.
86.Editor's Note: This ordinance superseded former Part 17, Signs, as amended.
§ 1701 FOREWORD § 1702
FWD:825
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS AWNING SIGN — A sign painted on or attached
to the cover of a metal, wooden, or canvas frame of a structural overhang,
whether movable, hinged, rolling, folding, stationary or permanent.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS FREESTANDING SIGN — A sign intended to
advertise a business, a nonprofit organization, or any other use. An
individual business freestanding sign is on a self-supporting post or frame
not attached to any building, wall or fence but in a fixed location. This
sign does not include advertising and real estate signs, directional signs,
sidewalk signs or other temporary or portable signs.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS PROJECTING SIGN — A sign to advertise a
business or use, that is wall-mounted and perpendicular to the building
surface.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS ROOF SIGN — A sign to advertise a business
or use, erected upon a roof of any building or structure or part thereof,
including the trim attached to the roof.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS SPECIAL EVENT SIGN — A sign to advertise a
special event for a business or use that is temporary in nature, such as a
sale event, grand opening, going-out-of-business, or other similar event.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS WALL SIGN — A sign to advertise the business or
use, painted on or affixed to and paralleling the outside wall of a building
and extending no more than 12 inches from such wall. Murals are
considered as individual business wall signs.
INDIVIDUAL BUSINESS WINDOW SIGN — A sign advertising the business,
products on display within the business and/or the use, which is painted or
mounted onto a window pane or which is hung directly inside the window,
for the purpose of identifying any premises from the street or sidewalk.
OFFICIAL SIGN — A sign erected by and for a federal, state, county or
municipal agency.
POLITICAL SIGN — A sign promoting an individual for an elected federal,
state, county or local office.
RESIDENTIAL IDENTIFICATION SIGN — A sign or nameplate identifying a
house number and/or name of the occupant of a residential property.
SIDEWALK SIGN — A sign not permanently attached to the ground or
other permanent structure, meant to be portable in nature and removed
at the end of the business day, such as menu or sandwich boards, flags,
balloons, or other inflatable objects used for advertising or umbrellas used
for advertising.
§ 1703. General Provisions. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; as amended by
Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
1. No sign shall be erected, enlarged or relocated until a permit has been
issued by the Zoning Officer, unless otherwise stated in this chapter.
§ 1702 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1703
FWD:826
2. No sign shall be placed in such a position that it will cause danger or
hazard on a street or sidewalk by obscuring view and in no case, except
for official signs, shall signs be placed within the required clear-sight
triangle.
3. No sign, except official signs and sidewalk signs, shall be allowed within
the street right-of-way. A sidewalk sign shall not be located in a public
accessway.
4. No portion of any individual business freestanding sign shall be located
closer to any lot line than 1/2 the required yard for the district in which
it is located or 10 feet from the property line, whichever is greater.
5. No person shall paint, paste, brand, stamp, or in any manner
whatsoever permanently attach to any tree, telegraph, electric light or
other pole on any street in the Borough any written, printed, painted or
other advertisement, bill, notice, sign, card or poster.
6. No sign shall be erected containing information on which it states or
implies that a property may be used for any purpose not permitted
under the applicable district provisions of this chapter.
7. No sign, except for yield, regulatory or official municipal signs, shall
use the words "stop," "caution," or "danger," or shall use "stop" or
"yield" signs in shape or color, or shall simulate a traffic or regulatory
sign.
8. In addition to the other requirements of this Part, every sign must be
constructed of durable materials, be kept in good repair, not be allowed
to become dilapidated, and be in compliance with other applicable
State and local codes and ordinances.
9. If the Zoning Officer finds that any sign is unsafe or insecure, or is a
menace to the public, or has been constructed or erected or is being
maintained in violation of the provisions of this chapter, he shall give
written notice to the owner thereof. If the owner fails to remove or alter
the sign so as to comply with the standards herein set forth within 10
days after such notice, such sign may be removed or altered to comply
by the Zoning Officer at the expense of the owner of the property on
which it is located. The Zoning Officer may cause any sign or other
advertising structure which is in immediate peril to persons or property
to be removed summarily and without prior notice, provided that
written notice of such action shall be furnished to the owner of such
sign within five days after the date of such removal.
10. No sign shall be erected or located as to prevent free ingress or egress
from any window, door or fire escape.
11. No signs shall be permitted which are permanently attached to public
utility poles or trees within the right-of-way of any street.
12. (Reserved)
§ 1703 FOREWORD § 1703
FWD:827
§ 1704. Computation of Sign Area. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
13. All electrically illuminated signs shall be constructed in accordance
with the standards prescribed in the Uniform Construction Code.
14. No vulgar, indecent or obscene advertising matter shall be displayed in
any manner.
15. Signs which emit smoke, steam or other visible particles or odor are
prohibited.
16. No signs shall be placed so as to create a hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
17. Towable or portable signs or changeable message boards (whether
placed on the yard or a truck or trailer) shall not be permitted in any
residential districts. In the Central Business District, towable signs are
permitted for community events such as those sponsored by the
Borough, Elizabethtown Area School District, and the Elizabethtown
Area Chamber of Commerce. Display shall not exceed 48 hours per
event.
18. Signs permitted within the Borough are limited to those identified or
defined in this chapter. Other signs not so identified or defined herein
have been determined to be contrary to the stated purposes of this
chapter as set forth in § 103.
19. Any sign to be erected on any property or lot is limited to the use of that
property on which it is located, except with regard to directional signs.
Signs advertising uses or businesses not being conducted on the
property or lot on which the sign is erected shall not be permitted.
20. (Reserved)
21. Limitations upon painted wall signs (murals) shall be waived for
proposed signs approved by and participating in the official
Elizabethtown Borough Mural Program administered by the EEDC. In
the absence of participation in this program, all painted wall signs
(murals) shall be subject to dimensional and other requirements for
wall signs as provided for in this chapter.
22. Internally illuminated signs are not permitted in the residential zones.
An internally illuminated sign must comply with the regulations of its
type of sign.
1. The area of a sign shall be construed to include all lettering, wording
and accompanying designs and symbols, together with the background,
whether open or enclosed, on which they are displayed.
2. Where the sign consists of individual letters or symbols attached to a
building, wall or window, the area shall be considered to be that of the
smallest rectangle or other regular geometric shape that encompasses
all of the letters and symbols.
§ 1703 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1704
FWD:828
§ 1705. Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
§ 1706. Permit Application and Fees. [Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
3. In computing square-foot area of a double-faced sign, only one side
shall be considered, provided both faces are identical.
1. Any sign lawfully existing at the time of passage of this chapter which
does not conform with the regulations herein shall be considered
nonconforming and may continue in its present use and location until
replacement or rebuilding becomes necessary. At such time, a permit
shall be required, and the sign must conform with all provisions of this
chapter in effect at the time the permit is requested.
1. Except for signs exempted herein, no person shall erect, cause to be
erected, change or alter any sign on any property within the Borough
until a permit for the same has been issued by the Zoning Officer.
Property owners who authorize or allow any sign on their property shall
ensure that all provisions of this chapter are adhered to. Application for
a permit shall be made on an authorized Borough form and shall be
accompanied by the following:
A. A detailed scale drawing showing the sign and its intended
location.
B. A description of its type, construction, manner and method of
installation, and materials to be used.
C. Written authorization of the owner of the property if other than the
applicant.
D. A permit fee as established by Borough Council.
§ 1704 FOREWORD § 1706
FWD:829

Part 18
AIRPORT HAZARD REGULATIONS
§ 1801. Definitions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 18.0]
The following words and phrases, for the purposes of this Part only, shall
have the meaning given to them in this Section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise:
AIRCRAFT — Any contrivance, except an unpowered hang glider or
parachute, used for manned ascent into or flight through the air.
AIRPORT — Any area of land or water which is used of intended to be used
for the landing and takeoff of aircraft and any appurtenant areas which are
used or intended to be used for airport buildings or air navigation facilities
or rights-of-way, together with all airport buildings and facilities thereon. As
used herein, the term airport includes public airports but excludes private
airports and heliports. Public and private airports are defined separately in
this section.
AIRPORT ELEVATION — 310 feet mean elevation in the case of the
Harrisburg International Airport; defined as the highest point of land which
obstructs the airspace required for flight of aircraft in landing or taking off
at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined by Act 164 of 1985.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this Part and
Act 164 of 1984.
APPROACH SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on the extended
runway center line, extending outward and upward from the end of the
primary surface and at the same slope as the approach surface zone height
limitation slope set forth in this Part. In plan, the perimeter of the approach
surface coincides with the perimeter of the approach surface zone.
APPROACH, TRANSITIONAL, HORIZONTAL AND CONICAL SURFACE
ZONES — These zones are set forth in this Part.
BOARD OF APPEALS OR ADJUSTMENT — The Borough of Elizabethtown
Zoning Hearing Board.
CONICAL SURFACE — A surface extending outward and upward from
the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20:1 for a horizontal
distance of 4,000 feet.
DEPARTMENT — The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this Part and shown on the Zoning Map, the datum shall be mean
sea level elevation, unless otherwise specified.
§ 1801 FOREWORD § 1801
FWD:831
HORIZONTAL SURFACE — A horizontal plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation, the perimeter of which in plan coincides with
the perimeter of the horizontal surface zone.
LARGER-THAN-UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for the
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an
existing instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities
with only horizontal guidance or area-type navigation equipment, for which
a straight-in nonprecision-instrument approach procedure has been
approved or planned.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part
or an amendment thereto.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth or other object, including a mobile
object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth in this Part.
PERSON — An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company,
association, joint-stock association or governmental entity; includes a
trustee, a receiver, an assignee or a similar representative of any of them.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precision approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for which
a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an approved
airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE — A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When
the runway has a specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface
extends 200 feet beyond each end of that runway. For military runways or
when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface or planned hard
surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of
the primary surface is set forth in this Part. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the
runway center line.
PRIVATE AIRPORT — An airport which is privately owned and which is not
open or intended to be open to the public as defined by State or Federal law.
PUBLIC AIRPORT — An airport which is either publicly or privately owned
and which is open to the public, as defined by State or Federal law.
RUNWAY — A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff
of aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including but without limitation buildings, towers, cranes,
smokestacks, earth formation and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES — These surfaces extend outward at 90° angles
to the runway center line and the runway center line extended at a slope
of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the
§ 1801 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1801
FWD:832
primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and
conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for these portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the
conical surface, extend a distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from
the edge of the approach surface and at 90° angles to the extended runway
center line.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for an intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using approach procedures.
§ 1802. Airport Surface Zones. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 18.1]
In order to carry out the provisions of this Part, there are hereby created
and established certain zones, to the extent they are in the Borough, which
include all of the land lying beneath the approach surfaces, transitional
surfaces, horizontal surfaces and conical surfaces as they apply to the
Harrisburg International Airport. Such zones are shown on the Borough of
Elizabethtown Height Limitation and Zoning District Map prepared by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and dated
1989, which is hereby made a part hereof. An area located in more than one
of the following zones is considered to be only in the zone with the morerestrictive
height limitation. The various zones are hereby established and
defined as follows:
A. Conical Surface Zone. Established beneath the conical surface. This
zone commences at the periphery of the horizontal surface and extends
therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
B. Horizontal Surface Zone. Established beneath the horizontal surface,
150 feet above the established airport elevation, the perimeter of which
is constructed by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from the center of
each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the
adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal
surface zone does not include the approach surface and transitional
surface zones.
C. Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the precision instrument approach surface. The inner edge of
this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000
feet at a horizontal distance of 50,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
D. Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone
coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500 feet wide.
§ 1801 FOREWORD § 1802
FWD:833
§ 1803. Airport Surface Zone Height Limitations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 18.2]
Except as otherwise provided in this Part, no structure shall be erected,
altered or maintained and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any zone
created by this Part to a height in excess of the applicable height limit
herein established for such zone.
The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center
line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
E. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum as Low as 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the non-precision instrument approach surface. The inner edge
of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 4,000 feet
at a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuation of the center line of the runway.
F. Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater Than 3/4
Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone. Established
beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface. The inner edge
of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 500
feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet
at a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its
center line is the continuance of the center line of the runway.
G. Transitional Surface Zones. Established beneath the transitional
surfaces adjacent to each runway and approach surface as indicated on
the Height Limitation Zoning District Map.
H. Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Established beneath the nonprecision instrument approach surface.
The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary
surface and is 500 feet wide. The zone expands outward uniformly to a
width of 2,000 feet at a horizontal distance 5,000 feet from the primary
surface. Its center line is the continuation of the center line of the
runway.
I. Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Established beneath the
visual approach surface. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the
width of the primary surface and is 250 feet wide. The zone expands
outward uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet from the primary surface. Its center line is the continuation
of the center line of the runway.
A. Such applicable height limitations are hereby established for each of
the zones in question as follows:
(1) Conical Surface Zone. Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the periphery of the horizontal surface and at 150 feet
§ 1802 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1803
FWD:834
above the established airport elevation and extending to a height
of 350 feet above the established airport elevation or at a height of
660 feet above mean sea level.
(2) Horizontal Surface Zone. Established at 150 feet above the
established airport elevation or at a height of 460 feet above mean
sea level, in the case of the Harrisburg International Airport.
(3) Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface Zone. Slopes 50
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the same elevation
as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of
10,000 feet along the extended runway center line; thence slopes
upward 40 feet horizontally for each foot vertically to an additional
horizontal distance of 40,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
(4) Runway Larger Than Utility Visual Approach Surface Zone. Slopes
20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
(5) Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum as Low as 3/
4 Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone. Sloped 34
feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at
the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
(6) Runway Larger Than Utility With a Visibility Minimum Greater
Than 3/4 Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Slopes 34 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end
of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending
to a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
(7) Transitional Surface Zone. Slopes seven feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the
primary surface and the approach surface and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation, which is 310 feet
above mean sea level in the case of the Harrisburg International
Airport. In addition to the foregoing, when an airport has a
precision instrument runway approach zone, there are established
height limits sloping seven feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach
surface and extending to where they intersect the conical surface.
Where the precision instrument runway-approach zone projects
beyond the conical zone, there are established height limits sloping
seven feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of
and at the same elevation as the approach surface and extending a
§ 1803 FOREWORD § 1803
FWD:835
§ 1804. Airport Zoning Requirements. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 18.3]
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90° angles to the
extended runway center line.
(8) Utility Runway Nonprecision Instrument Approach Surface Zone.
Slopes 20 feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the end
of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending
to a horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway
center line.
(9) Utility Runway Visual Approach Surface Zone. Slopes 20 feet
outward for each foot upward beginning at the end of and at the
same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway center
line.
B. Excepted height limitations. Nothing in this Part shall be construed as
prohibiting the construction or maintenance of any structure or growth
of any tree to a height up to 60 feet above the surface of the land.
1. Use Restrictions. Notwithstanding any other provision of this Part, no
use may be made of land or water within any zone established by this
Part in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and
aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights
and others, result in glare in the eyes of pilots using the airport, impair
visibility in the vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or
otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, takeoff or
maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport.
2. Nonconforming Uses.
A. Regulations Not Retroactive. The regulations prescribed by this
Part shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering or
other change or alternation of any structure or tree not conforming
to the regulations as of the effective date of this Part or otherwise
interfere with the continuance of any nonconforming use, except as
provided in this Part relating to permits and variances. Nothing
contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration or intended use of any structure, the construction or
alteration of which was begun prior to the effective date of this Part
and is diligently executed.
B. Marking and Lighting. Notwithstanding the preceding provision of
this subsection, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure
or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation and
maintenance thereon or nearby of such markers and lights as shall
be deemed necessary by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Elizabethtown to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity
of the airport the presence of such airport obstruction. Such
§ 1803 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1804
FWD:836
§ 1805. Permits and Variances; Enforcement; Notice. [Ord. 766, 5/
16/1996, § 18.4]
markers and lights shall be installed, operated and maintained at
the expense of the owner of structures or objects.
1. Future Uses.
A. Except as specifically provided in this section, no material change
shall be made in the use of land, no structure shall be erected or
otherwise established and no tree shall be planted in any zone
hereby created unless a permit therefor shall have been applied for
and granted. Each application for a permit shall indicate the
purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient
particularity to permit it to be determined whether the resulting
use, structure or tree would conform to the regulations herein
prescribed. If such determination is in the affirmative, the permit
shall be granted. No permit for a use inconsistent with the
provisions of this Part shall be granted unless a variance has been
approved in accordance with Subsection 4 hereafter.
(1) In the area lying within the limits of the horizontal zone and
conical zone, no permit shall be required for any tree of
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such zones.
(2) In areas lying within the limits of the approach zones, but at a
horizontal distance of not less than 4,200 feet from each end of
the runway, no permit shall be required for any tree or
structure less than 75 feet of vertical height above the ground,
except when, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
features, such tree or structure would extend above the height
limits prescribed for such approach zones.
(3) In the areas lying within the limits of the transition zones
beyond the perimeter of the horizontal zones, no permit shall
be required for any tree or structure less than 75 feet of
vertical height above the ground, except when such tree or
structure, because of terrain, land contour or topographic
feature, would extend above the height limit prescribed for
such transition zones.
B. Nothing contained in any of the foregoing exceptions shall be
construed as permitting or intending to permit any construction or
alteration of any structure or growth of any tree in excess of any of
the height limits established by this Part, except that no permit is
required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace parts of
existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height of
an existing structure.
§ 1804 FOREWORD § 1805
FWD:837
2. Existing Uses. Before any nonconforming structure may be replaced,
substantially altered or rebuilt or tree allowed to grow higher or
replanted, a permit must be secured from the Borough authorizing the
replacement or change. No permit shall be granted that would allow the
establishment or creation of an obstruction or permit a nonconforming
use, structure or tree to become a greater hazard to air navigation than
it was on the effective date of this Part or any amendments thereto or
than it is when the application for a permit is made.
3. Nonconforming Uses Abandoned or Destroyed. Whenever the Borough
Council of the Borough of Elizabethtown determines that a
nonconforming tree or structure has been abandoned or more than 80%
torn down, physically deteriorated or decayed, no permit shall be
granted that would allow such structure to tree to exceed the applicable
height limit or otherwise deviate from this Part.
4. Variance.
A. Any person desiring to erect any structure or increase the height of
any structure or permit the growth of any object of natural growth
or otherwise use his property in violation of airport zoning
regulations may apply to the Zoning Hearing Board for a variance
from the zoning regulations in question. A variance shall only be
granted after the requirements of Subsections 6 and 7 hereafter
are satisfied. A variance may be allowed where a literal application
or enforcement of the regulations would result in practical
difficulty or unnecessary hardship and the relief granted would not
be contrary to the public interest but would do substantial justice
and would be in accordance with the spirit of this Part. Any
variance may be granted subject to any reasonable condition that
the Zoning Hearing Board may deem necessary to effectuate the
purposes of this Part.
B. The application for variance shall be accompanied by a
determination from the Federal Aviation Administration as to the
effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. Additionally, no
application for variance to the requirements of this Part may be
considered by the Zoning Hearing Board unless a copy of the
application has been furnished to the airport manager (or person of
equivalent description) for advice as to the aeronautical effects of
the variance. If the airport manager (or person of equivalent
description) does not respond to the application within 15 days
after receipt, the Zoning Hearing Board may act without such input
to grant or deny said application.
5. Hazard Marking and Lighting. In granting any permit or variance under
this Section, the Board shall, if it deems the action advisable to
effectuate the purpose of this Part and reasonable under the
circumstances, so condition the permit or variance as to required the
owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
§ 1805 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1805
FWD:838
§ 1806. Relationship to Existing Districts. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 18.5]
These airport hazard regulations shall be an overlay zoning district to the
existing zoning districts. All of the provisions of the underlying zoning
districts shall remain in full force, except that these additional procedures
and requirements of this Part also apply. In the event of conflict between
the regulations of this Part and any other regulations applicable to the
same area, whether the conflict be with respect to the height of structures
or trees, the use of land or any other matter, and whether the other
regulations were adopted in this chapter, in another ordinance, by some
other municipality, by the State or Federal government or otherwise, the
more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 1807. Appointment of Board of Appeals. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 18.6]
For purposes of this Section, the Elizabethtown Zoning Hearing Board is
appointed as the Board of Appeals, to hear and decide appeals, special
exceptions and requests for variances pursuant to this Part.
the Borough, at its own expense, or require the person or persons
requesting the permit or variance to install, operate and maintain
thereon such markers and lights as may be required by guidelines or
regulations adopted by the FAA.
6. Local Enforcement. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to
administer and enforce the regulations prescribed herein. Applications
for permits and variances shall be made to the Zoning Officer upon a
form published for that purpose. Applications required by this Part to
be submitted to the Zoning Officer shall be promptly considered and
granted or denied. Application for action by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be forthwith transmitted by the Zoning Officer.
7. Notice to Department. Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the
Borough or board which decides to grant a permit or variance under
this Part shall notify the Department of Transportation of its decision.
This notice shall be in writing and shall be sent so as to reach the
Department at least 10 days before the date which the decision is to
issue.
§ 1805 FOREWORD § 1807
FWD:839

Part 19
NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES
§ 1901. Nonconforming Buildings and Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 19.0; as amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
All lawful or previously nonconforming buildings and/or structures, lots,
signs, fences, architectural and engineering retaining walls, excluding
nonconforming uses, existing on the effective date of this section, may be
continued, altered, restored, reconstructed, changed, sold or maintained
even though such structures may not conform to the regulations of the
district in which it is located.
§ 1902. Alterations. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.1]
Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a nonconforming
building or a building occupied by a nonconforming use; providing, such
alterations and repairs are in conformance with the regulations set forth
in this chapter and other applicable codes and ordinances adopted by the
Borough.
§ 1903. Extensions or Enlargements. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.2;
as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 983, 11/16/2017]
1. The types of extensions and enlargements listed below are permitted
for the following nonconforming uses and buildings existing on the
effective date of this chapter:
A. The extension of a nonconforming use of land upon a lot occupied
by such use.
B. The extension or enlargement of a conforming building occupied by
a nonconforming use.
C. The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a nonconforming use.
D. The extension or enlargement of a nonconforming building
occupied by a conforming use.
2. The foregoing extensions or enlargements of such nonconforming
buildings or uses shall be subject to the following conditions:
A. The extension or enlargement shall conform to the height, area,
yard, and coverage regulations of the district in which it is located.
Where a structure is nonconforming as to a required side yard or
rear yard setback, the established nonconforming setback may be
continued, so long as the proposed extension or enlargement does
not project further into any yard, whether front, side or rear yard,
than the original building line extended. Extension or enlargement
shall not exceed 33 1/3% of the existing floor area or use. The
extension or enlargement of a nonconforming use or structure
§ 1901 FOREWORD § 1903
FWD:841
§ 1904. Reconstruction/Restoration. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.3]
A nonconforming building or use which is damaged by fire, explosion,
windstorm or other natural or criminal acts may be reconstructed and used
for the same purposes, provided:
§ 1905. Discontinuance. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.4; as amended
by Ord. 975, 6/16/2016]
If a nonconforming use or building ceases operations for a continuous
period of more than 12 months, then such use and any subsequent use or
building shall conform to the regulations of this chapter.
§ 1906. Nonconforming Lots. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.5]
Any lot held in single and separate ownership at the effective date of
this chapter which does not conform to one or more of the applicable
area regulations in the district in which it is located shall be considered
nonconforming. A building may be erected upon any vacant nonconforming
lot provided a special exception is authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board,
and, further provided, that the applicant does not own or control other
housing a nonconforming use granted herein shall not be
interpreted to be in addition to any expansion previously granted
under prior zoning regulations unless the previous expansion was
less than otherwise permitted herein.
B. The entire building or use shall be provided with off-street parking
and loading spaces as required by Part 16.
C. The extension or enlargement does not replace a conforming use.
D. The extension or enlargement of a building used for a
nonconforming use shall not be permitted to extend into vacant
parcels of land adjacent to the initial parcel of land existing and
occupied on the effective date of this chapter, where such vacant
parcels have been recorded separately or acquired following the
effective date of this chapter.
E. Any lawful nonconforming use of a building or land may be changed
to another nonconforming use of substantially the same character.
The proposed change in nonconforming use shall not increase the
need for off-street parking, produce any noise, glare, heat, dust,
traffic vibration, or illumination in excess of the existing
nonconforming use.
A. The reconstruction and/or restoration of the building is commenced
within one year from the date of occurrence of the damage and is
carried to completion without undue delay.
B. The reconstructed building or occupied area does not exceed the
height, area and volume of the original structure and occupied use.
§ 1903 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 1906
FWD:842
adjoining property sufficient to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
Such development shall comply with the following provisions:
§ 1907. Nonconforming Signs. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 19.6]
Signs in existence at the effective date of this chapter, or amendments
thereto, may be continued subject to the regulations contained in Part 17.
A. The proposed use is permitted within the district in which it is located.
B. Proposed building shall comply with all applicable area, height and bulk
regulations including, but not limited to, applicable district
requirements and yard requirements as set forth in the supplementary
regulations.
§ 1906 FOREWORD § 1907
FWD:843

Part 20
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
§ 2001. Appointment and Powers of Zoning Officer. [Ord. 766, 5/16/
1996, § 20.0]
For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who may not hold
any elective office in the Borough, shall be appointed. The Zoning Officer
shall administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms, and shall
not have the power to permit any construction or any use or change of use
which does not conform to this chapter.
§ 2002. Enforcement, Penalty and Remedy. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 20.1; as amended by Ord. 808, 4/20/2000, § 1; and by Ord. 889, 9/
20/2007, § 1]
A. The Zoning Officer shall:
(1) Administer this chapter in accordance with its literal terms.
(2) Identify and register nonconforming uses and nonconforming
structures.
(3) Receive and examine all applications required under the terms of
this chapter.
(4) Issue or refuse permits within 15 days of the receipt of the
application, except as specifically provided for in this chapter.
(5) Receive complaints of violations of this chapter.
(6) Issue a written notice of violation to any person violating any
provision of this chapter.
(7) Keep records of applications, permits and certificates issued, of
variances granted by the Board, of complaints received, of
inspections made, of reports rendered, and of notice or orders
issued.
(8) Make all required inspections and perform all other duties as called
for in this chapter.
B. The Zoning Officer shall not have the power to permit any construction,
use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
1. Duty of Zoning Officer. It shall be the duty of Zoning Officer, and he is
hereby given the power and authority to enforce the provisions of this
chapter. The Zoning Officer shall examine all applications for permits,
issue permits for construction and uses which are in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter, record and file all applications for
permits with accompanying plans and documents, and make such
reports as the Borough Council may require. Permits for construction
and uses which are a special exception, or a variance to requirements of
§ 2001 FOREWORD § 2002
FWD:845
this chapter shall be issued only upon approval by the Zoning Hearing
Board.
2. Violations. The construction, excavation alteration, maintenance or use
of any structure, building sign, land or landscaping or the change of
use, area of use, percentage of use or displacement of the use of any
structure, building, sign, land or landscaping without first obtaining a
zoning permit; or the use of any building, structure, sign or land
without receipt of a certificate of use and occupancy; or the use or
maintenance of any building, structure, sign or land for a use or in a
manner which is not in accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
or the use of property for use different from that set forth in any zoning
permit or certificate of use and occupancy which has been granted for
the property without applying for and being granted a zoning permit
and certificate of use and occupancy for such new or different use; or
the failure to comply with any other provision of this chapter; or the
violation of any conditions imposed upon the grant of a special
exception or variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or a conditional use
by the Borough Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction of a
special exception, variance or conditional use is granted by such court
are hereby declared to be violations of this chapter.
3. Enforcement Notice. If it appears to the Zoning Officer that a violation
of this chapter shall exist, the Zoning Officer shall send an enforcement
notice (also known as a "notice of violation and cease and desist order")
to the owner of record of the lot on which the violation has occurred, to
any person who has filed a written request to receive enforcement
notices regarding that lot, to any other person requested in writing by
the owner of record, and to any person against whom the Borough may
bring an enforcement action. The enforcement notice shall contain the
name of the owner of record and any other person against whom the
Borough may take action, the location of the property in violation, the
specific violation with a description of the requirements which have not
been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions of this
chapter, the date before which steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be completed,
that the recipient of the enforcement notice has the right to appeal to
the Zoning Hearing Board within 30 days, and that a failure to comply
with the notice within the time specified, unless extended by an appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board, constitutes a violation with sanctions as
provided in this chapter.
4. Enforcement Action. If the enforcement notice is not promptly complied
with, the Zoning Officer, following consultation with the Borough
Council and/or the Borough Solicitor, shall be authorized to institute an
appropriate action or proceeding at law or in equity to prevent,
restrain, correct, or abate such violation or to require the removal or
termination of the unlawful use of the structure, building, sign,
landscaping or land in violation of the provisions of this chapter or the
order or direction made pursuant thereto. The Zoning Officer, following
§ 2002 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2002
FWD:846
§ 2003. Permits. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.2; as amended by Ord.
882, 2/15/2007]
consultation with Borough Council and/or Borough Solicitor, shall also
be authorized to institute a civil enforcement proceeding before a
District Justice.
5. Penalties. Any person who has violated or permitted the violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefore in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including the
reasonable attorney's fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until
the date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless a District Justice determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorneys' fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Borough for the
general use of the Borough.
6. Remedies. In case any building, structure, sign or landscaping is
erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or
maintained; or any building, structure sign or land is used; or any
hedge, shrub, tree or other growth is maintained in violation of this
chapter or of any of the regulations made pursuant thereto or any of the
permits or certificates of use and occupancy issued under this chapter,
or any conditions imposed upon the grant of a special exception or
variance by the Zoning Hearing Board or upon the grant of a
conditional use by the law, any appropriate action or proceeding may be
instituted or taken to prevent or restrain such unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or
use in and about such premises.
1. Requirement of Permit. A building and/or zoning permit shall be
required prior to the erection, addition or alteration of any building or
portion thereof; prior to the use or change in use of a building or land;
and prior to the change or extension of a nonconforming use. It shall be
unlawful for any person to commence work for the erection or
alteration of any building or for a change in land use until a permit has
been duly issued therefor.
§ 2002 FOREWORD § 2003
FWD:847
A. Placement of fences, walls and signs require permits, and the
regulations regarding fences are provided in § 1302, Subsection 5,
and for signs in § 1701.
B. Placement of driveways, or expansion of dimensions of existing
driveways, shall require a permit and shall be subject to the
regulations regarding driveways set forth in § 1323.
C. Placement of any dumpster in the street, municipal right-of-way or
any lot shall be subject to the provisions of § 1317D and the Refuse
and Recycling Ordinance, Chapter 20.
D. No permit shall be required for maintenance of any building or
structure, as that term is defined in this chapter, except as
otherwise provided by State law.
2. Application for Permits. All applications for permits shall be
accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing the actual
shape and dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the exact size and
location of any buildings existing on the lot, the lines within which the
proposed building or structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or part of a building, the number of
families or dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate and
such information as may be necessary to determine compliance with
this chapter and all other ordinances. One copy of such plans shall be
returned to the owner when such plans have been reviewed and acted
upon by the Zoning Officer. All applications with accompanying plans
and documents shall become a public record after a permit is issued of
denied.
3. Issuance of Permits.
A. No permit shall be issued until the Zoning Officer has certified that
the proposed building, addition or alteration complies with all the
provisions of this chapter, as well as the provisions of all other
applicable ordinances.
B. Zoning Officer shall act upon request within 30 days following
application.
C. A permit issued hereunder shall become void 12 months after
issuance date, unless a request for extension has been submitted to
and approved by the Zoning Officer. Such request shall be files with
the Zoning Officer at least 30 days prior to the permit expiration
date.
4. Temporary Permits. A temporary permit may be authorized by the
Zoning Officer for a structure or use which it deems necessary to
promote the proper development of the community, provided that such
nonconforming structure or use shall be completely removed upon
expiration of the permit without cost to the Borough. Such permits shall
§ 2003 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2003
FWD:848
§ 2004. Fees. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.3]
§ 2005. Zoning Hearing Board. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.4; as
amended by Ord. 829, 11/15/2001; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed one year, and may
be renewed annually for an aggregate period not exceeding two years.
5. A variance, special exception, or conditional use for which a building
permit will be issued shall not be transferable to a subsequent owner in
the event that the erection, construction, reconstruction, or alteration
authorized has not been completed prior to transfer. Conditional use
approvals, special exception use approvals, and use variances are not
transferable to a subsequent owner.
1. The Borough Council shall establish a schedule of fees, charges and
expenses, as well as a collection procedure for zoning permits,
certificates of occupancy, appeals, variances, special exceptions,
amendments, bonds and other matters pertaining to this chapter. The
schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the Zoning Officer, and
may be amended only by Borough Council.
2. Such fees shall be payable to the Borough and until all applicable fees,
charges and expenses have been paid in full, the application shall be
considered incomplete and no action shall be taken on any application
or appeal.
1. Appointment.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall continue, with three members
appointed by the Borough Council, and have such powers and
authority as set forth in Article IX, Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (Act 247), as amended. The duly established Zoning
Hearing Board shall have the following functions.
B. Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.
2. Vacancies.
A. The Board shall promptly notify Borough Council of any vacancies
which occur.
B. Appointments to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired
portion of a term.
3. Removal.
A. Any Board member may be removed for just cause by a majority
vote of Borough Council, if the member has received 15 days notice
of the intent to take such a vote.
B. A hearing shall be held in connection with the vote, if the member
so requests it in writing.
§ 2003 FOREWORD § 2005
FWD:849
§ 2006. Appeals and Applications. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.5]
4. Organization.
A. The Board shall elect officers from its own membership. Officers
shall serve annual terms and may succeed themselves.
B. For the conduct of any hearing and taking of any action, a quorum
shall be not less than majority of all members of the Board, but the
Board may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to
conduct any hearing on its behalf, and parties may waive further
action by the Board.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with all applicable Borough ordinances and
laws of the Commonwealth.
5. Expenditures.
A. Within the limits of funds appropriated by Borough Council, the
Zoning Hearing Board may employ or contract for secretaries,
clerks, legal counsel, consultants and other technical and clerical
services.
B. Members of the Board may receive compensation for the
performance of their duties, as may be fixed by Borough Council,
but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation authorized
to be paid to the members of Borough Council.
6. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have jurisdiction as set forth in Article
IX of the Municipalities Planning Code87 and/or any State law or
municipal ordinance promulgated by legislative enactment and/or case
law transmitted by a judicial decision from any court of competent
jurisdiction.
1. An appeal, or application for an amendment, special exception,
conditional use or variance from the terms of this chapter shall be filed
with the Zoning Officer and shall contain:
A. The name and address of the applicant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected
by such proposal.
C. A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such proposal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon, and the present use thereof.
87.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
§ 2005 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2006
FWD:850
§ 2007. Special Exceptions. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.6A; as
amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal
or application requested may be allowed, and reasons why it should
be granted; or a statement of the section of this chapter governing
the situation in which the alleged erroneous ruling is being
appealed, and reasons for the appeal.
F. An accurate description of the present improvements and the
additions intended to be made under this application, indicating
the size and use of such proposed improvements and general
construction thereof. In addition, there shall be attached a plot plan
of the real estate to be affected, as required to accompany
applications for permits, indicating the location and size of the lot
and location of improvements now erected, and proposed to be
erected thereon.
G. Any other pertinent data required by the Zoning Hearing Board,
Borough Council, and/or Zoning Officer, as appropriate to their
individual authorities set forth in this Part.
1. Where provided for in this chapter, the Zoning Hearing Board shall hear
and decide requests for special exceptions in accordance with stated
standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended in this chapter. The Board may grant approval of a special
exception provided that the applicant complies with the following
standards for special exceptions and that the proposed special
exception shall not be detrimental to the health, safety or welfare of the
neighborhood.
2. Standards.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence of compliance with all
conditions for such special exception as provided for in Part 14.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed special
exception shall be properly serviced by existing streets. The peak
traffic generated by the use shall be accommodated in a safe and
efficient manner or improvements made in order to effect the same.
(1) For industrial and commercial special exception applications,
the applicant shall demonstrate, through the use of traffic
studies or other applicable data, that the granting of the
special exception shall not increase traffic congestion on
streets within the Borough.
§ 2006 FOREWORD § 2007
FWD:851
C. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed special
exception shall be properly served by utilities, police protection,
fire protection and parts and recreation facilities.
D. The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to one inch containing the following information:
(1) Location of all existing floodplains, watercourses, wetlands,
rights-of-way, easements, areas of subsidence, wooded areas
and other significant natural features on the tract.
(2) The location of all streets, adjacent tracts and buildings within
200 feet of the tract.
(3) Location of all proposed land uses including residential uses by
type.
(4) Number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units or
nonresidential structures and lot sizes.
(5) Location of public water and sewer lines.
(6) All proposed site grading and drainage provisions.
(7) Zoning data.
(8) Certification of site plan by professional engineer/surveyor.
(9) Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plans
signed by owner.
E. The applicant shall provide the Board with sufficient plans, studies
or other data to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
regulations.
F. The proposed special exception shall not significantly detract from
the use of neighboring properties or from the character of the
neighborhood and that the use of adjacent property is adequately
safeguarded.
G. Unless otherwise specified by the Board or by law, a special
exception shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning
permit within one year from the date of authorization thereof by the
Board or by the court if such special exception has been granted
after an appeal or fails to complete any erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration or change in use authorized by the
special exception within two years from the date of authorization
thereof by the Board or by the court if such variance has been
granted after an appeal. The Board may, for reasonable cause,
extend the approval for an additional period of up to one year upon
the written request by the applicant.
H. A variance, special exception, or conditional use for which a
building permit will be issued shall not be transferable to a
§ 2007 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2007
FWD:852
§ 2008. Variances. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.6B; as amended by
Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon
the applicant. Application for said variance shall be made in accordance
with this chapter. The Zoning Hearing Board may grant a variance, provided
the following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
subsequent owner in the event that the erection, construction,
reconstruction, or alteration authorized has not been completed
prior to transfer. Conditional use approvals, special exception use
approvals, and use variances are not transferable to a subsequent
owner.
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the district which the property is
located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefor necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the district in which the property is located, not substantially or
permanently impair the appropriate use or development of adjacent
property, not be detrimental to the public welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
that will afford relief and represent the least modification possible of
the regulation in issue.
F. In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of this chapter.
G. Unless otherwise specified by the Board or by law, a variance shall
expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning permit within one year
from the date of authorization thereof by the Board, or by the court if
such variance has been granted after an appeal, or fails to complete any
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration or change in use
authorized by the variance within two years from the date of
authorization thereof by the Board, or by the court if such variance has
been granted after an appeal. The Board may, for reasonable cause,
§ 2007 FOREWORD § 2008
FWD:853
§ 2009. Appeals from a Decision of the Zoning Officer. [Ord. 766, 5/
16/1996, § 20.7; as amended by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
§ 2010. Hearings. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.8; as amended by Ord.
882, 2/15/2007; and by Ord. 946, 3/21/2013]
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following:
extend the approval for an additional period of up to one year, upon the
written request by the applicant.
H. A dimensional variance, special exception, or conditional use for which
any permit and/or license shall be required from the Borough to be
issued to an applicant shall not be transferrable in the event that the
erection, construction, reconstruction, or alteration authorized has not
been completed prior to transfer. Conditional use approvals, special
exception use approvals, and approved use variances are not
transferrable to a subsequent owner. [Amended by Ord. 975, 6/16/
2016]
1. All appeals from a decision of the Zoning Officer and applications to the
Board shall be in writing on forms prescribed by the Board.
2. Every appeal or application shall include the following:
A. The name and address of the applicant, or appellant.
B. The name and address of the owner of the property to be affected
by such proposed change or appeal.
C. A brief description and location of the property to be affected by
such proposed change or appeal.
D. A statement of the present zoning classification of the property in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
E. A statement of the section of this chapter under which the appeal is
made and reasons why it should be granted, or a statement on the
section of this chapter governing the situation in which the alleged
erroneous ruling is being appealed and the reasons for this appeal.
F. A reasonably accurate description of the additions or changes
intended to be made under the application, indicating the size
material, and general construction of such proposed
improvements. A plot plan of the property to be affected, indicating
the location and size of the lot and the size or existing and intended
improvements, shall be attached to the description.
G. Applications to the Zoning Hearing Board must be filed no later
than three weeks prior to the scheduled hearing date to allow
sufficient time for required advertising and notifications.
§ 2008 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2010
FWD:854
§ 2011. Conditional Uses. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.9; as amended
by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
A. Notice of Hearings. Notice of all hearings of the Board shall be given as
follows:
(1) Notice to the public shall be published at least twice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
(a) The first publication shall be not more than 30 days and the
second notice shall not be less than seven days from the date of
the hearing.
(b) The notices shall state the time and place of the hearing and
the particular nature of the matter to be considered.
(2) Written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(3) Written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer
and Planning Commission, Borough Council, adjoining property
owners within 200 feet (including those across the street) and any
other person or group (including civic or community organizations)
who has made a timely request for such notice, by personally
delivering or mailing a copy of the published notice.
(4) Other municipalities.
(a) In any matter which relates to a property which lies within 500
feet of the boundary of another municipality, the Secretary of
the Board shall transmit to the municipal clerk of this other
municipality a copy of the official notice of the public hearing
on such matters, not later than one day after publication
thereof.
(b) The other municipality shall have the right to appear and to be
heard at the public hearing.
B. Parties.
(1) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made a timely appearance of
record before the Board, and any other person, including civic or
community organizations, permitted to appear before the Board.
(2) The Board shall have the power to require that all persons who
wish to be considered parties enter appearances in written on
forms provided by the Board for that purpose.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct its hearings and render its
decision in accordance with the requirements of the Municipalities
Planning Code (MPC).
§ 2010 FOREWORD § 2011
FWD:855
1. Where provided for in this chapter, the Borough Council shall hear and
decide requests for conditional uses in accordance with stated
standards and criteria. In granting a conditional use, the Borough
Council may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purposes of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, Act 247, as amended, and this chapter. The Borough Council may
grant approval of the conditional use provided that the applicant
complies with the following standards for conditional uses and that the
proposed conditional use shall not be detrimental to the health, safety
or welfare of the neighborhood.
2. Standards.
A. The applicant shall provide evidence or compliance with all
conditions for such conditional use as provided for in Part 15.
B. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed conditional
use shall be properly serviced by existing streets. The peak traffic
generated by the use shall be accommodated in a safe and efficient
manner or improvements made in order to effect the same.
(1) For industrial and commercial conditional use applications, the
applicant shall demonstrate, through the use of traffic studies
or other applicable data, that the granting of the conditional
use shall not increase traffic congestion on streets within the
Borough.
C. The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed conditional
use shall be properly served by utilities, police protection, fire
protection and parks and recreation facilities.
D. The applicant shall submit a site plan drawn to a scale of not more
than 100 feet to one inch containing the following information:
(1) Location of all existing floodplains, watercourses, wetlands,
rights-of-way, easements, areas of subsidence, wooded areas,
and other significant natural features on the tract.
(2) The location of all streets, adjacent tracts and buildings within
200 feet of the tract.
(3) Location of all proposed land uses including residential uses by
type.
(4) Number of proposed lots and/or dwelling units or
nonresidential structures and lot sizes.
(5) Location of public water and sewer lines.
(6) All proposed site grading and drainage provisions.
(7) Zoning data.
§ 2011 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2011
FWD:856
§ 2012. Amendments. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996, § 20.10; as amended by
Ord. 876, 8/17/2006; and by Ord. 882, 2/15/2007]
(8) Certification of site plan by professional engineer/surveyor.
(9) Certification of ownership and acknowledgment of plans
signed by owner.
E. The applicant shall provide Borough Council with sufficient plans,
studies or other data to demonstrate compliance with all applicable
regulations.
F. The proposed conditional use shall not significantly detract from
the use of neighboring properties or from the character of the
neighborhood and that the use of adjacent property is adequately
safeguarded.
G. Unless otherwise specified by Borough Council or by law, a
conditional use shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a zoning
permit within one year from the date of authorization thereof by
Borough Council or by the court if such conditional use has been
granted after an appeal or fails to complete any erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or change in use
authorized by the conditional use within two years from the date of
authorization thereof by Borough Council or by the court if such
variance has been granted after an appeal. Borough Council may,
for reasonable cause, extend the approval for an additional period
of up to one year upon the written request by the applicant.
H. A variance, special exception, or conditional use for which a
building permit will be issued shall not be transferable to a
subsequent owner in the event that the erection, construction,
reconstruction, or alteration authorized has not been completed
prior to transfer. Conditional use approvals, special exception use
approvals, and use variances are not transferable to a subsequent
owner.
I. For conditional use hearings, the initial hearing shall be
commenced within 60 days of the applicant's request, unless an
extension is agreed upon. Each subsequent hearing on the request,
if any, shall occur within 45 days of the prior hearing, and all
hearings shall be completed within 100 days of the date the
applicant has completed its case in chief, unless extended by
application to the Lancaster County Court of Common Pleas.
Additionally, the applicant must complete its case within 100 days
of the date of application. Hearings may be conducted by an
independent attorney or Council.
1. Procedure. The Borough Council may, from time to time, amend,
supplement or repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this
chapter after public notice and hearing. Before the public hearing, each
§ 2011 FOREWORD § 2012
FWD:857
§ 2013. Zoning Amendment Application Requirements. [Ord. 766, 5/
16/1996, § 20.11]
The Borough Council shall have the power to enact, by resolution, zoning
change application requirements for those requesting a zoning change of a
land area in the Borough from one zoning classification to another zoning
classification.
proposed amendment, except those coming from the Borough Planning
Commission, must be referred to the Borough Planning Commission
for its recommendations at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
amendment. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment,
the proposed amendment is revised or further revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment. At least 30 days prior to the hearing on the chapter
amendment by the Borough Council, the Borough Planning Commission
shall submit the proposed ordinance or amendments to the Lancaster
County Planning Commission for recommendations. Amendment
procedures shall be in compliance with § 609 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended.
2. Procedure Upon Curative Amendments. The procedure upon curative
amendments shall be in accordance with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as amended,
§§ 609.1 and 609.2.
3. Publication, Advertisement and Availability of this Chapter. Proposed
zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted unless notice
of proposed enactment is given in the manner as set forth in this
section, and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Borough
where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined without charged or obtained for a charge not greater than the
cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed ordinance
or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor, and setting forth all provisions in
reasonable detail. If full text is not included, a copy thereof shall be
supplied to a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough at the
time the public notice is published.
4. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough
Council shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments.
§ 2012 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2014
FWD:858
§ 2014. Interpretation, Purpose, and Conflict. [Ord. 766, 5/16/1996,
§ 20.12]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the health,
safety, morals, and general welfare. It is not intended to interfere with or
abrogate or annul other rules, regulations, or ordinances, provided that
where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon the use of buildings
or premises, or upon the height of a building, or requires larger open spaces
than are imposed by such other rules, easements, covenants, restrictions,
regulations or ordinances, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 2014 FOREWORD § 2014
FWD:859

Part 21
ZONING RECLASSIFICATIONS
§ 2101. Zoning Reclassifications.
Ordinance Date Subject
836 9/19/2002 Reclassifying from R-2 Residential District to R-3
Residential District three tracts of land located
south of the lands of Amtrak Tax and Insurance
Department, east of West Bainbridge Street and
west of the municipal boundary with West
Donegal Township, containing 35 acres, more or
less.
856 3/17/2005 Reclassifying from Institutional to R-1
Residential District three tracts of land located
between Hampden Road and Hampden Road
Extended.
876 8/17/2006 Reclassifying from the Institutional, R-3
Residential and General Industrial Zoning
Districts to the MU Mixed-Use Zoning District
an area of land located within the Borough of
Elizabethtown, bounded as follows:
§ 2101 FOREWORD § 2101
FWD:861
Ordinance Date Subject
Beginning on the westerly side of Peach Alley
at its intersection with West Bainbridge Street;
thence running north on the westerly side of
Peach Alley to the north side of Winnemore Alley;
thence through Winnemore Alley and on the
same line across the Conoy Creek to the lands
now or formerly of White Oak Mills; thence
following the lands of White Oak Mills west and
south to West High Street; thence northwest and
then following property lines for properties
fronting on West High Street crossing North
Wilson Avenue and the Amtrak Railroad Line to
lands of the Masonic Village; thence northwest
along said lands to a point; thence proceeding
southeastward in a straight line to West
Bainbridge Street; thence along West Bainbridge
Street to the northeast side of Masonic Drive;
thence southeast to the property line of Conoy
Crossing lands; thence along same to the Amtrak
Railroad Line; thence by a curved line
northwesterly and following lands of
Masterfoods, USA. behind properties of South
Brown Street around the land of Agri-Basics
crossing South Brown Street eastward; thence
following behind properties of the east side of
South Brown Street at the northerly boundary of
Agri-Basics south to the line to the Conoy Creek
and then following the line of Conoy Creek to
the easterly side of South Poplar Street; thence
southeast along the Conoy Creek to West
Bainbridge Street; and then in a northeasterly
direction to the south side of Peach Alley, the
place of beginning.
Said lands contain approximately 104 acres,
more or less, located in the Borough.
887 8/16/2007 Reclassifying from R-1 to R-2 Residential one
tract of land of approximately 0.5 acre situated
at 125 North Locust Street. The half-acre parcel
is a landlocked parcel located approximately 140
feet to the west of North Locust Street and 140
feet to the south of East Willow Street.
947 3/21/2013 Reclassifying from R-2, R-3 Residential and
Central Business District(s) to Mixed-Use District
the area shall be bounded as follows:
§ 2101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § 2101
FWD:862
Ordinance Date Subject
Beginning on the westerly side of South Spruce
Street at the intersection of Sand Alley; thence
running north on the westerly side of South
Spruce Street to the south side of Apple Alley
running west to the lands now or formerly owned
by the Borough of Elizabethtown; thence
following the lands of the Borough of
Elizabethtown west running north on Cherry
Alley to Apple Alley; thence through the
southerly side of Apple Alley running west to
Peach Alley; thence the easterly side of Peach
Alley running south to Sand Alley; thence
running east along the northerly side of Sand
Alley to South Spruce Street.
996 1/16/2020 Reclassifying from R-1 Low Density Residential
District to R-3 High Density Residential District
two tracts of land bounded by the Amtrak
railroad tracks, the Conoy Crossing development
and Maytown Avenue.
§ 2101 FOREWORD § 2101
FWD:863
Appendix
Appendix A
ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY
§ A-101. Annexation of Territory.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
2/23/1909 2/23/1909 Annexing to the Borough of Elizabethtown
certain territory, lots or outlots lying adjacent
thereto in Mount Joy and West Donegal
Township, Lancaster, Pennsylvania. Fixing and
determining the corporate boundary of the said
Borough; regulating the assessments in the
annexed territory.
3/15/1927 3/15/1927 Extending the Borough limits of the Borough of
Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania, authorizing the
annexation of a part of Mount Joy Township,
approximately 20 acres in area, belonging to
Frank W. Groff, W.A. Withers, F.B. Aldinger and
S.F. Ulrich.
3/18/1941 3/18/1941 Annexing a portion of Mount Joy Township to
the Borough of Elizabethtown, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania. This refers to 21 acres southwest
of the Borough line.
9/18/1945 9/18/1945 Annexing certain land in Mount Joy Township
of Elizabethtown. This refers to 25.066 acres,
the property of Claude E. Disney, Kathryn D.R.
Disney, Kenneth E. Baker and Sara D. Baker.
7/20/1948 7/20/1948 Annexing to the Borough of Elizabethtown,
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania, a part of Mount
Joy Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
contiguous to said Borough of Elizabethtown.
This refers to 29.77 acres belonging to Loy
Trostle, Joseph Helm, Mariam Dickson, Robert
and Mary Shank, Paul and Jean Beard, Lee and
Hilda Livingston, William and Jean Herdle, E.
Rudolph Harzer, George Wells, Richard Myers,
P.W. Heisey, W.D. Groff and Mark Mavretic.
9/24/1953 9/24/1953 Annexing a portion of Mount Joy Township to
the Borough of Elizabethtown. This refers to 13.1
acres adjoining the eastern boundary line of the
Borough, which becomes part of the Second
Ward upon annexation.
§ 2101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § A-101
FWD:864
Ord./Res. Date Subject
3/21/1955 3/21/1955 Annexing a portion of Mount Joy Township to
the Borough of Elizabethtown. This refers to 9.6
acres adjoining the eastern boundary line of the
Borough, which becomes part of the Second
Ward upon annexation.
7/16/1956 7/16/1956 Annexing a portion of Mount Joy Township to
the Borough of Elizabethtown. This refers to .99
acre adjoining the eastern boundary line of the
Borough, which becomes part of the Second
Ward upon annexation.
10/22/1956 10/22/
1956
Annexing a portion of Mount Joy Township to the
Borough of Elizabethtown. This refers to 12.31
acres adjoining the southeastern boundary line of
the Borough, which became part of the Second
Ward upon annexation.
6/18/1957 6/18/1957 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of West
Donegal Township, Lancaster County,
Pennsylvania, adjacent to and south of the said
Borough of Elizabethtown and hereinafter fully
described, and providing that the said territory
shall be annexed and become a part of the said
Borough if the annexation thereof shall be
approved by the Court of Quarter Sessions. This
refers to 24.79 acres, which were to become part
of the First Ward upon annexation.
1/21/1958 1/21/1958 Approving a petition for annexing to the Borough
of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown. This refers to a tract of
approximately 29.37 acres along and south of
East High Street.
346 8/19/1958 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown. This relates to 24.16 acres, to
become part of the Second Ward.
383 5/26/1959 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown. This contains 16.62 acres of land.
§ A-101 FOREWORD § A-101
FWD:865
Ord./Res. Date Subject
386 8/15/1959 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing 16.62 and 25.9 acres
of lands.
389 9/15/1959 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania
adjacent to and north and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown. This contains a total area of 22.05
acres to be annexed.
390 9/15/1959 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to said Borough of Elizabethtown. This
contains a total area of 7.5 acres to be annexed.
391 10/20/
1959
Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to the said Borough of Elizabethtown.
This contains approximately 24.8 acres to be
annexed.
428 6/19/1962 Approving the petition for annexation to the
Borough of Elizabethtown of a section of Mount
Joy Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing approximately 13
acres to be annexed.
452 9/17/1963 Approving the petition for annexation to the
Borough of Elizabethtown of a section of Mount
Joy Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and south of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing a total area of 56.25
acres.
454 10/15/
1963
Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, and zoning of the same.
473 8/16/1964 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and north of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, and zoning of the same.
§ A-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § A-101
FWD:866
Ord./Res. Date Subject
474 8/18/1964 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and northeast of said Borough of
Elizabethtown and zoning of the same.
506 10/15/
1968
Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown, a section of Mount
Joy Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and north of said Borough of
Elizabethtown.
509 12/19/
1967
Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and north of said Borough of
Elizabethtown.
520 12/17/
1968
Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown.
529 2/24/1970 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and east of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing 74.013 acres, which
shall become part of the Second Ward upon
annexation.
532 2/24/1970 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and north of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing 79.6 acres, which
shall become part of the Third Ward upon
annexation.
533 3/17/1970 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
containing 3 acres of land formerly owned by
Amos Nauman, Charles F. Simon, Margaret E.
Simon and David Greiner, which shall become
part of the Second Ward upon annexation.
§ A-101 FOREWORD § A-101
FWD:867
Ord./Res. Date Subject
534 4/21/1970 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and south of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, containing 31,500 square feet of
land.
535 4/21/1970 Approving the petition for annexing to the
Borough of Elizabethtown a section of Mount Joy
Township, Lancaster County, Pennsylvania,
adjacent to and north of said Borough of
Elizabethtown, which shall become part of the
Third Ward upon annexation.
Appendix B
BOND ISSUES AND LOANS
§ B-101. Bond Issues and Loans.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
5/19/1879 5/19/1879 Empowering the Burgess to make a loan of
money to defray expenses for steam fire
engine in an amount not to exceed $4,000.
1/22/1908 1/22/1908 Providing for the redemption of certain
outstanding bonds and the issuance of certain
other bonds in the amount of $12,000.
1/22/1908A 1/22/1908 Appropriating the sum of $2,600 from the
Borough funds for payment of indebtedness.
3/21/1922A 3/21/1922 Authorizing a temporary loan in the amount of
$19,000 for the purchase of fire apparatus.
1/9/1923 1/9/1923 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in
an amount not to exceed $60,000 for sewer
construction.
3/1/1923 3/1/1923 Providing for the refunding and payment of
the existing indebtedness of the Borough by
issuance and sale of bonds in the amount of
$17,000.
2/19/1924 2/19/1924 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in
the amount of $60,000 for sewer construction.
3/27/1924 3/27/1924 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in
the amount of $60,000 for sewer construction.
2/16/1926 2/16/1926 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in
the amount of $30,000 for sewer construction.
§ A-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § B-101
FWD:868
Ord./Res. Date Subject
4/20/1926 4/20/1926 Increasing the indebtedness of the Borough in
the amount of $30,000 for sewer construction.
6/15/1931 6/15/1931 Appropriating the sum of $3,000 for disposal
of sewage from the State Home for Crippled
Children.
Res. 7/8/1946 7/8/1946 Cashing in certain bonds for the purpose of
purchasing a Huber Maintainer.
Res. 11/12/
1957
11/12/1957 Authorizing the sale of $55,000 worth of
general obligation bonds for repair of sewer
system.
Res. 12/13/
1957
12/13/1957 Authorizing the sale of general obligations
bonds in the amount of $55,000.
457 1/6/1964 Issuing sewer revenue bonds in the amount of
$160,000.
Res. 7/21/1964 7/21/1964 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$11,000 for the purpose of street
improvements.
Res. 12/15/
1964
12/15/1964 Authorizing the advertisement for bids for a
general obligation note in the amount of
$80,000.
487 3/11/1965 Reducing the percentage of revenues
required for annual debt service
requirements.
488 3/11/1965 Issuing sewer revenue bonds in the amount of
$125,000.
523 -/-/1969 Issuing sewer revenue bonds in the amount of
$740,000.
609 4/18/1978 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$822,094 for certain capital improvements.
629 6/19/1980 Increasing the indebtedness in the amount of
$189,086 for certain capital improvements.
654 8/18/1984 Issuing water revenue bonds in the amount of
$2,300,000.
673 4/10/1986 Issuing water revenue bonds in the amount of
$2,600,000.
726 8/20/1992 Increasing the nonelectoral debt in the
amount of $85,000 by a general obligation
note for the purpose of providing funds for
capital improvements.
736 1/27/1993 Issuing general obligation bonds in the
amount of $2,150,000.
§ B-101 FOREWORD § B-101
FWD:869
Ord./Res. Date Subject
750 2/17/1994 Issuing a general obligation note in the
amount of $500,000 for certain capital
improvements at the Elizabethtown sewer
plant.
777 6/26/1997 Issuing a general obligation note in the
amount of $1,100,000 for the purpose of
providing funds for the purchase of land.
783 -/-/- Increasing the nonelectoral debt by the
issuance of a general obligation note in the
amount of $2,273,800.
Res. 97-6 9/11/1997 Approving a commitment letter concerning
the issuance of a general obligation note in
the amount of $2,273,800.
799 -/-/- Authorizing and incurring nonelectoral debt
in the sum of $6,775,000 in connection with
the issuance of guaranteed revenue sewer
bonds.
806 -/-/- Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
debt in the sum of $1,600,000 for the making
of improvements to the Elizabethtown
Borough water treatment plant.
832 6/20/2002 Determining to incur lease rental debt in the
maximum principal amount of $583,334 to
finance the costs of acquisition of certain land
for park, recreation and open space purposes
and a portion of the costs of planning and
designing improvements to a portion of such
land.
834 7/11/2002 Authorizing an increase of the nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of general obligation bonds in the aggregate
principal amount of $3,625,000 for the
purpose of providing funds for the cost of a
refunding project.
835 7/18/2002 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
debt of the Borough by the issuance of a
$4,000,000 general obligation note for the
making and completion of improvements to
the Borough wastewater treatment plant.
853 2/17/2005 Issuing a series of general obligation bonds in
the aggregate principal amount of $7,080,000
for general purposes.
854 3/17/2005 Amending Ord. 853.
§ B-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § B-101
FWD:870
Ord./Res. Date Subject
896 4/17/2008 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of three series of general obligation notes in
the combined aggregate principal amount of
$6,500,000 for capital projects of the
Borough.
906 3/5/2009 Authorizing the issuance of a general
obligation note in the amount of $836,300 to
be used for improving the municipal
streetlight system and other capital
improvements.
915 3/4/2010 Authorizing the issuance of a series of bonds
in the amount of $6,436,000 to be used to
refund the Borough's outstanding general
obligation bonds and related costs.
918 4/14/2010 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of three series of general obligation notes in
the combined aggregate principal amount of
$6,500,000 for capital projects of the
Borough.
948 4/23/2013 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of a general obligation bond in the aggregate
principal amount of $3,000,000 for capital
projects of the Borough.
968 2/19/2015 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of a general obligation bond in the aggregate
principal amount of $4,939,000 to be used
to refund the Borough's outstanding general
obligation bonds and related costs and for
capital projects of the Borough.
988 11/15/2018 Authorizing the incurrence of nonelectoral
indebtedness of the Borough by the issuance
of a general obligation note in the maximum
principal amount of $2,848,000 for capital
projects and related costs of the Borough.
Appendix C
FRANCHISES AND SERVICES
§ B-101 FOREWORD § C-101
FWD:871
§ C-101. Franchises and Services.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
11/12/1894 11/12/
1894
Granting permission to the Elizabethtown
Electric Light Company to erect and maintain
equipment in the Borough.
11/20/1894 11/20/
1894
Accepting the proposed of Elizabethtown Electric
Company to furnish electric lighting.
9/17/1895 9/17/1895 Granting a franchise to the Elizabethtown Water
Company to maintain and operate equipment in
the Borough.
Res. 2/18/
1896
2/18/1896 Entering into a contract with the Elizabeth Pa.
Water Company to furnish the Borough with
water for fire purposes.
9/15/1896 9/15/1896 Accepting the proposition of the Elizabethtown
Electric, Heat & Power Company to furnish
electric lighting.
3/16/1897 3/16/1897 Granting a franchise to the Pennsylvania
Telephone Company to maintain and operate
equipment in the Borough.
9/28/1897 9/28/1987 Accepting the proposition of Elizabethtown
Electric Light, Heat & Power Company to furnish
electric lighting.
2/24/1898 2/24/1898 Granting a franchise to the Columbia Telephone
Company to maintain and operate equipment in
the Borough.
8/18/1903 8/18/1903 Accepting the proposition of Elizabethtown
Electric Light, Heat and Power Company to
furnish electric lighting.
11/21/1907 11/21/
1907
Authorizing a contract with the Water Company
for the supply of water for a 9 year period.
2/20/1908 2/20/1908 Granting a franchise to the Marietta and
Elizabethtown Gas Company to operate and
maintain equipment in the Borough.
1/25/1909 1/25/1909 Authorizing a contract with the Elizabethtown
and Marietta Light Company for 5 years.
10/17/1917 10/17/
1917
Authorizing Klein Chocolate Company to
construct, operate and maintain siding crossing
Brown Street.
2/20/1934 2/20/1934 Authorizing an agreement with the Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company.
4/18/1939 4/18/1939 Providing for the furnishing of overhead electric
street lighting service to the Borough.
§ C-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § C-101
FWD:872
Ord./Res. Date Subject
7/18/1944 7/18/1944 Authorizing an agreement with the Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company.
3/18/1947 3/18/1947 Authorizing an agreement with the Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company.
7/18/1950 7/18/1950 Authorizing an agreement with the Pennsylvania
Power and Light Company.
3/18/1952 3/18/1952 Providing for the furnishing of electric service to
the Borough.
402 -/-/- Providing for the furnishing of electric street
lighting for the Borough.
429 6/19/1962 Providing for the furnishing of electric light in
the Borough.
496 6/21/1966 Granting a nonexclusive cable television
franchise.
592 10/19/
1976
Amending Ord. 496.
Agr. 7/17/
1986
7/17/1986 Entering into a cable television franchise
agreement between Elizabethtown Borough and
the Warner Cable Communications, Inc., for
cable television service.
Res. 2004-5 9/16/2004 Authorizing an agreement with Elizabethtown
Area Water Authority, whereby the Authority will
covenant to maintain and operate certain
waterworks, water supply works and water
distribution facilities required for rendering
water service in and for the Borough.
Res. 2005-4 2/17/2005 Authorizing an agreement between the Borough
and Elizabethtown Area Water Authority,
whereby the Authority will covenant to maintain
and operate certain waterworks, water supply
works and water distribution facilities required
for rendering water service in and for the
Borough.
Appendix D
GOVERNMENTAL AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AFFAIRS
§ C-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:873
§ D-101. Governmental and Intergovernmental Affairs.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
4/1/1864 4/1/1864 Providing for the payment of bounties of
volunteers credited to the quota of the
Borough on the calls of the President of the
United States.
8/23/1864 8/23/1864 Providing for the payment of bounties of
volunteers credited to the quota of the
Borough on the calls of the President of the
United States.
3/13/1865 3/13/1865 Providing for the payment of bounties of
volunteers credited to the quota of the
Borough on the calls of the President of the
United States.
6/19/1951 6/19/1951 Establishing the Elizabethtown Community
Park and the Parks and Recreation Board.
9/22/1953 9/22/1953 Authorizing the Borough's participation the
Social Security System and that the benefits
of Old Age and Survivors Insurance be
extended to eligible full-time employees.
10/3/1953 10/3/1953 Extending the benefits of the Social Security
Act to certain employees of the Borough.
10/20/1953A 10/20/1953 Amending Ord. 6/19/1951.
3/19/1956A 3/19/1956 Authorizing the unexpended surplus of the
1942 Budget for street repairs and
improvements.
Res.1/16/1962 1/16/1962 Establishing a policy that the Borough
Manager shall receive notice and invitation to
attend all meetings of commissions and
boards.
427 5/15/1962 Establishing a Real Estate Registry in the
Borough.
558 12/19/1972 Amending Ord. 6/19/951.
561 1/16/1973 Establishing the boundaries of wards in the
Borough.
Res. 4/16/1974 4/16/1974 Establishing a policy of residence and
transportation for full-time, permanent police
officers in the Borough.
Res. 8/20/1974 8/20/1974 Establishing a pension plan by joining the
Master Corporate Pension Plan and Trust of
the Pennsylvania State Association of
Boroughs.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:874
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 9/24/1974 9/24/1974 Amending Res. 8/20/1974, which established
the Borough Pension Plan.
Res. 1/31/1977 1/31/1977 Entering into an agreement between the
Borough, the West Donegal Township
Authority and the Township of West Donegal
to accept wastewater from the collection
system to be constructed by the West
Donegal Township Authority.
Res. 2/21/1978 2/21/1978 Adopting the Comprehensive Plan for the
Borough.
607 4/11/1978 Approving a Joint Municipal Agreement
between the Township of Manheim and the
Borough of Elizabethtown for the purpose of
providing the services of a bomb technician.
Res. 4/17/1979 4/17/1979 Agreeing to adhere to the standards for
training established by the Municipal Police
Officer's Education and Training Commission
while receiving State funds.
Res. 5/15/1979 5/15/1979 Opposing the discharge of radioactive wastes
into the Susquehanna River which have
radioactive levels above the minimum
standards of the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission. Also, requesting adequate
notification prior to any action taken by the
Nuclear Regulatory Commission regarding
disposal into the Susquehanna River.
Res. 12/31/
1979
12/31/1979 Appointing Trout, Ebersole and Groff to audit
the funds and accounts for the year ended
December 31, 1979. Also, exonerating the
local elected auditors from performing audit
services for the Borough for the calendar
year 1979.
Res. 12/18/
1980
12/8/1980 Appointing Trout, Ebersole and Groff as
independent auditors for the fiscal year 1980.
Res. 12/17/
1981
12/17/1981 Authorizing the use of the Liquid Fuels Tax
Fund for the purpose of maintenance and
repair of existing roads.
Res. 1/4/1982 1/4/1982 Appointing Nick Viscome and Peter Whipple
as Borough Manager/Secretary and Assistant
Manager/Treasurer, respectively.
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:875
Ord./Res. Date Subject
639 6/17/1982 Authorizing the Borough of Elizabethtown to
enter into an agreement with the Court of
Common Pleas and the County of Lancaster
to participate in a computerized criminal
history information system.
Res. 6/17/
1982A
6/17/1982 Fixing June 9, 1982, as the completion date
for the expansion and upgrading of the
treatment works. Also, adjusting the capital
cost contribution of major industrial,
municipal and authority users.
Res. 6/17/
1982B
6/17/1982 Establishing the interest rate for delinquent
payments due from users under service
contracts between the Borough and users for
capital contributions at the rate of 10.5% per
annum.
641 10/21/1982 Establishing the membership of
Elizabethtown Borough in the Northwestern
Lancaster County of Governments.
Res. 1/20/1983 1/20/1983 Urging the President and Congress to work
for an early reenactment of the Federal
General Revenue Sharing program as it now
exits.
Res. 83-2 2/17/1983 Eliminating member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1983.
Res. 83-3 2/17/1983 Establishing that the residency distance for
all permanent full time police officers shall
not exceed 8 miles from Center Square and
authorized transportation of officers by police
vehicle, for purposes of going on or off duty,
shall not exceed the corporate limits of the
Borough.
Res. 84-1 1/3/1984 Urging Congress to adopt the technical
amendment proposed by the Redevelopment
Authority of Lancaster County which would
enable the Community Development Block
Grant program to be administered in a
similar manner prior to the changes made to
the Act on November 17, 1983.
Res. 84-2 1/19/1984 Eliminating member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1984.
Res. 84-3 2/16/1984 Appointing Nick Viscome and Peter Whipple
as Secretary and Treasurer, respectively.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:876
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 84-5 7/19/1984 Authorizing the Department of Community
Affairs to conduct a study of law enforcement
services in the Borough in conjunction with
neighboring municipalities for the purpose of
determining the feasibility of cooperative
police services.
Res. 84-6 9/20/1984 Requesting Lancaster County to prepare a
solid waste management plan on behalf of the
Borough.
Res. 85-1 1/17/1985 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the year 1985.
Res. 85-2 2/21/1985 Scheduling a public hearing for the rezoning
request of Sunrise Development Corporation.
Res. 85-3 -/-/- Adopting guidelines for the use of the public
area of Center Square and the Central
Business District.
662 3/21/1985 Terminating the Elizabethtown Water
Company Pension Plan.
Res. 86-1 2/16/1986 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1986.
Res. 86-2 4/17/1986 Establishing the residency policy for fulltime,
permanent police officers.
Res. 86-3 4/17/1986 Appointing Berkheimer Associates as
delinquent tax collector for a period
beginning May 1, 1986 and ending December
31, 1988 for per capita taxes.
Res. 86-4 4/17/1986 Concerning a joint recreation authority
whose purpose shall be to acquire, hold,
improve, maintain and operate the property
situated at 70 South Poplar Street. Also,
considering acceptance of a deed from the
Elizabethtown Area School District conveying
the property at 70 South Poplar Street.
Res. 86-5 5/15/1986 Appointing Peter J. Whipple, Treasurer, as the
chief administrative officer responsible for
the administration of the nonuniformed
pension plan and police pension plan. Also,
appointing Nick Viscome as chief
administrative officer in the absence of the
Treasurer.
Res. 86-6 10/16/1986 Fixing the time and place of a public hearing
to consider the adoption of an ordinance
amending the zoning ordinance.
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:877
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 86-7 11/20/1986 Submitting a request to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation to provide 50%
reimbursement to the Borough for all costs
incurred in relocating the sanitary manhole
frame and water valve boxes.
Res. 87-1 1/15/1987 Adopting the Lancaster County Solid Waste
Management Plan 1986 as the solid waste
management plan for Lancaster County.
Res. 87-2 1/15/1987 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the year 1987.
Res. 87-4 7/29/1987 Ratifying the agreement dated July 21, 1987,
between the Borough and the Lancaster
County Solid Waste Management Authority
for the purpose of the Borough providing
sewage effluent for use as process water at
the Lancaster County Solid Waste
Management Authority's future resource
recovery facility.
Res. 88-1 1/21/1988 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the year 1988.
Res. 88-4 5/19/1988 Adopting a uniformed personnel policy.
Res. 89-1 1/19/1989 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the year 1989.
Res. 89-2 2/21/1989 Requesting the Lancaster County Board of
Elections to place a referendum on the May
16, 1989, municipal ballot for voters of the
Borough to consider the issuance of licenses
to conduct small games of chance in the
Borough.
Res. 89-4 3/16/1989 Approving the agreement with Officer Clair
R. Martin, Jr. to extend his probationary
period until April 18, 1990.
Res. 89-5 6/15/1989 Participating in purchase contracts of
Lancaster County.
Res. 89-6 11/16/1989 Adopting the "Comprehensive Plan for
Elizabethtown Borough, Mount Joy Township
and West Donegal Township, 1989."
Res. 90-1 1/18/1990 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1990.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:878
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 90-2 3/15/1990 Authorizing certain officers to sign a
declaration of taking and other papers as are
necessary to take fee simple title to property
at the corner of Washington Street and
Spruce Street for park purposes.
Res. 90-5 6/21/1990 Acknowledging changes made to the joint
municipal comprehensive plan by the
Supervisors of West Donegal Township.
Res. 90-7 7/19/1990 Adopting fire and emergency management
services policy statement.
698 7/20/1990 Approving an addendum to intermunicipal
agreement with the Elizabethtown Area
School District, Township of West Donegal
and the Township of Mount Joy with respect
to joint administration of a recreational
program.
Res. 90-8 8/16/1990 Approving the 1990 Lancaster County
Municipal Waste Management Plan and
stating certain objections to the plan.
Res. 91-1 6/20/1991 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1991.
Res. 91-2 6/13/1991 Approving the Elizabethtown Borough
recycling plan.
Res. 91-3 6/20/1991 Suspending the issuance of sewer and water
tapping fees and permits until an ordinance is
properly advertised and adopted in
accordance with State law.
Res. 92-2 1/16/1992 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1992.
Res. 92-3 2/20/1992 Adopting a revised police manual.
723 4/16/1992 Approving an intermunicipal agreement with
the Township of West Donegal with respect to
the erection of a traffic control signal.
Res. 92-4 8/13/1992 Appointing Linda Loser, Office Manager, as
Deputy Tax Collector.
Res. 8/20/1992 8/20/1992 Approving the infectious waste revisions to
the 1990 solid waste plan.
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:879
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 92-7 9/17/1992 Designating October 31 as "Trick or Treat"
night from 6:00 p.m. to 8:00 p.m. each year
unless October 31 falls on a Saturday or
Sunday in which case "Trick or Treat" night
should occur on the Friday prior to October
31.
735 1/14/1993 Realigning the wards within the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
Res. 93-1 1/21/1993 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1993.
Res. 93-2 9/19/1993 Adopting mutual aid agreements with one or
more neighboring municipalities.
Res. 93-3 9/19/1993 Stating that the project, a regional
comprehensive parks, recreation and open
space plan, was completed in accordance
with the RIRA grant contract; all project
expenditures have been made and were made
in accordance with the RIRA grant contract;
the regional comprehensive plan and related
materials are acceptable to the Borough and
will be used as a guide for future recreation,
park and open space development.
746 10/21/1993 Providing administrative and governmental
consulting services to the Township of West
Donegal.
749 12/16/1993 Joining with other local government units as
a member of the intergovernmental
insurance cooperative.
Res. 94-1 1/20/1994 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1994.
Res. 94-5 11/17/1994 Recognizing the efforts of the Citizens Flag
Alliance to protect the United States flag.
Res. 95-1 1/19/1995 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1995.
758 1/19/1995 Entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with the Township of
West Donegal for the purpose of establishing
the Elizabethtown/West Donegal Zone
Management Agency."
759 2/16/1995 Joining other political subdivisions as a
member of the Susquehanna Municipal Trust.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:880
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 95-2 4/20/1995 Adopting a nonuniformed employees
personnel policy.
Res. 96-1 2/15/1996 Suspending member contributions to the
Police Pension Fund for the calendar year
1996.
Res. 96-3 3/21/1996 Establishing guidelines for arrest without
warrant pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S. § 8902.
Res. 96-4 7/18/1996 Adopting the Susquehanna Municipal Trust
Confined Space Entry Policy as the confined
space policy to be followed by all employees
and emergency service volunteers of the
Borough and the Borough Manager shall be
responsible for the implementation of this
policy.
770 8/15/1996 Joining with other local governments as a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government
Investment Trust for the purpose of
purchasing shares of the trust.
Res. 97-1 2/20/1997 Requesting permission to participate in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania cooperative
purchasing program.
Res. 97-2 6/19/1997 Reviewing the Elizabethtown Borough/West
Donegal Township emergency operations
plan.
Res. 97-4 8/21/1997 Adopting a comprehensive plan for the
Elizabethtown area comprising of
Elizabethtown Borough, Mount Joy Township
and West Donegal Township.
Res. 97-5 8/21/1997 Adopting the concept to consolidate the
Elizabethtown Area Recreation Commission
and the Elizabethtown Area Community
Services Authority.
Res. 97-7 11/20/1997 Authorizing the Lancaster County Planning
Commission to make an application for a
grant in the amount of $50,940.
785 6/18/1998 Authorizing and approving an agreement
with the Elizabethtown Area School District,
Borough of Elizabethtown, Township of
Mount Joy, Township of West Donegal and
Elizabethtown Area Recreation Commission
to cooperate for park and recreation
purposes for the formation, financing
operation and dissolution of the Commission.
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:881
Ord./Res. Date Subject
821 12/21/2000 Fixing the Real Estate Tax Rate for the 2001
Fiscal Year.
Res. 2001-01 3/15/2001 Authorizing the disposal of several records in
accordance with the Municipal Records
Manual.
Res. 2002-1 3/21/2002 Approving the filing of an application for the
Community Parks Initiative grant program of
Lancaster County.
Res. 2002-2 —/—/2002 Committing to prepare an open space and
recreation plan or the open space and
recreation chapter of the comprehensive plan
within two years from the date of the
Community Parks Initiative grant award.
Res. 2002-3 4/13/2002 Authorizing the disposition of public records.
Res. 2002-6 4/30/2002 Requesting the Elizabethtown Area Regional
Authority to undertake the acquisition of
park, open space and recreational land.
Res. 2002-4 5/16/2002 Approving the financing by the Elizabethtown
Industrial Development Authority of a project
for the benefit of Elizabethtown College.
Res. 2002-5 7/18/2002 Authorizing application of grants-in-aid to an
intermunicipal cooperative project.
833 6/20/2002 Authorizing the Borough to enter into an
intermunicipal agreement to provide for
formation of the Donegal-Elizabethtown Area
Appeals Board and for the joint
administration of certain portions of the
building code.
Res. 2002-7 8/15/2002 Adopting the revised non-uniformed
employees personnel policy dated August 15,
2002.
Res. 2002-8 8/15/2002 Approving the financing by the Elizabethtown
Industrial Development Authority of a project
for the benefit of Elizabethtown College.
Res. 2002-9 8/15/2002 Endorsing certain principles set forth by the
South Central Assembly for Effective
Governance.
Res. 2002-10 8/15/2002 Establishing a policy of residence within
proximity to Borough for full-time permanent
police officers.
Res. 2003-2 2/20/2003 Authorizing the Borough to participate in the
PACC 2002-03 contract by purchasing
supplies and services from the contract.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:882
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 2003-3 3/20/2003 Authorizing the Borough to apply for an
Enterprise Grant to implement an historic
preservation program in the Borough.
Res. 2003-5 12/18/2003 Authorizing the Borough to request sealed
bids for the sale of 10.1 acres of land situated
on the north side of Turnpike Road in West
Donegal Township, Lancaster County.
847 7/15/2004 Signifying the desire and intention of the
Borough to organize a joint authority under
the Municipality Authorities Act.
Res. 2004-2 7/15/2004 Adopting rules of decorum for public
meetings.
848 8/19/2004 Signifying the desire and intention of the
Borough to organize a joint authority under
the Municipality Authorities Act.
Res. 2004-6 12/16/2004 Authorizing and approving a subsidy
agreement with Elizabethtown Area Water
Authority under which said Authority will
make semi-annual payments for and toward
payment of the debt service on certain
outstanding bonds of the Borough.
Res. 2004-7 12/16/2004 Granting to the Elizabethtown Area Water
Authority certain rights and privileges in,
along, over and under streets, roads, lanes,
courts, cul-de-sacs, alleys, public ways, public
squares and other properties of the Borough
for use in connection with said Authority's
water system.
Res. 2005-1 1/20/2005 Indicating the Borough Council's intent to
follow the schedules and procedures for
disposition of records as set forth in the
Municipal Records Manual approved on July
16, 1993.
Res. 2005-2 1/20/2005 Adopting the revised Non-uniformed
Employees Personnel Policy.
Res. 2005-5 —/—/2005 Forwarding for the Enterprise Committee
review a grant proposal requesting $5,000
for Community Park Stream Bank
Restoration.
Res. 2005-6 4/21/2005 Adopting the Elizabethtown Area Community
Services Authority Regional Comprehensive
Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan as
the Elizabethtown Borough Comprehensive
Parks, Recreation and Open Space Plan.
§ D-101 FOREWORD § D-101
FWD:883
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 2005-8 8/18/2005 Authorizing the Borough to impose use
restriction on certain property known as 323
and 325 East Orange Street and to authorize
the sale of same at public sale.
Res. 2005-10 10/20/2005 Revising procedures and policies for the
dedication of park and recreational land or
payment of a fee in lieu thereof.
Res. 2005-13 12/30/2005 Appointing a new collector for the
Emergency and Municipal Services Tax;
addressing various tax return and collection
issues.
877 10/19/2006 Amending the Non-Uniformed Employees
Pension Plan to comply with the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986, as amended.
881 2/15/2007 Amending the Non-Uniformed Employees
Pension Plan to add a short-term bond
investment.
886 8/16/2007 Adopting and entering into the Northwest
Lancaster County Intermunicipal Cooperative
Planning Agreement to develop a multimunicipal
Comprehensive Plan.
895 4/17/2008 Entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement for the purpose of
establishing a Zone Emergency Management
Agency.
907 4/16/2009 Entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with the Municipal
Utility Alliance and other local governments
and appointing the Municipal Utility Alliance
as the Borough's bidding and purchasing
consultant for the joint purchase of certain
utility services and products.
Res. 2009-11 12/17/2009 Appointing a new chief administrative officer
for the Nonuniformed Employees Pension
Plan and the Police Pension Plan.
910 1/21/2010 Joining the Pennsylvania Intergovernmental
Risk Management Association for the
purpose of entering into a contract to form a
local government risk pool.
921 5/20/2010 Dissolution of Elizabethtown Area Park
Authority and transfer of assets to the
incorporating municipalities.
Res. 2011-7 12/15/2011 Establishing a policy for disposition of
surplus Borough property.
§ D-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § D-101
FWD:884
Ord./Res. Date Subject
959 8/21/2014 Entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement for the purpose of
establishing a Zone Emergency Management
Agency.
961 10/30/2014 Directing the Elizabethtown Area Regional
Authority to transfer all assets to the
incorporating municipalities and terminate its
existence.
982 2/16/2017 Entering into an intergovernmental
cooperation agreement with the Township of
Mount Joy for transportation projects.
Appendix E
PLAN APPROVAL
§ E-101. Plan Approval.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
12/19/1911A 12/19/1911 Providing for the making of a General Plan for
the Topographical Survey and Map.
5/28/1912 5/28/1912 Regulating, defining and adopting the General
Plan of the Streets, Lanes, Alleys, Public
Squares and Pavements,
8/20/1946 8/20/1946 Amending the Borough Plan by incorporating
the Plan of Sunnyside heights.
8/15/1955 8/15/1955 Amending the Borough Plan by altering the
location of certain streets in the "Forest Hills
Development."
664 9/19/1985 Amending the Official Borough Plan by
removing therefrom the proposed Sunrise
Terrace Bikepath.
822 1/18/2001 Adopting an Official Map of the Borough of
Elizabethtown.
919 4/29/2010 Adopting an updated Official Map of the
Borough of Elizabethtown.
Appendix F
PUBLIC PROPERTY
§ D-101 FOREWORD § F-101
FWD:885
§ F-101. Public Property.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
6/4/1828 6/4/1828 Relating to the purchase of fire equipment by
the Borough.
7/12/1908 7/12/1908 Providing for the streets, alleys, public squares
and the pavements of the Borough.
10/19/1910 10/19/1910 Purchasing a fire hose.
10/17/1911 10/17/1911 Providing for the purchase of a lot of land
situated on the north side of Mechanic Alley.
7/19/1912 7/19/1912 Providing for the purchase of a concrete mixer.
7/16/1913 7/16/1913 Providing for the purchase from James J. Doyle,
and wife, of a certain lot of land situated at the
intersection of Bainbridge Street with Poplar
Street.
11/23/1918 11/23/1918 Purchasing a compressor from the Ingersoll
Rand Company.
5/15/1919 5/15/1919 Purchasing a No. 2 grader.
7/20/1920 7/20/1920 Providing for the purchase of a dump truck.
11/2/1925 11/2/1925 Providing for the purchase from William B.
Schneitman of a lot of land situated on the
west side of South Poplar Street, between
Conoy Street and West Bainbridge Street.
5/17/1932 5/17/1932 Providing for the purchase of a new chassis to
replace the present chassis of the Brockway
Chemical Truck.
Res. 4/19/
1938
4/19/1938 Selling of certain real estate owned by the
Borough and formerly the property of George
B. Gise, Harry H. and Elizabeth H. Nye, Tom C.
Shirk and Daniel F. Shuman.
§ F-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § F-101
FWD:886
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 5/17/
1938
5/17/1938 Selling by the Borough of a tract of land
situated on the north side of East Washington
Street, between South Mount Joy Street and
South Spruce Street, to John D. Berberian.
Selling by the Borough of a tract of land
situated on the north side of East Washington
Street, between Locust Street and an unnamed
alley, to Frank S. Spickler and Anna M.
Spickler. Selling by the Borough of a tract of
land situated on the south side of East Orange
Street, between South Spruce and South
Locust Streets, to Elmer S. Eshelman and Pearl
T. Eshelman. Selling by the Borough of a tract
of land situated on the east side of South
Brown Street, between West High Street and
West Bainbridge Street, to Louis Charleroy.
Selling by the Borough of a triangular tract of
land situated on the east side of South Poplar
Street, between West High and West
Bainbridge Streets, to the Elizabethtown Ice
Manufacturing Company.
10/20/1953B 10/20/1953 Establishing additional areas as a recreation
place for the citizens of the Borough.
6/15/1954 6/15/1954 Purchasing of a lot on East High Street in the
Borough.
3/21/1955A 3/21/1955 Purchasing of a lot adjoining Borough land on
West High Street in the Borough.
9/19/1955 9/19/1955 Location of certain streets in certain portions
of Elizabethtown known as “Forest Hills
Development.”
10/17/1955 10/19/1955 Negotiating for and purchasing a strip of land
along Cottage Avenue in the Borough.
392 12/15/1955 Authorizing purchasing of a lot lying between
West High Street and Winnemore Street in the
Borough.
5/20/1956 5/20/1956 Purchasing automatic traffic control lights.
Res. 9/10/
1957
9/10/1957 Appropriating a right-of-way easement
through the land of J. Henry Rutt and Ethel M.
Rutt for the purpose of changing the course of
Conoy Creek.
10/15/1957 10/15/1957 Altering the course of Conoy Creek in the
northeast section of the Borough and
authorizing the purchase of rights-of-way for
relocating said Creek.
§ F-101 FOREWORD § F-101
FWD:887
Ord./Res. Date Subject
385 7/21/1959 Authorizing the sale of a lot of land by the
Borough.
408 4/18/1961 Authorizing purchasing of a lot with a dwelling
thereon at the intersection of North Market
Street and East Hummelstown Street in the
Borough.
445 3/19/1963 Authorizing acknowledgment of a deed
conveying a certain tract of land acquired from
the Elizabethtown Area School Authority and
the Elizabethtown Area School District.
450 8/20/1963 Entering into an Agreement of Sale for the
purchase of a certain lot of land with a
warehouse thereon on the north side of East
Plum Street.
Res. 1/19/
1971
1/19/1971 Selling of a certain vacant tract of land
situated at the southwest corner of Cedar
Street and South Hanover Street to Carson
M. and Viola H. Geyer. Selling of a certain
vacant tract of land situated on the east side of
Market Street to Carson M. and Viola H. Geyer.
Res. 11/16/
1971
11/16/1971 Selling of a certain lot or tract of land which
is part of a tract purchased to relocate and
improve Cedar Street.
Res. 4/13/
1972
4/13/1972 Selling of a tract of unimproved land situated
on the west side of Poplar Street, which
Elizabethtown Garment Company conveyed to
the Borough to provide a means of access to
land owned by Elizabethtown School District,
to George S. Engle.
Res. 12/19/
1972
12/19/1972 Conveying a certain tract of land situated on
the north side to Arch Street to Turkey Hill
Dairy.
566 11/20/1973 Authorizing exchanging a lot on North Mt. Joy
Street for that owned by J. Henry and Ethel M.
Rutt.
Res. 8/20/
1974A
8/20/1974 Leasing to the Friendship Fire & Hose
Company No. 1 a tract of land on North Mt. Joy
Street.
Res. 88-5 7/21/1988 Accepting for dedication a small parcel of
ground adjacent to Westbury Court.
Res. 90-9 9/20/1990 Acquiring by eminent domain proceedings
from ERN-BARK, Inc., the fee simple title to
real estate situate in the west side of Peach
Alley.
§ F-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § F-101
FWD:888
Ord./Res. Date Subject
738 3/18/1993 Transferring the parking lot owned by the
Elizabethtown Business Promotion, Inc., to the
Borough.
Res. 94-4 8/18/1994 Condemning a certain a tract of land situate
at the northeast corner of the intersection of
North Market Street and Linden Avenue for
the purpose of erecting a traffic control signal.
Res. 96-6 9/12/1996 Approving proposed financing by Friendship
Fire & Hose Co. No. 1 for the acquisition of a
fire truck.
Res. 96-7 9/19/1996 Purchasing a tract of land located on West
Bainbridge Street, Route 241, at the
southwestern section of a tract, being part of
the premises known as Willowood Swim Club.
Res. 97-3 7/17/1997 Accepting the assignment of the agreement of
sale and purchase for 10-20 South Market
Street from the Elizabethtown Public Library.
Res. 01-2 5/17/2001 Entering into a standard agreement for the
sale of real estate for the purchase of 620
South Hanover Street from Peter J. and Linda
B. Whipple.
953 12/19/2013 Authorizing proceedings for condemnation to
acquire 50 East Washington Street.
Res. 2016-13 9/15/2016 Authorizing the sale of real property at 616
South Market Street, Elizabethtown Borough,
to Rene H. Maldonado.
Res. 2016-19 12/15/2016 Authorizing the transfer of real property at 400
East Willow Street, Elizabethtown Borough, to
the Friendship Fire and Hose Company No. 1.
Res. 2018-07 5/17/2018 Purchasing property located at 56 North
Market Street.
Appendix G
SEWERS
§ F-101 FOREWORD § G-101
FWD:889
§ G-101. Sewers.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
12/19/1911 12/19/1911 Providing for the making of a "General Plan"
of the Borough of Elizabethtown, for a
topographical survey and map of said
Borough, together with plans, specifications
and estimates of a complete storm and
sanitary sewer system, including a plant for
disposal.
8/22/1923 8/22/1923 Adopting the "General Plan for the Sanitary
Sewerage System of Elizabethtown" and
establishing, laying out and ordaining the
common sewers and drains in the streets of
the Borough.
11/23/1923 11/23/1923 Authorizing the execution of a contract with
"The Right Worshipful Grand Lodge of the
Most Ancient and Honorable Fraternity of
Free and Accepted Masons of Pennsylvania
and Masonic Jurisdiction Thereunto
Belonging" and "Trustees of the Title to the
Masonic Temple and other Real Estate of the
Grand Lodge of the Most Ancient and
Honorable Fraternity of Free and Accepted
Masons of Pennsylvania" relating to the
construction of a portion of the sanitary
sewerage system.
2/27/1924 2/27/1924 Providing for the taking and appropriating
of certain portions of land for extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer A.
Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands situated in West Donegal
Township for extending, constructing and
maintaining Trunk Sewer B.
Providing for the taking and appropriating of
certain lands for extending, constructing and
maintain Trunk Sewer C.
Providing for the taking and appropriating
of certain portions of land for extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer D.
Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the "General Plan of the
Sanitary Sewerage System."
§ G-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § G-101
FWD:890
Ord./Res. Date Subject
6/17/1924 6/17/1924 Providing for the execution of a contract
between the Borough and the firm of Fuller &
McClintock for erection and construction of
the sanitary sewerage system.
7/28/1924 7/28/1924 Providing for the erection and construction of
the sanitary sewage disposal plant and Trunk
Sewers A, B, C and D.
9/2/1924 9/2/1924 Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the "General Plan of the
Sanitary Sewerage System."
8/19/1925A 8/19/1925 Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the "General Plan of the
Sanitary Sewerage System."
10/2/1925 10/2/1925 Levying and assessing, as a sewer tax, claim
or assessment, against the assessable
properties abutting upon the street, square
and alleys in which portions of the sanitary
sewerage system have been constructed in
the Borough.
10/10/1925 10/10/1925 Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the "General Plan of the
Sanitary Sewerage System."
Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the "General Plan of the
Sanitary Sewerage System."
10/21/1925 10/21/1925 Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands for the purpose of extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer C.
11/2/1925A 11/2/1925 Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands for the purpose of extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer A.
Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands in West Donegal Township for
the purpose of extending, constructing and
maintaining Trunk Sewer B.
Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands for the purpose of extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer C.
§ G-101 FOREWORD § G-101
FWD:891
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Providing for taking and appropriating
certain lands for the purpose of extending,
constructing and maintaining Trunk Sewer D.
12/16/1930 12/16/1930 Authorizing an agreement between the
Borough of Elizabethtown and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Health for the disposal and payment of
sanitary sewage from the Elizabethtown
State Hospital for Crippled Children.
7/21/1931 7/21/1931 Appropriating a certain sum received under a
contract for the disposal of sewage from the
State Home for Crippled Children between
the Borough of Elizabethtown and the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
4/21/1953 4/21/1953 Providing for the construction of certain
parts of the sanitary sewerage system
according to the General Plan of the sanitary
sewerage system.
Res. 11/12/
1957A
11/12/1957 Accepting the bid of Rice and Weidman, Inc.,
Lancaster, for construction of alterations and
additions to a sewerage treatment plant.
Res. 6/6/1961 6/6/1961 Authorizing an agreement with Gannet
Fleming Corddry & Carpenter, Inc., relating
to preparation of a feasibility report plan for
improvements and additions to the sewerage
system and treatment plant.
Res. 1/16/
1962A
1/16/1962 Authorizing the acceptance of an amendment
to an Agreement with Gannet Fleming
Corddry & Carpenter, Inc. relating to
improvements and additions to the sewerage
system and treatment plant.
Res. 11/19/
1963
11/19/1963 Resolving that the Borough take, acquire and
appropriate the free and uninterrupted right,
use, liberty and privilege of constructing,
reconstructing, repairing, inspecting,
maintaining, removing, and relocating a
pipeline or pipelines for sewage purposes.
Res. 1/6/1964 1/6/1964 Awarding of the contract for Part B, Contract
2 of the Park Trunk Sewer Line to Roegele,
Inc., Harrisburg.
Res. 2/18/1964 2/18/1964 Granting permission to the Grand Lodge to
connect into an additional sewer line.
§ G-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § G-101
FWD:892
Ord./Res. Date Subject
Res. 1/19/1965 1/19/1965 Authorizing the placement of advertisements
and take bids for construction of a pumping
station to be known as "Oak Manor Pumping
Station.
490 3/16/1965 Authorizing the construction of a trunk sewer
in the Borough.
Res. 4/20/1965 4/20/1965 Approving insurance coverages on a
construction contract and authorizing
Rogele, Inc., to proceed with sewer
construction.
Res. 5/5/1965 5/5/1965 Awarding contract for the construction of the
Oak Manor Pumping Station to Moseman
Construction Company, Inc.
Res. 5/5/1965A 5/5/1965 Awarding contract for electrical work in the
construction of Oak Manor Pumping Station
to John E. Fullerton, Inc.
Res. 7/1/1965 7/1/1965 Authorizing the beginning of the construction
of Oak Manor Pumping Station by Moseman
Construction Company, Inc.
519 10/15/1968 Assessing the cost of construction of the
project in accordance with the front-foot rule.
Res. 1/21/1969 1/21/1969 Awarding contracts for construction of
additions and alterations to the sewage
treatment plant.
Res. 1/8/1972 1/8/1972 Executing an agreement for certain work and
services by Gannett Fleming Corddry and
Carpenter, Inc. relating to a study and report
of excess wet weather sewage flows.
Res. 7/15/1975 7/15/1975 Amending the Comprehensive Sewerage Plan
to incorporate the design plans and
specifications prepared by Filson-Ginrich &
Minnich for the construction of the extension
line necessary to connect the proposed threestory
brick skilled care facility of the Masonic
Health Care Center.
Res. 2/17/1976 2/17/1976 Permitting the installation of on-site waste
water disposal systems.
Res. 9/7/1976 9/7/1976 Authorizing Vartan Associates to perform the
engineering work required in connection
with sewage treatment and disposal facilities.
§ G-101 FOREWORD § G-101
FWD:893
Ord./Res. Date Subject
794 2/18/1999 Authorizing the Borough to provide
contracted services for the operation and
maintenance of the Mount Joy Township
Authority Sewer and Water system in
Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
816 7/13/2000 Approving an Intermunicipal Agreement with
Mount Joy Township, Mount Joy Township
Authority and Elizabethtown Area Regional
Authority concerning expansions, upgrading,
reservation of capacity, rates and charges
and other items relating to the wastewater
treatment plant and conveyance facilities
providing wastewater conveyance, treatment
and disposal services to properties without
Mount Joy Township.
817 7/13/2000 Approving an Intermunicipal Agreement with
West Donegal Township Authority and
Elizabethtown Area Regional Authority
concerning expansions, upgrading,
reservation of capacity, rates and charges,
and other items relating to the Wastewater
Treatment Plant and conveyance facilities
providing wastewater conveyance, treatment
and disposal services to properties within the
Borough and within West Donegal Township.
126-2000 8/7/2000 Approving an Intermunicipal Agreement with
West Donegal Township Authority and
Elizabethtown Area Regional Authority
concerning expansions, upgrading,
reservation of capacity, rates and charges,
and other items relating to the Wastewater
Treatment Plant and conveyance facilities
providing wastewater conveyance, treatment
and disposal services to properties within the
Borough and within West Donegal Township.
Res. 2000-6 8/17/2000 Adopting an Official Sewage Facilities Plan
conforming to applicable zoning, subdivision,
other municipal ordinances and plans and to
a comprehensive program of pollution
control and water quality management.
Res. 2001-8 2/8/3002 Authorizing the acquisition of a tract of land
and certain easements by dedication or by
deed or grant in lieu of condemnation for the
expansion of the Wastewater Treatment Plant
from Masonic Homes.
§ G-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § G-101
FWD:894
Ord./Res. Date Subject
916 4/15/2010 Authorizing an amendment to the 2000
intermunicipal agreement with Mount Joy
Township, Mount Joy Township Authority and
Elizabethtown Area Regional Authority for
wastewater treatment services.
917 4/15/2010 Authorizing an amendment to the 2000
intermunicipal agreement with West Donegal
Township Authority and Elizabethtown Area
Regional Authority for wastewater treatment
services.
Appendix H
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
§ H-101. Streets and Sidewalks.
This appendix contains an alphabetical listing of streets; and, under each
street, a listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Ada Alley Remove Between Apple
Alley and
College Avenue
528 7/16/1969
Apple Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
Arch Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
Arch Street Adopt From Hanover
Street to Cherry
Alley
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
Arch Street Open Entire length 7/15/1969 7/15/1969
Arrowhead
Drive
Dedication Beginning at its
intersection with
Masonic Drive
and terminating
at its
intersection with
Maize Circle
986 4/19/2018
Ash Alley Remove Between Olive
Alley and S.
Locust Street
528 7/16/1969
§ G-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:895
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Ash Alley Remove Between S.
Mount Joy Street
and Olive Alley
513 4/2/1968
Ash Alley Remove Between S.
Mount Joy Street
and Locust
Street
513 4/2/1968
Aspen Alley Vacate Extending from
S. Market Street
to Cherry Alley
618 7/17/1979
Aspen Cir. Add to
official plan
Mulberry Street
to cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Astor Alley Vacate Between Grant
Alley and State
Alley
595 19/19/1976
Astor Alley Vacate Extending 750
feet located east
of Brown Street
between three
unnamed alleys
828 8/16/2001
Bainbridge
Street
Sewer West Donegal
Township; from
the Borough line
to the
intersection with
the trunk sewer
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
Bainbridge
Street
Sewer From Mill Street
extended to West
Donegal
Township
456 12/26/1963
Bainbridge
Street
Vacate Certain portions
of Bainbridge
Street
4/19/1910 4/19/1910
Bank Alley Remove Extending in a
southwest
direction from a
point on the
northeast
boundary of Lois
Alley to the
northeast
boundary of
Brown Street
538 8/8/1970
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:896
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Bank Alley Vacate A 14 ft. wide
alley, extending
from S. Poplar
Street to a point
166 ft.
westward.
711 5/16/1991
Baugher
Avenue
Vacate Between College
Avenue and
Cedar Street
574 9/17/1974
Beech Alley Improvement Entire Length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Beech Alley Vacate Between E.
Willow Street
and E.
Hummelstown
Street
595 10/19/1976
Beech Ln. Add to
official plan
W. Bainbridge
Street to cul-desac
807 4/20/2000
Bernice
Avenue
Vacate Between W. High
Street and an
unnamed alley
602 12/20/1977
Berry Alley Remove Between Orange
Street and Arch
Street
528 7/16/1969
Berry Alley Vacate Between south
side of E. Arch
Street and the
north side of E.
Cedar Street
616 3/20/1979
Brookview Cir. Add to
official plan
Northfield Drive
to cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Brown Street Vacate Portion of Brown
Street
8/15/1899 8/15/1899
Buch Alley Remove Between E.
Lemon Street
and Ridge Road
528 7/16/1969
Campus Road Water mains College Avenue
to Hampden
Road extended
Res. 87-3 5/21/1987
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:897
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Campus Road Water mains Unopened
section from
College Avenue
to East High
Street
Res. 87-3 5/21/1987
Cedar Avenue Open Portion of Cedar
Avenue
477 9/15/1964
Cedar Street Sewer Entire length 6/16/1964 6/16/1964
Cherry Alley Vacate Extending
southeast from
Cedar Street to
the intersection
of an alley and S.
Hanover Street
544 1/19/1971
Cherry Alley Sewer From the
southeast corner
of E. High Street
to the southeast
corner of
Mechanics
Street
8/21/1907 8/21/1907
Chestnut
Street
Improvement Between College
Avenue and
Bainbridge
Street
7/22/1947 7/22/1947
Chestnut
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of
Chestnut Street
459 3/17/1964
Church Alley Vacate/
remove
Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
671 3/20/1986
Cliff Lane Add to
official plan
Gerald Drive to
Borough line
807 4/20/2000
Cloud Alley Remove Between Cedar
Street and Plum
Street
528 7/16/1969
College
Avenue
Sewer Between Cherry
Alley and
Hanover Street
462 4/30/1964
College
Avenue
Adopt Certain portions
of College
Avenue
9/19/1911 9/19/1911
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:898
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
College
Avenue
Water mains Campus Road to
South Mount Joy
Street
Res. 87-3 5/21/1987
Community
Park
Sewer From Manhole
B-9 to College
Avenue
462 4/30/1964
Conoy Avenue Open Between Sunrise
Blvd. and Radio
Road
685 11/19/1987
Conoy Avenue Add to
official plan
Radio Road to
Borough line
807 4/20/2000
Cottage Alley Vacate/
remove
Between N.
Market Street
and Cherry Alley
665 7/18/1985
Cottage Street Sewer Between N.
Poplar Street
and Peach Alley
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
Cottage Street Sewer Between N.
Poplar Street
and Peach Alley
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Cottage
Avenue
Remove Between N.
Poplar Street
and Peach Alley
528 12/16/1969
Cottage
Avenue
Remove Between Cherry
Alley and N.
Hanover Street
528 12/16/1969
Cranfield
Court
Add to
official plan
Foxbury Drive to
cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Crestlawn
Alley
Remove (Unopened)
From east side of
Frey Alley to
west side of N.
Spruce Street
525 3/18/1969
Crestlawn
Alley
Open From N. Market
Street to N.
Cherry Alley
905 2/19/2009
Crestlawn
Avenue
Vacate Between N.
Spruce Street
and a four-foot
alley
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Crestlawn
Avenue
Vacate Between N.
Market Street
and Cherry Alley
595 10/19/1976
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:899
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Crestlawn
Avenue
Rename Between S.
Market Street
and Frey Alley;
change to
Crestlawn Alley
898 10/16/2008
Dewey Alley Vacate Portion of Dewey
Alley
9/19/1905A 9/19/1905A
Dogwood
Circle
Open From Conoy
Avenue to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Duke Alley Remove Between Aspen
Alley and E.
Washington
Street
528 7/16/1969
Earl Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
E. Arch Street Sewer Between S.
Hanover Street
and S. Market
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. Arch Street Sewer Between S.
Hanover Street
and S. Market
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E. Bainbridge
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of E.
Bainbridge
Street
8/20/1968 8/20/1968
E. Bainbridge
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of E.
Bainbridge
Street
380 5/19/1959
E. Bainbridge
Street
Remove Unopened
portion
517 8/20/1968
E. Cedar
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of E.
Cedar Street
413 9/19/1961
E. Cedar
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of E.
Cedar Street
468 6/16/1964
E. Cedar
Street
Sewer Portions of E.
Cedar Street
469 6/16/1964
E. College
Avenue
Open/extend Between S.
Mount Joy Street
and Borough
limits
11/19/1941 11/19/1941
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:900
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
E. College
Avenue
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Chestnut
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. High Street Improvement Entire length 396 4/19/1960
E. High Street Improvement Entire length 401 7/9/1960
E. High Street Sewer Between Center
Square and the
eastern Borough
line
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. High Street Sewer Between Center
Square and the
eastern Borough
line
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E. High Street Sewer Portion of E.
High Street
382 5/19/1959
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate West of N.
Spruce Street
8/21/1923 9/21/1923
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Planning Between N.
Spruce Street
and Borough line
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Improvement Entire length 9/16/1947 9/16/1947
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate Between N.
Spruce Street
and N. Chestnut
Street
5/21/1956 5/21/1956
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate Portion of E.
Hummelstown
Street
1/21/1958A 1/21/1958
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate Unopened
portion between
N. Chestnut
Street and east
Borough line
1/21/1958A 1/21/1958
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Open/
improve
Portions of E.
Hummelstown
Street
384 6/16/1959
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:901
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Hanover
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Hanover
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Improvement Entire length 4/20/1948 4/20/1948
E.
Hummelstown
Street
Open/
improve
A certain portion
of E.
Hummelstown
Street
398 4/19/1960
E. Lemon
Street
Open/
improve
East of
intersection with
Mount Joy Street
527 7/10/1969
E. Oak Street Open/
improve
Portion of E. Oak
Street
11/12/1957 11/12/1957
E. Oak Street Relocate East of
intersection with
N. Locust Street
10/23/1956 10/23/1956
E. Oak Street Open/
improve
Portion between
N. Spruce Street
and Highlawn
Avenue
10/15/1957A 10/15/1957
E. Oak Street Open/
improve
Portion between
N. Spruce Street
and N. Locust
Street
10/15/1957A 10/15/1957
E. Oak Street Open/
improve
Portion of E. Oak
Street
444 3/19/1963
E. Oak Street Open/
improve
Portion of E. Oak
Street
458 1/21/1964
E. Oak Street Dedication Between Holly
Street and
Mount Joy Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
E. Oak Street Dedication Between Holly
Street and old
Borough
boundary
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:902
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
E. Orange
Street
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. Orange
Street
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E. Park Street Improvement Between east
side of S. Mount
Joy Street and
west side of S.
Chestnut Street
9/19/1933 9/19/1933
E. Park Street Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Chestnut
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. Park Street Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Chestnut
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E. Plum Street Improvement Entire length 4/18/1950 4/18/1950
E. Plum Street Vacate Between the east
side of S. Mount
Joy Street to the
present Borough
line
616 3/20/1979
E. Summit
Street
Open/
improve
Certain portions
of E. Summit
Street
409 4/18/1961
E. Summit
Street
Open Between N.
Hanover Street
and Lane Alley
410 4/18/1961
E. Summit
Street
Improvement Portion of E.
Summit Street
411 6/6/1961
E. Summit
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of E.
Summit Street
458 1/21/1964
E. Summit
Street
Dedication Between Holly
Street and N.
Mount Joy Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:903
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
E. Summit
Street
Dedication Between Holly
Street and old
Borough
boundary
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
E. Washington
Street
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. Washington
Street
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
E. Willow
Street
Open Portion of E.
Willow Street
11/18/1925 11/18/1925
E. Willow
Street
Open/extend East side of N.
Market Street to
N. Hanover
Street
11/18/1925 11/18/1925
E. Willow
Street
Planning Between N.
Spruce Street
and the Borough
line
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
E. Willow
Street
Open/
improve
Eastward from
intersection with
N. Mount Joy
Street
447 4/16/1963
E. Willow
Street
Dedication From 270 feet
from the east
side of Lime
Street to the
west side of
Beechwood Lane
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
E. Willow
Street
Sewer Between N.
Hanover Street
and N. Spruce
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
E. Willow
Street
Sewer Between N.
Hanover Street
and N. Spruce
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Eden Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:904
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Edge Alley Remove Between Bank
Alley and
Bainbridge
Street
538 8/8/1970
Edge Alley Vacate Between W.
Bainbridge
Street and Bank
Alley
595 10/19/1976
Edgewood
Avenue
Vacate Entire length 12/20/1954 12/20/1954
Elk Alley Vacate Between W.
Bainbridge
Street and Bank
Alley
595 10/19/1976
Fairview
Street
Vacate West of N. Poplar
Street
898 10/16/2008
Fieldstone Ln. Add to
official plan
Northfield Drive
to Radio Road
807 4/20/2000
Fig Alley Vacate Between Orange
Street and Flint
Alley
8/18/1953 8/18/1953
Fig Alley Remove Between Sand
Alley and Orange
Street
528 7/16/1969
Fig Alley Remove Between Pearl
Alley and Cedar
Street
528 7/16/1969
Fir Alley Remove Between Apple
Alley and
College Avenue
528 7/16/1969
Flint Alley Remove Between Fig
Alley and S.
Spruce Street
528 7/16/1969
Flint Alley Remove Between Short
Alley and S.
Mount Joy Street
528 7/16/1969
Flint Alley Vacate Between S.
Spruce Street
and Short Alley
595 10/19/1976
Flint Alley Vacate Between S.
Locust Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
595 10/19/1976
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:905
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Forest Hills
Development
Location Certain streets
in Forest Hills
Development
9/19/1955 9/19/1955
Foxbury Drive Open From Conoy
Avenue to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Foxchase
Drive
Add to
official plan
Gerald Drive to
Foxfield Ln.
807 4/20/2000
Foxfield Ln. Add to
official plan
Cul-de-sac to culde-
sac
807 4/20/2000
Frey Alley Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Gerald Drive Open E. High to end 685 11/19/1987
Governor Alley Name Between N.
Peach Alley and
N. Poplar Street
898 10/16/2008
Grandview
Circle
Open Spring Garden
Street to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Grant Alley Remove Between Astor
Alley and Race
Alley
528 7/16/1969
Grant Alley Vacate Between S.
Brown Street
and Astor Alley
595 10/19/1976
Greenleaf
Lane
Add to
official plan
S. Mt. Joy Street
to end
807 4/20/2000
Groff Avenue Improvement Between
Woodland
Avenue and
Hickory Lane
5/24/1965 5/24/1965
Groff Avenue Improvement Between Hickory
Lane and the
east Borough
line
5/24/1965 5/24/1965
Groff Avenue Sewer Entire length 388 9/15/1959
Grubb Alley Remove Southward form
intersection with
W. High Street
528 7/16/1969
Gum Alley Remove Between S.
Locust Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
528 7/16/1969
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:906
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Gum Alley Remove Between S.
Spruce Street
and an unnamed
alley
528 7/16/1969
Hampden
Road
Improvement Entire length 5/24/1965 5/24/1965
Hanover
Street
Adoption Between College
Avenue and
Cherry Alley
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
Hanover
Street
Improvement Entire length 8/27/1964 8/27/1964
Hanover
Street
Improvement Entire length 479 9/28/1964
Heather Circle Open From Conoy
Avenue to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Hedgewyck
Ln.
Add to
official plan
Hillside Avenue
(west) to Hillside
Avenue (east)
807 4/20/2000
Hemlock
Circle
Open From Conoy
Avenue to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Hess Avenue Open Portion of Hess
Avenue
477 9/15/1964
Hickory Lane Rename Entire length;
formerly Locust
Lane
461 4/21/1964
Hickory Lane Dedicate From north side
of E. Willow
Street to 144
feet north
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
High Street Improvement From Station
318+33 to
Station
341+06.91
12/15/1959 12/15/1959
Highlawn
Avenue
Open/
improve
Between E.
Willow Street
and Spring
Garden Street
7/15/1952 7/15/1952
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:907
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Highlawn
Avenue
Remove (Unopened)
From east
Hummelstown
Street to 150 E.
Willow Street
and 142 E.
Willow Street
525 3/18/1969
Hillside
Avenue
Dedication Entire length 10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Hillside
Avenue
Open Between
Watercress Lane
and Sunrise
Street
Hillside
Avenue
Water mains Holly Street to
Radio Road
Res. 87-3 5/21/1987
Hillside
Avenue
Add to
official plan
Sunrise Blvd. To
Radio Road
807 4/20/2000
Holly Street Dedication Entire length 10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Hoover Alley Remove Between S.
Market Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
528 7/16/1969
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate Portion of
Hummelstown
Street
7/15/1952 7/15/1952
Huntington
Ln.
Add to
official plan
Hedgewyck Ln.
(west) to
Hedgewyck Ln.
(east)
807 4/20/2000
Iris Circle Open From Conoy
Avenue to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Iron Alley Remove Between E.
Willow Street
and Lincoln Alley
528 7/16/1969
Ironstone
Drive
Cooperative
agreement
Entire length 800 8/19/1999
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:908
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Ironstone
Drive
Add to
official plan
Beginning at its
intersection with
Mount Gretna
Road and ending
at the Mount Joy
Township/
Elizabethtown
Borough
municipal
boundary
809 5/18/2000
Jackson Alley Vacate Extending
southeast from
Bank Alley
595 10/19/1976
Jefferson Alley Remove Between Jackson
Alley to W.
Bainbridge
Street
528 7/16/1969
Jefferson Alley Vacate Between Jackson
Alley and
Monroe Alley
595 10/19/1976
Jury Alley Remove Between Spruce
Street and S.
Locust Street
528 7/16/1969
Jury Alley Vacate Entire length,
northeast from
S. Locust Street
595 10/19/1976
Kenbridge Ln. Add to
official plan
Beech Lane to
end
807 4/20/2000
Kiwanis
Boulevard
Open Portion of
Kiwanis
Boulevard
480 10/20/1964
Lancaster
Avenue
Vacate Between Penn
Street and N.
Market Street
381 5/19/1959
Lehn Alley Adoption Between Conoy
Creek and W.
Bainbridge
Street
11/2/1925 11/2/1925
Lehn Alley Remove North from its
intersection with
E. Summit Street
528 7/16/1969
Lime Street Adoption Between Spruce
Street and S.
Market Street
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:909
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Lime Street Dedication From south side
of Mulberry
Street to north
side of E. Willow
Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Lime Street Open Between Oak
Street and
Hillside Avenue
685 11/19/1987
Lincoln Alley Remove Between N.
Locust Street
and N. Mount
Joy Street
529 7/16/1969
Linden Avenue Adoption Entire length 11/18/1930 11/18/1930
Locust Street Vacate Between north
side of
Washington
Street and south
side of E. Park
Street
1/15/1935 1/15/1935
Locust Street Vacate Between north
side of
Washington
Street and north
side of E.
Bainbridge
Street
7/20/1937 7/20/1937
Locust Street Vacate Portion of Locust
Street
7/20/1937 7/20/1937
Locust Street Vacate Between Snyder
Avenue and E.
Hummelstown
Street
5/21/1956 5/21/1956
Locust Lane Name Entire length;
Changed to
Hickory Lane
461 4/21/1964
Locust Lane Open/
improve
A certain portion
of Locust Lane
398 4/19/1960
Lois Alley Remove Between Bank
Alley and
Bainbridge
Street
538 8/8/1970
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:910
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Maize Circle Dedication Beginning at the
phase line of
future Phase 5 of
Conoy Crossing
and terminating
in a cul-de-sac
turnaround
986 4/19/2018
Market Street Improvements
Entire length 1/16/1934 1/16/1934
Masonic Drive Improvements
Entire length 7/22/1947 7/22/1947
Masonic Drive Dedication Beginning at its
intersection with
W. Bainbridge
Street and
ending at the
phase line of
Phase 1 (center
line length of
853.7 feet) and
beginning at its
intersection with
W. Bainbridge
Street and
ending at its
intersection with
Pfautz Circle
(center line
length of 742
feet)
938 3/15/2012
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:911
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Masonic Drive Dedication Beginning at the
termination of
the segment
accept by Ord.
No. 938 and
terminating at
the line of future
Phase 5 of Conoy
Crossing (centerline
length of
991.06 feet and
center-line
length of
1,844.76 feet
beginning at its
intersection with
West Bainbridge
Street and
terminating at
the line of future
Phase 5 of Conoy
Crossing)
981 1/19/2017
Maytown
Avenue
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and the
Pennsylvania
Railroad
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
Maytown
Avenue
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and the
Pennsylvania
Railroad
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Mechanic
Street
Remove Eastward from
intersection with
Walnut Avenue
528 7/16/1969
Melody Circle Vacate Located on or
around the
Hickory Lane
Park
898 10/16/2008
Mill Street Improvements
Entire length 9/19/1905A 9/19/1905
Mill Street Sewer Between S.
Poplar Street
and S. Market
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:912
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Mill Street Sewer Between College
Avenue and the
interceptor line
at the
intersection with
Mill Street
462 4/30/1964
Mill Street Vacate Entire length
located between
W. Bainbridge
Street and
Jefferson Alley,
south of W.
Bainbridge
Street extending
approximately
204 feet, and
entire length
located south of
Jefferson Alley
extending 31
feet to the legal
right-of-way line
of W. College
Avenue
874 6/15/2006
Monroe Alley Vacate Between Bank
Alley and
Bainbridge
Street
595 10/19/1976
Mount Joy
Street
Adopting Between College
Avenue and
Ridge Road
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
Mount Joy
Street
Open/
improve
A certain portion
of Mount Joy
Street
412 9/19/1961
Mulberry
Street
Dedication From east side of
N. Chestnut
Street to east
side of Lime
Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
N. Chestnut
Street
Planning Between
Mechanics
Street and E.
Willow Street
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
N. Chestnut
Street
Rename Portion of N.
Chestnut Street
438 11/20/1962
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:913
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
N. Chestnut
Street
Dedication From north side
of E. Willow
Street to north
side of Mulberry
Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
N. Fairview
Avenue
Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
N. Hanover
Street
Improvement Entire length 4/20/1948 4/20/1948
N. Hanover
Street
Improvement Entire length 9/16/1947 9/16/1947
N. Hanover
Street
Sewer Between 400
feet north of E.
Oak Street and
E. Hummelstown
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
N. Hanover
Street
Sewer Between 400
feet north of E.
Oak Street and
E. Hummelstown
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
N. Highlawn
Avenue
Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
N. Lime Street Open/
improve
Certain portion
of Lime Street
416 10/30/1961
N. Lime Street Vacate
N. Locust
Street
Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
N. Locust
Street
Improvement From the south
side of E. Willow
Street
southward to the
north side of a
fourteen-foot
alley
7/17/1945 7/17/1945
N. Locust
Street
Planning Between
Mechanics
Street and E.
Hummelstown
Street
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
N. Locust
Street
Open/
improve
Between E.
Willow Street
and Oak Street
12/17/1955 12/17/1955
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:914
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
N. Locust
Street
Sewer Portion of N.
Locust Street
469 6/16/1964
N. Locust
Street
Remove/
portion
Northward from
intersection of
Hillside Avenue
528 7/16/1969
N. Locust
Street
Sewer Entire length 6/16/1964 6/16/1964
N. Market
Street
Improvement Between Center
Square and
north side of
Winnemore
Street
12/18/1928 12/18/1928
N. Market
Street
Bridge Over Conoy
Creek
10/7/1910 10/7/1910
N. Market
Street
Sewer Between 110
feet north of Oak
Street and
Center Square
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
N. Market
Street
Sewer Between 110
feet north of Oak
Street and
Center Square
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
N. Market
Street
Sewer Between a point
100 feet south of
the northern
Borough line and
Center Square
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
N. Market
Street
Sewer Between a point
100 feet south of
the northern
Borough line and
Center Square
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
M. Market
Street
Improvement Between Wood
Alley and the old
Borough
boundary
5/17/1911 5/17/1911
N. Maple
Street
Vacate Between south
side of E.
Summit Street to
Hurl B. Shank
property line
7/16/1940 7/16/1940
N. Maple
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of N.
Maple Street
8/18/1953 8/18/1953
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:915
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
N. Mount Joy
Street
Planning Between
Mechanic Street
and E. Willow
Street
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
N. Mount Joy
Street
Open/
improve
Between Spring
Garden Street
and E. Willow
Street
4/15/1958 4/15/1958
N. Mount Joy
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of N.
Mount Joy Street
467 6/16/1964
N. Mount Joy
Street
Improvement Portion of N.
Mount Joy Street
491 6/15/1965
N. Poplar
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of N.
Poplar Street
489 3/16/1965
N. Poplar
Street
Sewer Between W. High
Street and W.
Summit Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
N. Poplar
Street
Sewer Between W. High
Street and W.
Summit Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
N. Spruce
Street
Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
N. Spruce
Street
Vacate Between E.
Hummelstown
and E. Willow
Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
N. Spruce
Street
Improvement Between E. High
and E.
Hummelstown
Street
9/15/1925 9/15/1925
N. Spruce
Street
Improvement Between E. High
Street and E.
Willow Street
12/21/1937 12/21/1937
N. Spruce
Street
Open/
improve
Between Oak
Street and
Spring Garden
Street
7/20/1954 7/20/1954
N. Spruce
Street
Open/
improve
E. Willow Street
and Oak Street
5/20/1958 5/20/1958
N. Spruce
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of N.
Spruce Street
415 10/30/1961
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:916
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
N. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between E. High
Street and E.
Willow Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
N. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between E. High
Street and E.
Willow Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Northfield
Drive
Add to
official plan
Radio Road to
end
807 4/20/2000
Olive Alley Vacate Portion
extending from
E. Cherry Street
southward
6/18/1957A 6/18/1957
Olive Alley Vacate Between E.
Cherry Street
and private alley
leading
westward to S.
Spruce Street
6/18/1957A 6/18/1957
Olive Alley Remove Between College
Ave and Orange
Street
528 7/16/1969
Olive Alley Vacate Between Orange
Street and Plum
Street
595 10/19/1976
Olive Alley Reopen Between Plum
Street and E.
Cherry Street
898 10/16/2008
Orange Street Adoption Between Mount
Joy Street and S.
Market Street
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
Park Street Open/extend Extend to S.
Market Street
6/19/1900 6/19/1900
Park Street Improvement Between S.
Market Street
and Mount Joy
Street
5/24/1916 5/24/1916
Peach Alley Remove Between Wood
Alley and W. Oak
Street
528 7/16/1969
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:917
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Peach Alley Sewer Between
intersection with
Rose Alley and
intersection with
Pink Alley
3/19/1913A 3/19/1913A
Peach Alley Name Between
intersection with
Mill Street and
the intersection
with Stone
Street; changed
to Peach Street
555 4/13/1972
Peach Street Rename Between
intersection with
Mill Street and
the intersection
with Stone
Street; formerly
Peach Alley
555 4/13/1972
Peach Street Rename Between Mill
Street/W. College
Avenue and
Stone Street;
change to S.
Peach Alley
898 10/16/2008
Pearl Alley Remove Between Cherry
Alley and S.
Hanover Street
528 7/16/1969
Pearl Alley Remove Between Fig
Alley and S.
Spruce Street
528 7/16/1969
Penn Street Name Extending from
intersection with
W. Market Street
to the Borough
boundary;
renamed W. Oak
Street
430 7/17/1962
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:918
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Pfautz Circle Dedication Beginning at its
intersection with
Masonic Drive
and ending at
the center of a
cul-de-sac
turnaround
(center-line
length of 344.0
feet)
938 3/15/2012
Pike Alley Vacate Between N.
Hanover Street
and previously
vacated Lehn
Alley
905 2/19/2009
Pinehurst
Avenue
Vacate Entire length 12/20/1954 12/20/1954
Pink Alley Sewer Between
intersection with
Peach Alley and
intersection with
Poplar Street
3/19/1913A 3/19/1913
Plane Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
Plum Street Adoption Between Olive
Alley and Cherry
Alley
Poplar Street Improvement Entire length 2/2/1904 2/2/1904
Poplar Street Improvement Entire length 9/20/1904 9/20/1904
Race Alley Remove Between W. High
Street and Grant
Alley
529 7/16/1969
Radio Road Open Between Willow
Street and
Foxbury Drive
685 11/19/1987
Radio Road Water mains Mount Gretna
Road to East
High Street
Res. 87-3 5/21/1987
Raymond
Court
Open Between
Foxbury Drive to
cul-de-sac
685 11/19/1987
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:919
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Reed Alley Remove Between Apple
Alley and
College Avenue
528 7/16/1969
Rhema Court Add to
official plan
Conoy Avenue to
cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Ridge Road Name Extending from
intersection with
Hampden Road
to its
intersection with
Groff Avenue;
renamed
Woodland
Avenue
430 7/17/1962
Ridge Road Improvement Between
Woodland
Avenue and
Market Street
5/24/1965 5/24/1965
Ridgeview
Avenue
Sewer Portion of
Ridgeview
Avenue
465 5/19/1964
Ridgeview
Avenue
Sewer Entire length 6/16/1964 6/16/1964
Ridgeview
Avenue
Open/
improve
A certain portion
of Ridgeview
Avenue
478 9/28/1964
Rock Alley Remove Between Bank
Alley and
Bainbridge
Street
538 8/8/1970
Rose Alley Sewer Between
intersection of
Rose Alley and S.
Market Street
and intersection
of Rose Alley and
Peach Alley
3/19/1913A 3/19/1913
Route 241 Vacate Between
Bainbridge Road
to the
Elizabethtown
and Falmouth
Turnpike
4/19/1910 4/19/1910
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:920
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Route 36001 Vacate Portion of Route
36001
576 9/17/1974
Ruby Alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Cherry Alley
595 10/19/1976
Sand Alley Remove Between S.
Hanover Street
to S. Spruce
Street
528 7/16/1969
School Lane Dedication From north side
of E. Park Street
to south side of
E. High Street
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Scott Alley Remove Between E.
Washington
Street and
Verdant Street
528 7/16/1969
Seal Alley Remove Between Jury
Alley and Ridge
Road
528 7/16/1969
Sherfield Ct. Add to
official plan
Cliff Ln. to
Sherfield Ct.
807 4/20/2000
Sherfield Ct. Add to
official plan
Cul-de-sac to culde-
sac
807 4/20/2000
Short Alley Vacate Between Orange
Street and Flint
Alley
Skyline Drive Vacate Between Elm
Avenue and
Borough line
12/20/1954 12/20/1954
Skyline Drive Remove Portion of
Skyline Drive
12/20/1954 12/20/1954
Smith Alley Name Between S.
Market Street
and the railroad
tracks
898 10/16/2008
Snyder Avenue Planning Between N.
Spruce Street
and the Borough
line
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
Snyder Avenue Open/
improve
Portion of
Snyder Avenue
10/20/1953A 10/20/1953A
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:921
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Snyder Avenue Open/
improve
Portions of
Snyder Avenue
384 6/16/1959
S. Brown
Street
Sewer Between W. High
Street and 300
feet south of W.
Washington
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Brown
Street
Vacate A certain portion 862 9/15/2005
S. Chestnut
Street
Vacate Between south
side of E. cedar
Street to the
north side of
Cherry Street
616 3/20/1979
S. Chestnut
Street
Vacate Between South
side of E. Cherry
Street to the
north side of
Ridge Road
616 3/20/1979
S. Hanover
Street
Improvement Entire length 4/18/1950 4/18/1950
S. Hanover
Street
Remove Portion of S.
Hanover Street
6/21/1961 6/21/1961
S. Hanover
Street
Vacate Between E.
Washington
Street and E.
College Avenue
S. Hanover
Street
Remove Certain portions
of S. Hanover
Street
6/21/1951 6/21/1951
S. Locust
Street
Vacate Between the
south side of E.
Bainbridge
Street and the
north side of E.
College Avenue
9/17/1946 9/17/1946
S. Locust
Street
Vacate Between College
Avenue and
Orange Street
611 6/20/1978
S. Market
Street
Improvement From beginning
to an
undetermined
point
10/20/1931 10/20/1931
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:922
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
S. Market
Street
Sewer Between Center
Square and 125
feet south of
south of Cherry
Street (east side)
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Market
Street
Sewer Between Center
Square and 125
feet south of
south of Cherry
Street (east side)
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
S. Market
Street
Sewer Between
Maytown Road
and 275 feet
north of
Maytown Avenue
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Market
Street
Sewer Between Center
Square and Mill
Street (west
side)
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Market
Street
Adopt Certain portions 9/19/1911 9/19/1911
S. Mount Joy
Street
Improvement Between the
north side of E.
Washington
Street to the
south side of E.
Park Street
9/19/1933 9/19/1933
S. Mount Joy
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of S.
Mount Joy Street
S. Mount Joy
Street
Dedication Portion of S.
Mount Joy Street
(tract of land)
5/26/1970 5/26/1970
S. Mount Joy
Street
Sewer Between E. High
Street and E.
Washington
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Mount Joy
Street
Sewer Between E. High
Street and E.
Washington
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
S. Mount Joy
Street
Open Schwanger
Street to end
685 11/19/1987
S. Mount Joy
Street
Add to
official plan
Briarcliff Lane to
cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:923
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
S. Peach
Street
Sewer Between W. Mill
Street and the
northern
boundary of
lands of the
Buch
Manufacturing
Company
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Poplar
Street
Sewer Between E. High
Street and
Bainbridge
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Spruce
Street
Location Entire length 10/17/1922 10/17/1922
S. Spruce
Street
Improvement From S. Market
Street to an
undetermined
point north
10/20/1931 10/20/1931
S. Spruce
Street
Improvement Between south
side of W. Plum
Street and the
south side of E.
Arch Street
1/15/1935 1/15/1935
S. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between E.
College Avenue
and a point 150
feet south of E.
Arch Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between Center
Square and a
point 125 feet
south of E.
Cherry Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
S. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between E.
Washington
Street and S.
Market Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
S. Spruce
Street
Sewer Between E.
Washington
Street and S.
Market Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
S. Spruce
Street
Change/open Between S. Park
Street to E.
Washington
Street
7/18/1944A 7/18/1944
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:924
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Southview
Circle
Add to
official plan
Hillside Avenue
to cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Spring Garden
Street
Dedication From west side
of Holly Street to
old Borough
boundary
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Spring Garden
Street
Dedication From east side of
Holly Street to
Borough
boundary
10/9/1969 10/9/1969
Spring Garden
Street
Open Between Oak
Street and
Hillside Street
685 11/19/1987
Spruce Street Adoption Between College
Avenue and S.
Market Street
8/20/1913 8/20/1913
Spruce Street Open Between Spring
Garden Street
and Hillside
Street
10/17/1955 10/17/1955
Spruce Street Bridge Across Negley's
Run
9/19/1917 9/19/1917
Spruce Street Open/
improve
Certain portion
of Spruce Street
11/21/1955B 11/21/1955
Steel Alley Improvement Entire length 8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Stone Alley Name Entire length;
change to Stone
Street
555 4/13/1972
Stone Alley Rename Entire length;
formerly Stone
Alley
555 4/13/1972
Stone Street Rename Between S.
Market Street
and Peach
Street; change to
Stone Alley
898 10/16/2008
Summit Street Improvement Between N.
Market Street
and N. Hanover
Street
4/17/1918 4/17/1918
Summit Street Remove Portion of
Summit Street
377 11/18/1958
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:925
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Sunrise Blvd. Add to
official plan
Hillside Avenue
(west) to Hillside
Avenue (east)
807 4/20/2000
Sunset Drive Vacate From Elm
Avenue to
Borough line
12/20/1954 12/10/1954
Sunset Drive Remove Portion of Sunset
Drive
12/20/1954 12/20/1954
Teakwood Cir. Add to
official plan
Mulberry Street
to cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Tulip Alley Remove Between S.
Market Street
and Cherry Alley
645 4/19/1983
Turnpike Road Adoption Remaining
portion
1/21/1919 1/21/1919
Union Alley Rename Entire length of
an alley
currently known
as Union Alley
between S.
Market Street
and S. Peach
Alley; change to
West Verdant
Alley
934 1/5/2012
Verdant Alley Rename Entire length of
an alley
currently known
as Verdant Alley
between S.
Market Street
and S. Spruce
Street; change to
East Verdant
Alley
934 1/5/2012
Verdant Street Open/
planning
Portions of
Verdant Street
476 9/15/1964
Washington
Street
Improve/
extend
Entire length 8/30/1899 8/30/1899
Washington
Street
Improvement Between S.
Spruce Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street
9/19/1933 9/19/1933
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:926
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Washington
Street
Vacate Between Mount
Joy Street and
Chestnut Street
595 10/19/1976
Wasp Alley Vacate Between N.
Market Street
and Peach Alley
595 10/19/1976
Wealand Alley Vacate Portion of
Wealand Alley
7/16/1940 7/16/1940
W. Bainbridge
Street
Relocate Southwest of
Pennsylvania
Railroad
11/16/1926 11/16/1926
W. Bainbridge
Street
Direction Portion of W.
Bainbridge
Street
10/17/1950 10/17/1950
W. Bainbridge
Street
Sewer Between S.
Market Street
and the western
Borough line
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W. Bainbridge
Street
Vacate A portion of the
right-of-way
883 4/19/2007
W. Bainbridge
Street
Rename Portion of the
street currently
known as W.
Bainbridge
Street between
S. Market Street
and S. Poplar
Street; change to
Union Street
934 1/5/2012
W. College
Avenue
Rename Entire length of
the street
currently known
as W. College
Avenue between
S. Market Street
westbound to
Conoy Creek;
change to W.
Bainbridge
Street
934 1/5/2012
W. High Street Improvement Entire length 8/18/1920 8/18/1920
W. High Street Sewer Between Center
Square and
Wilson Avenue
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:927
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
W. High Street Sewer Between Center
Square and
Wilson Avenue
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
W.
Hummelstown
Street
Vacate Five-foot strip on
north and south
W.
Hummelstown
Street
7/16/1940 7/16/1940
W.
Hummelstown
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and 200 feet
west of N. Poplar
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W.
Hummelstown
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and 200 feet
west of N. Poplar
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
W. Mechanics
Alley
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and a public
alley extending
between N.
Maple Street
and N. Pine
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W. Mechanics
Alley
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and a public
alley extending
between N.
Maple Street
and N. Pine
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
W. Oak Street Rename Entire length;
formerly Penn
Street
430 7/17/1962
W. Park Street Vacate/
remove
Between Peach
Alley and S.
Brown Street
7/17/1951 7/17/1951
W. Park Street Reopen Between Peach
Alley and Peace
Alley
898 10/16/2008
W. Summit
Street
Open/
improve
Portion of W.
Summit Street
432 8/21/1962
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:928
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
W. Summit
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Poplar
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W. Summit
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Poplar
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
W. Washington
Street
Open/extend Between Market
Street and S.
Poplar Street
2/18/1941A 2/18/1941
W. Washington
Street
Remove Portion of W.
Washington
Street
6/17/1958 6/17/1958
W. Washington
Street
Vacate Between S.
Poplar Street
and Brown
Street
6/17/1958 6/17/1958
W. Washington
Street
Sewer Between S.
Poplar Street
and S. Brown
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W. Willow
Street
Vacate Portion of W.
Willow Street
7/16/1940 7/16/1940
W. Willow
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Poplar
Street
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
W. Willow
Street
Sewer Between N.
Market Street
and N. Poplar
Street
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Westbury
Court
Open From Radio
Road to cul-desac
685 11/19/1987
Wilson Avenue Open Portion of Wilson
Avenue
477 9/15/1964
Wilson Avenue Sewer Between W. High
Street and the
Pennsylvania
Railroad
Passenger
Station
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:929
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Wood Alley Vacate Entire length 595 10/19/1976
Woodland
Avenue
Improvement Between Ridge
Road and the
south Borough
line
5/24/1965 5/24/1965
Wood Street Vacate Between N.
Hanover Street
and Holly Street
898 10/16/2008
Wren Alley Remove Between Peace
Alley and N.
Poplar Street
528 7/16/1969
Wren Alley Remove Between N.
Poplar Street
and N. Market
Street
528 7/16/1969
Yorkshire Ct. Add to
official plan
Kenbridge Ln. to
cul-de-sac
807 4/20/2000
Unnamed alley Vacate Entire length 10/17/1922 10/17/1922
Unnamed alley Vacate Entire length 8/15/1899 8/15/1899
Unnamed alley Vacate Parallel between
E. Hummelstown
and E. Willow
Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Unnamed alley Vacate Parallel Between
N. Mount Joy
Street and N.
Locust Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Unnamed alley Vacate Parallel between
N. Locust and N.
Spruce Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Unnamed alley Vacate Between E.
Hummelstown
Street and E.
Willow Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Unnamed alley Improvement Between E.
Hummelstown
Street and E.
Willow Street
8/21/1923 8/21/1923
Unnamed alley Vacate Between W.
Willow Street
and W. Summit
Street
7/16/1940 7/16/1940
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:930
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed alley Remove Between E. High
Street and
Wilson Avenue
and Penn
Central Railway
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed alley Remove Between E. High
Street and
Wilson Avenue
and Penn
Central Railway
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed alley Remove Between S.
Spruce Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street from E.
Bainbridge
Street to Apple
Alley
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed alley Remove Between Sand
Alley and Flint
Alley from S.
Locust Street to
S. Mount Joy
Street
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed alley Remove Between Sand
Alley and Flint
Alley from S.
Locust Street to
S. Mount Joy
Street
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed alley Remove Between Gum
Alley and Cherry
Street
528 7/16/1969
Unnamed
alleys
Vacate/
remove
All alleys
northwest from
the northwest
edge of Bank
Alley and lying
within the land
owned by Klein
Chocolate
Company
538 8/8/1970
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:931
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed alley Vacate Extending from
intersection of
Cherry Alley and
S. Hanover
Street to S.
Market Street
544 1/19/1971
Unnamed alley Vacate Between S.
Market Street
and Cherry Alley
544 1/19/1971
Unnamed alley Vacate Between E. Plum
Street and
Cherry Street
from S. Market
Street northeast
to E. Plum Street
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Between E. Plum
Street and
Cherry Street
from S. Market
Street northeast
to E. Plum Street
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Between S.
Spruce Street
and S. Locust
Street from E.
High Street to
Vine Alley
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Between S.
Locust Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street from E.
High Street to
Vine Alley
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Between S.
Locust Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street from Sand
Alley to Flint
Alley
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Between S.
Locust Street
and S. Mount Joy
Street from Sand
Alley to Flint
Alley
595 10/19/1976
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § H-101
FWD:932
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed alley Vacate Entire length;
southeast from
E. Arch Street
and parallel to
Fig Alley
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Vacate Entire length;
between S.
Locust Street
and S. Spruce
Street extending
northwest from
E. Lemon Street
595 10/19/1976
Unnamed alley Sewer Extending
between N.
Maple Street
and N. Pine
Street, from W.
High Street to W.
Mechanics Alley
3/12/1924 3/12/1924
Unnamed alley Sewer Extending
between N.
Maple Street
and N. Pine
Street, from W.
High Street to W.
Mechanics Alley
9/2/1924A 9/2/1924
Unnamed alley Vacate East of Brown
Street
approximately
900 feet
northward from
Bainbridge
Street
828 8/16/2001
Unnamed alley Vacate East of Brown
Street
approximately
1,050 feet
northward from
Bainbridge
Street
828 8/16/2001
§ H-101 FOREWORD § H-101
FWD:933
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed alley Vacate East of Brown
Street
approximately
16,500 feet
northward from
Bainbridge
Street
828 8/16/2001
Unnamed alley Vacate Between an
unnamed alley
and Maytown
Avenue
898 10/16/2008
Unnamed alley Vacate Between Brown
Street and the
railroad siding
898 10/16/2008
Appendix I
WATER
§ I-101. Water. (Reserved for future enactments)
Appendix J
ZONING; PRIOR ORDINANCES
§ J-101. Zoning; Prior Ordinances.
Ord./Res. Date Subject
11/15/1949 11/15/1959 Borough of Elizabeth 1949 Zoning
Ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980.
Res. 11/15/
1949
11/15/1949 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
3/16/1954A 3/16/1954 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
4/20/1954 4/20/1954 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
5/18/1954A 5/18/1954 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
4/18/1955A 4/18/1955 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
7/16/1957 7/16/1957 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
6/17/1958A 6/17/1958 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
§ H-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § J-101
FWD:934
Ord./Res. Date Subject
345 7/15/1958 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
347 8/19/1958 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
359 8/19/1958 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
375 8/19/1958 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
400 8/19/1955 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
431 7/17/1962 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
449 7/16/1963 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
451 9/17/1963 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
463 5/19/1965 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
466 5/29/1964 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
472 8/18/1964 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
482 11/17/1964 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
483 1/19/1965 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
484 2/16/1965 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
502 4/18/1967 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
503 4/18/1967 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
518 8/20/1968 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
537 7/21/1970 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
540 10/20/1970 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
545 4/20/1971 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
§ J-101 FOREWORD § J-101
FWD:935
Ord./Res. Date Subject
546 6/15/1971 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
550 7/20/1971 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
551 11/16/1971 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
556 7/18/1972 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
560 1/16/1973 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
564 5/15/1973 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
571 5/21/1974 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
593 12/21/1976 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
617 4/17/1979 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
630 12/18/1980 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord. 8/
21/1980.
8/21/1980 8/21/1980 Borough of Elizabethtown Zoning Ordinance
1980; superseded by Ord. 766.
677 11/20/1986 Amending the zoning map; superseded by
Ord. 766.
701 12/21/1989 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
704 4/5/1990 Amending zoning map; superseded by Ord.
766.
707 9/20/1990 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
710 1/17/1991 Amending zoning map; superseded by Ord.
766.
724 4/16/1992 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
732 11/19/1992 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
734 11/19/1992 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
740 4/15/1993 Amending zoning map; superseded by Ord.
766.
§ J-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § J-101
FWD:936
Ord./Res. Date Subject
742 6/15/1993 Amending zoning map; superseded by Ord.
766.
764 3/20/1996 Amending ordinance; superseded by Ord.
766.
Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances
Chapter KO
KEY TO THE DISPOSITION OF ALL ORDINANCES
§ KO-101. Key to the Disposition of All Ordinances.
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
6/4/1828 Appendix F Public Property
6/4/1828A Repealed by 348
6/4/1828B Repealed by 2/13/1849
Undated Repealed by 348
7/2/1828 Repealed by 348
1/5/1829 Repealed by 348
5/22/1829 Repealed by 348
8/13/1829 Repealed by 364
1/29/1831 Repealed by 2/13/1849
6/13/1832 Repealed by 348
7/5/1832 Repealed by 2/13/1849
7/5/1832A Repealed by 2/13/1849
7/5/1832B Repealed by 2/13/1849
1/13/1847 Repealed by 348
4/17/1848 Repealed by 348
4/17/1848A Repealed by 348
4/20/1848 Repealer
4/20/1848 Repealed by 348
2/13/1849 Repealed by 348
2/13/1849A Repealed by 348
3/19/1849 Repealed by 9/19/1905
8/6/1849 Repealed by 348
6/17/1850 Repealed by 348
1/23/1851 Repealed by 1/18/1864
§ J-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:937
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
6/6/1853 Repealed by 365 Public Property
7/3/1854 Repealed by 6/23/1885
10/28/1861 Repealed by 9/19/1905
1/20/1862 Repealed by 348
7/30/1863 Repealed by 348
1/18/1864 Repealed by 6/4/1866
2/15/1864 Repealed by 348
4/1/1864 Appendix D War Bounties
8/23/1864 Appendix D War Bounties
3/13/1865 Appendix D War Bounties
5/21/1866 Repealed by 348
6/4/1866 Repealed by 348
5/18/1869 Repealed by 348
4/21/1873 Repealed by 348
5/18/1874 Repealed by 348
2/21/1876 Repealed by 348
11/20/1876 Repealed by 363 Conduct
11/19/1877 Repealed by 348
4/29/1878 Repealed by 348
5/19/1879 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
10/20/1879 Repealed by 348
6/23/1885 Repealed by 348
6/9/1886 Repealed by 348
7/19/1887 Repealed by 348
8/25/1887 Repealed by 348
11/28/1893 Repealed by 348
11/12/1894 Appendix C Franchises and Services
11/20/1894 Appendix C Franchises and Services
9/17/1895 Appendix C Franchises and Services
7/21/1896 Repealed by 348
7/21/1896A Repealed by 362
9/15/1896 Appendix C Franchises and Services
3/16/1897 Repealed by 829 Utilities
Appendix C Franchises and Services
9/28/1897 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2/24/1898 Appendix C Franchises and Services
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:938
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
8/15/1899 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
8/30/1899 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
6/19/1900 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/16/1901 Repealed by 348
2/18/1902 Repealed by 348
4/14/1902 Repealed by 348
8/25/1902 Repealed by 348
7/21/1903 Repealed by 348
8/18/1903 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2/2/1904 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
9/20/1904 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/1/1905 Vetoed
6/8/1905 Repealed by 348
9/19/1905 Repealed by 829 Structures over
Sidewalks
9/19/1905A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
6/22/1906 Repealed by 348
7/9/1906 Repealed by 348
7/18/1906 Repealed by 372
3/26/1907 Tax Rate 1907
8/21/1907 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
11/21/1907 Appendix C Franchises and Services
1/22/1908 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
1/22/1908A Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
2/20/1908 Appendix C Franchises and Services
3/18/1908 Tax Rate 1908
5/19/1908 Repealed by 348
7/12/1908 Appendix F Public Property
1/25/1909 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2/23/1909 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
3/16/1909 Tax Rate 1909
3/16/1909A Repealed by 348
3/15/1910 Tax Rate 1910
4/19/1910 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/7/1910 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/19/1910 Appendix F Public Property
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:939
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
1/21/1911 Repealed by 348
3/21/1911 Tax Rate 1911
5/17/1911 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
5/17/1911A Repealed by 6/18/1929
9/19/1911 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/17/1911 Appendix F Public Property
11/21/1911 Repealed by 348
11/21/1911A Repealed by 3/20/1928
12/19/1911 Appendix G Sewers
12/19/1911A Appendix E Plan Approval
3/19/1912 Tax Rate 1912
5/28/1912 Appendix E Plan Approval
7/19/1912 Appendix F Public Property
11/26/1912 Vetoed
3/19/1913 Tax Rate 1913
3/19/1913A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/16/1913 Appendix F Public Property
8/20/1913 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/21/1913 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
12/16/1913 Repealed by 348
2/17/1914 Tax Rate 1914
2/18/1914 Repealed by 348
6/16/1914 Repealed by 348
8/18/1914 Chapter 4 §§ 101-107 Building Numbers
§ 104 Repealed by 829
3/18/1915 Tax Rate 1915
4/22/1915 Repealed by 367
12/22/1915 Repealed by 348
3/21/1916 Tax Rate 1916
5/24/1916 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/18/1916 Repealed by 10/19/1926 Streets/Sidewalks
4/17/1917 Tax Rate 1917
9/19/1917 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/17/1917 Appendix C Franchises and Services
3/19/1918 Tax Rate 1918
4/17/1918 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:940
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
8/7/1918 Repealed by 348
11/23/1918 Appendix F Public Property
12/4/1918 Repealed by 11/16/1926
1/21/1919 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/21/1919A Repealed by 370
2/18/1919 Tax Rate 1919
5/15/1919 Appendix F Public Property
3/17/1920 Tax Rate 1920
7/20/1920 Appendix F Public Property
8/18/1920 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/15/1921 Tax Rate 1921
3/21/1922 Tax Rate 1922
3/21/1922A Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
10/17/1922 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/9/1923 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
3/1/1923 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
3/20/1923 Tax Rate 1923
8/21/1923 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
8/22/1923 Appendix G Sewers
9/24/1923 Repealed by 2/19/1924
11/23/1923 Appendix G Sewers
2/19/1924 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
2/19/1924A Repealer
2/27/1924 Appendix G Sewers
3/4/1924 Repealed by 7/26/1924
3/12/1924 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/25/1924 Tax Rate 1924
3/27/1924 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
6/17/1924 Appendix G Sewers
7/26/1924 Repealer
7/28/1924 Appendix G Sewers
9/2/1924 Appendix G Sewers
9/2/1924A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/18/1925 Tax Rate 1925
8/19/1925,
§ 2,3,4
Repealed by 829 Sewage Disposal
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:941
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
§ 5,6,9 Superseded by 683 Sewage Disposal
8/19/1925A Appendix G Sewers
9/15/1925 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/2/1925 Appendix G Sewers
10/10/1925 Appendix G Sewers
10/21/1925 Appendix G Sewers
11/2/1925 Appendix F Public Property
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
11/2/1925A Appendix G Sewers
11/18/1925 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/16/1926 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
3/16/1926 Repealed by 348
3/31/1926 Tax Rate 1926
4/20/1926 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
5/20/1926 Repealed by 829 Amusements
8/18/1926 Repealed by 348
10/19/1926 Superseded by 612 Streets/Sidewalks
11/16/1926 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/16/1927 Tax Rate 1927
3/15/1927 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
2/21/1928 Tax Rate 1928
3/20/1928 Repealed by 3/15/1949
7/25/1928 Chapter 13 §§ 101-109 Transient Retail
Business
12/18/1928 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
5/21/1929 Tax Rate 1929
6/18/1929 Repealed by 6/15/1931
7/19/1929 Repealed by 370
8/20/1929 Repealer
3/18/1930 Tax Rate 1930
11/18/1930 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
12/16/1930 Appendix G Sewers
3/17/1931 Chapter 1 §§ 201-203 Firemen's Relief
3/17/1931A Tax Rate 1931
6/15/1931 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
6/15/1931A Repealed by 348
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:942
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
7/21/1931 Appendix G Sewers
10/20/1931 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/15/1932 Tax Rate 1932
5/17/1932 Appendix F Public Property
10/18/1932 Repealed by 348
3/21/1933 Tax Rate 1933
9/19/1933 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/16/1934 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/16/1934A Expired
2/20/1934 Appendix C Franchises and Services
3/20/1934 Tax Rate 1934
1/15/1935 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/19/1935 Tax Rate 1935
2/19/1936 Tax Rate 1936
2/17/1937 Tax Rate 1937
7/20/1937 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
12/21/1937 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/15/1938 Tax Rate 1938
3/21/1939 Tax Rate 1939
4/18/1939 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2/20/1940 Tax Rate 1940
7/16/1940 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/18/1941 Tax Rate 1941
2/18/1941A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/18/1941 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
11/19/1941 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/17/1942 Tax Rate 1942
2/16/1943 Tax Rate 1943
2/15/1944 Tax Rate 1944
7/18/1944 Appendix C Franchises and Services
7/18/1944A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/20/1945 Tax Rate 1945
6/19/1945 Superseded by 622 Compensation
7/17/1945 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
9/18/1945 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
2/19/1946 Tax Rate 1946
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:943
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
8/20/1946 Appendix E Plan Approval
9/17/1946 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/19/1947 Tax Rate 1947
3/18/1947 Appendix C Franchises and Services
7/22/1947 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
9/16/1947 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
11/19/1947 Repealed by 558 Planning Commission
11/23/1947 Repealed by 370
2/17/1948 Tax Rate 1948
4/20/1948 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/20/1948 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
2/15/1949 Tax Rate 1949
3/15/1949 Superseded by 622 Compensation
3/15/1949A Repealer
4/19/1949 Superseded by 471 Solid Waste
11/15/1949 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
2/21/1950 Tax Rate 1950
4/18/1950 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
5/16/1950 Superseded by 612 Streets/Sidewalks
7/18/1950 Appendix C Franchises and Services
8/15/1950 Repealed by 370
10/17/1950 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/20/1951 Tax Rate 1951
6/19/1951 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6/21/1951 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/17/1951 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/15/1952 Tax Rate 1952
2/20/1952 Tax Rate 1952
3/18/1952 Appendix C Franchises and Services
7/15/1952 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/17/1953 Tax Rate 1953
3/17/1953 Repealed by 8/20/1958 Motor Vehicles
4/21/1953 Appendix G Sewers
7/11/1953 Superseded by 575 Subdivision and Land
Development
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:944
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
8/18/1953 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
9/22/1953 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
9/24/1953 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
10/3/1953 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
10/20/1953 Repealed by 829 Vegetation
10/20/1953A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/20/1953B Appendix F Public Property
2/16/1954 Tax Rate 1954
3/16/1954 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
3/16/1954A Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
4/20/1954 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
5/18/1954 Superseded by 575 Subdivision and Land
Development
5/18/1954A Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
6/12/1954 Superseded by 575 Subdivision and Land
Development
6/15/1954 Appendix F Public Property
7/20/1954 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
8/30/1954 Superseded by 511 Storage of Materials
10/18/1954 Superseded by 497 Fire Prevention
11/15/1954 Chapter 2 §§ 101-103 Dogs at Large
12/20/1954 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/21/1955 Tax Rate 1955
3/21/1955 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
3/21/1955A Appendix F Public Property
4/18/1955 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
4/18/1955A Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
8/15/1955 Appendix E Plan Approval
9/19/1955 Appendix F Public Property
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
10/17/1955 Appendix F Public Property
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:945
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
11/21/1955 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
11/21/1955A Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
11/21/1955B Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
12/17/1955 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/20/1956 Tax Rate 1956
3/19/1956 Superseded by 406 Per Capita Tax
3/19/1956A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4/16/1956 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
4/16/1956A Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
5/20/1956 Appendix F Public Property
5/21/1956 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/16/1956 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
8/20/1956 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
10/22/1956 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
10/23/1956 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
3/12/1957 Tax Rate 1957
6/18/1957 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
6/18/1957A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/16/1957 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
8/20/1957 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
10/15/1957 Appendix F Public Property
10/15/1957A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
11/12/1957 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
1/21/1958 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
1/21/1958A Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
2/25/1958 Tax Rate 1958
4/15/1958 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
5/20/1958 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
6/17/1958 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
6/17/1958A Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
345 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
346 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
347 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:946
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
Appendix J
348 Repealer
349 Repealed by 829 Licenses and Permits
350 Chapter 21 §§ 401-405 Streets/Sidewalks
351 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
352 Chapter 4 §§ 101, 102, 104
106, 107
Buildings
353 Repealed by 829 Amusements
354 Superseded by 612 Streets/Sidewalks
355 Superseded by 829 Transient Retail
356 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
357 Repealed by 558 Planning Commission
358 Superseded by 471 Solid Waste
359 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
360 Repealed by 829 Weed Restrictions
361 Repealed by 829 Keeping of Pigs
362 Superseded by 362 Bicycles
363 Superseded by 621 Conduct
364 Superseded by 688 Firearms
365 Chapter 6 §§ 601-606 Public Property
366 Chapter 6 §§ 301,302 Advertising
367 Superseded by 549 Curfew
368 Superseded by 497 Burning of Refuse
369 Repealed by 829 Liquid Wastes
370 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
371 Chapter 21 §§ 301-305 Snow and Ice Removal
372 Repealed by 829 Building Materials on
Streets and Sidewalks
373 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
374 Superseded by 782 Trimming of Trees
375 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
376 Chapter 1 § 301 Police Department
377 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
378 Tax Rate 1959
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:947
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
379 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
380 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
381 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
382 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
383 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
384 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
385 Appendix F Public Property
386 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
387 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
388 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
389 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
390 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
391 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
392 Appendix F Public Property
393 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
12/15/1959 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
394 Superseded by 406 Per Capita Tax
395 Tax Rate 1960
396 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
397 Chapter 1 §§ 701-707 Borough Manager
398 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
399 Chapter 18 §§ 201-204 Sewer Rentals
400 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
401 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
402 Appendix C Franchises and Services
403 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
404 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
405 Tax Rate 1961
406 Superseded by 425 Per Capita Tax
407 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
408 Appendix F Public Property
409 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
410 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
411 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
6/21/1961 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:948
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
412 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
413 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
414 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
415 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
416 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
417 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
418 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
419 Repealed by 646 Parks and Recreation
Board
420 Repealed by 558 Planning Commission
421 Chapter 1 § 707 Borough Manager
422 Superseded by 829 Plumbing Code
423 Superseded by 638 Police Pension
424 Tax Rate 1962
425 Superseded by 442 Per Capita Tax
426 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
427 Repealed by 558 Real Estate Registry
Appendix D Governmental
428 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
429 Appendix C Franchises and Services
430 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
431 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
432 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
433 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
434 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
435 Repealed by 829 Alcoholic Beverages
436 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
437 Repealed by 829 Swimming Pools
438 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
439 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
440 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
441 Tax Rate 1963
442 Superseded by R-/-/1965 Per Capita Tax
443 Repealed by 829 Sewage Disposal
444 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:949
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
445 Appendix F Public Property
446 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
447 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
448 Repealed by 829 Swimming Pools
449 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
450 Appendix F Public Property
451 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
452 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
453 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
454 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
455 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
456 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
457 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
458 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
459 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
460 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
461 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
462 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
463 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
464 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
465 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
466 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
467 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
468 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
469 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
470 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
6/16/1964 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
471 Superseded by 717 Solid Waste
472 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
473 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
474 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:950
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
8/27/1964 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
475 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
476 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
477 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
478 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
479 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
480 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
481 Superseded by 829 Fees
482 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
483 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
484 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
486 Superseded by 829 Fees
487 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
488 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
489 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
490 Appendix G Sewers
5/24/1965 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
491 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
492 Repealed by 829 Sewers
493 Chapter 24 §§ 401-405 Per Capita Tax
494 Tax Rate 1966
495 Chapter 6 §§ 701, 702 Trespassing
496 Appendix C Franchises and Services
497 Superseded by 572 Fire Prevention
498 Repealed by 829 Dangerous Structures
499 Superseded by R-12/28/1967 Per Capita Tax
500 Tax Rate 1967
501 Superseded by 829 Transient Retail
502 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
503 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
504 Superseded by 565 Bicycles
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:951
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
505 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
8/20/1968 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
506 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
507 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
508 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
509 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
510 Tax Rate 1968
511 Repealed by 829 Storage of Materials
512 Superseded by 687 Housing Code
513 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
514 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
515 Tabled
516 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
517 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
518 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
519 Appendix G Sewers
520 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
521 Tax Rate 1969
522 Chapter 24 §§ 301-313 Occupation Tax
523 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
524 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
525 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
526 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
527 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
528 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
7/15/1969 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
10/9/1969 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
529 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
530 Superseded by 635 Compensation
531 Tax Rate 1970
532 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
533 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
534 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
535 Appendix A Annexation of Territory
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:952
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
536 Superseded by 801 Taxation, Special
5/26/1970 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
537 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
538 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
539 Repealed by 829 Sewers
540 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
541 Repealed by 552 Motor Vehicles
542 Superseded by 845 Plumbing Code
543 Tax Rate 1971;
§§ 2, 3, 4 Superseded by 829 Taxation
544 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
545 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
546 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
547 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
548 Superseded by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
549 Superseded by 614 Curfew
550 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
551 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
552 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
553 Tax Rate 1972
554 Superseded by 612 Streets/Sidewalks
555 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
556 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
557 Missing
558, § 1 Chapter 1 §§ 301, 601-605;
702, 703, 706,
707
Administration and
Government
Chapter 2 § 103 Dogs at Large
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:953
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
Repealed by 829 Swimming Pools
Chapter 24 § 302 Taxation
Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ 2 Superseded by 829 1972 Adopting
Ordinance
§ 3 Repealed by 829 1972 Adopting
Ordinance
§ 4 Superseded by 829 1972 Adopting
Ordinance
§ 5 Superseded by 829 1972 Adopting
Ordinance
§ 6 Superseded by 829 1972 Adopting
Ordinance
559 Tax Rate 1973;
§§ 2, 3, 4 Superseded by 829 Taxation
560 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
561 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
562 Superseded by 687 Housing Code
563 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
564 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
565 Repealed by 811 Bicycles
566 Appendix F Public Property
567
568 Tax Rate 1974
569 Superseded by 635 Compensation
570 Chapter 1 § 603 Planning Commission
571 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
572 Superseded by 819 Outdoor Burning
573 Superseded by 638 Police Pension
574 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
575 Superseded by 663 Subdivision and Land
Development
576 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
577 Superseded by 614 Curfew
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:954
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
578 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
579 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
580 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
581 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
582 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
583 Superseded by 680 Realty Transfer Tax
584 Tax Rate 1975
585 Repealed by 829 General Code Provisions
586 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
587 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
588 Tax Rate 1976
589 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
590 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
591 Chapter 6 §§ 401, 402 Alcoholic Beverages
592 Appendix C Franchises and Services
593 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
594 Chapter 1 § 602 Planning Commission
595 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
596 Chapter 24 § 501 Delinquent Taxes
597 Tax Rate 1977
598 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
599 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
600 Chapter 1 § 304 Police Department
601 Superseded by 829 Penalties
602 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
603 Tax Rate 1978
604 Chapter 2 §§ 101-103 Dogs at Large
605 Superseded by 663 Subdivision and Land
Development
606 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
607 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
608 Repealed by 974 Floodplains
609 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
610 Superseded by 801 Taxation, Special
611 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:955
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
612 Chapter 21 §§ 201-209 Streets/Sidewalks
613 Chapter 2 § 101 Dogs at Large
614 Repealed by 829 Curfew
615 Superseded 829 Motor Vehicles
616 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
617 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/1980 Zoning
Appendix J
618 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
619 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
620 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
621 Superseded by 668 Conduct
622 Superseded by 635 Compensation
623 Tax Rate 1980
624 Superseded by 802 Recreation Commission
625 Superseded by 647 Streets/Sidewalks
626 Repealed by 829 Conduct
627 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
628 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
8/21/1980 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J
629 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
630 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J
631 Chapter 1 § 803 Compensation
632 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
633 Superseded by 688 Firearms
634 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
635 Chapter 1 §§ 801, 802 Compensation
636 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
637 Repealed by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
638 Superseded by 706 Police Pension
639 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
640 Chapter 6 § 401 Alcoholic Beverages
641 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
642 Tax Rate 1983
643 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:956
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
644 Superseded by 829 Speed Timing Devices
645 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
646 Repealer Parks and Recreation
Board
647 Chapter 21 §§ 203, 207, 208 Streets/Sidewalks
648 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
649 Chapter 1 § 602 Planning Commission
650 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
651 Repealed by 974 Floodplains
652 Superseded by 706 Police Pension
653 Superseded by 845 Building Code
654 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
655 Chapter 2 §§ 101, 201, 202 Keeping of Cats Rabies
Shots for Dogs
656 Superseded by 663 Subdivision and Land
Development
657 Superseded by 812 Water
658 Chapter 26 §§ 201-212 Water Connections
659 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
660 Tax Rate 1985
661 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
662 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
663 Chapter 22 §§ 101-808;
Appendix
Subdivision and Land
Development
§§ 501, 505 Repealed by 829
664 Appendix E Plan Approval
665 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
666 Tabled
667 Chapter 21 §§ 501-505 Street Standards
668 Superseded by 789 Conduct
669 Tax Rate 1986
670 Repealed by 693 Streets/Sidewalks
671 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
672 Superseded by 683 Sewer Systems
673 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
674 Chapter 1 §§ 101-106 Municipal Authority
675 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:957
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
676 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
677 Superseded by 766 Zoning Map
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
678 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
679 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
680 Chapter 24 §§ 101-120 Realty Transfer Tax
681 Chapter 1 §§ 801,802 Compensation
682 Repealed by 974 Floodplains
683 Chapter 18 §§ 101-107 Sewer Connections
Chapter 26 §§ 101-108 Water Connections
§ 6 Superseded by 719
684 Superseded by 789 Loitering
685 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
686 Superseded by 706 Police Pension
687 Chapter 5 §§ 101-122 Code Enforcement
688 Chapter 6 § 501 Firearms
689 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
690 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
691 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
692 Tax Rate 1989
693 Chapter 21 §§ 101-111 Streets/Sidewalks
694 Chapter 26 §§ 401-403 Drought Plan
695 Superseded by 718 Sewers
696 Repealed by 765 Water Rates
697 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
698 Appendix D Recreation Program
699 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
700 Chapter 18 §§ 401-408 Industrial Wastes
701 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
702 Superseded by 829 Composting of Leaf and
Grass Material
703 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
704 Superseded by 766 Zoning Map
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:958
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
705 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
706 Repealed by 903 Police Pension
707 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
708 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
709 Tax Rate 1991
710 Superseded by 766 Zoning Map
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
711 Appendix H Streets/Sidewalks
712 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
713 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
714 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
715 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
716 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
717 Superseded by 843 Solid Waste
718 Superseded by 793 Sewer
719 Superseded by 792 Water
720 Superseded by 829 Subdivision and Land
Development
721 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
722 Chapter 21 § 103 Curbs and Sidewalks
723 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
724 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
725 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
726 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
727 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
728 Repealed by 903 Police Pension Fund
729 Chapter 5 § 119 Existing Structures
730 Tabled
731 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
732 Superseded by 766 Zoning
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:959
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
733 Tax Rate 1993
734 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
735 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
736 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
737 Chapter 5 § 119 Existing Structures
738 Appendix F Public Property
739 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rentals
740 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
741 Repealed by 745 Motor Vehicles
742 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
743 Superseded by 819 Outdoor Burning
744 Chapter 5 §§ 114, 121 Existing Structures
745 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
746 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
747 Chapter 7 §§ 201-203 Fire Lanes
748 Superseded by 830 Nonuniformed Pensions
749 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
750 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
751 Chapter 18 §§ 501-516 Sewers
752 Chapter 26 §§ 601-616 Water Specifications
753 Chapter 13 §§ 201-210 Alarm Systems
754 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
755 Superseded by 767 Motor Vehicles
756 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
757 Tax Rate 1994
758 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
759 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
760 Repealed by 903 Police Pension Fund
761 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:960
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
762 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
763 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
764 Superseded by 766 Zoning
Appendix J Zoning; Prior
Ordinances
765 Superseded by 812 Water
766 Chapter 27 §§ 101-2014 Zoning
767 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
768 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
769 Chapter 6 §§ 411-415 Alcoholic Beverages
770 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
771 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
772 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
773 Repealed by 811 Bicycles
774 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
775 Tax Rate 1997
776 Chapter 1 §§ 501-508 Attorneys Fees
777 Appendix B Bonds Issues and Loans
778 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
779 Chapter 16 §§ 101-103 Park Regulations
780 Chapter 27 §§ 913, 1304,
1702, 1703,
1708
Zoning
781 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
782 Chapter 25 §§ 101-108 Shade Tree Regulations
783 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
784 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
785 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
786 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
787 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
788 Chapter 6 § 801 Laser Beam Pointers
789 Chapter 6 §§ 101-105 Loitering
790 Superseded by 812 Water
791 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rental Rates
792 Chapter 26 §§ 501-509 Water Tap-In Fees
793 Superseded by 861 Sewer Tap-In Fees
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:961
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
794 Appendix G Sewers
795 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
796 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
797 Chapter 1 §§ 111-116 Elizabethtown Area
Regional Authority
798 Chapter 27 §§ 604, 1303,
1515
Zoning
799 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
800 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
801 Chapter 24 §§ 201-211 Taxation, Special
802 Chapter 1 §§ 121-127 Greater Elizabethtown
Area Recreation and
Community Services
803 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
804 Tax Rate 2000
805 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
806 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
807 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
808 Chapter 27 § 2002 Zoning
809 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
810 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
811 Chapter 3 §§ 101-114 Bicycles
812 Chapter 26 §§ 301-310 Water
813 Chapter 10 §§ 201-204 Health and Safety
814 Chapter 27 §§ 902 Zoning
815 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
816 Appendix G Sewers
817 Appendix G Sewers
126-2000 Appendix G Sewers
818 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
819 Chapter 7 §§ 101-108 Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection
820 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
821 Tax Rate 2001
822 Appendix E Plan Approval
823 Chapter 5 § 120 Code Enforcement
824 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:962
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
825 Chapter 1 §§ 121-127 Administration and
Government
826 Superseded by 830 Administration and
Government
827 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
828 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
829 Adopting
Ordinance
830 Repealed by 904 Administration and
Government
831 Tax Rate 2002
832 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
833 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
834 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
835 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
836 Chapter 27 Part 21 Zoning
837 Chapter 26 §§ 401, 402 Water
838 Chapter 15 § 209 Motor Vehicles
839 Tax Rate 2003
840 Chapter 15 § 201 Motor Vehicles
841 Chapter 15 § 903 Motor Vehicles
842 Chapter 1 §§ 411, 413, 414,
415
Administration and
Government
843 Chapter 20 §§ 101-118 Solid Waste
844 Tax Rate 2004
845 Chapter 5 §§ 201-208 Code Enforcement
846 Chapter 15 §§ 403, 502, 613 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
847 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
848 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
849 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
850 Tax Rate 2005
851 Tax Rate 2005
852 Chapter 1 § 419 Administration and
Government
853 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
854 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:963
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
855 Chapter 15 § 207 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
856 Chapter 27 §§ 1004,
1204—1211,
Part 21
Zoning
857 Repealed by 974 Floodplains
858 Chapter 21 § 503 Streets and Sidewalks
859 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
860 Superseded by 891 Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax
861 Chapter 18 §§ 301—313 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
862 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
863 Chapter 22 §§ 612, 616 Subdivision and Land
Development
864 Chapter 5 §§ 106, 301—311 Code Enforcement
865 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
866 Chapter 27 §§ 504—508,
1516
Zoning
867 Tax Rate 2006
868 Superseded by 891 Emergency and
Municipal Services Tax
869 Chapter 15 § 408 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
870 Chapter 15 §§ 214, 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
871 Repealed by 954 Stormwater
Management and Earth
Disturbance
872 Chapter 22 §§ 404, 608, 609 Subdivision and Land
Development
873 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
874 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
875 Chapter 26 §§ 701—707 Private Water Systems
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:964
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
876 Chapter 27 §§ 201,
301—304,
12A01—12A17,
1512, 1517,
2012, Part 21
Zoning
877 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
878 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
879 Tax Rate 2007
880 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
881 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
882 Chapter 4 §§ 102, 104 Numbering of Buildings
Chapter 5 §§ 108, 114, 115,
119
Code Enforcement
Chapter 27 §§ 201, 306,
503—510,
602—604, 607,
702, 703, 705,
707, 802, 803,
805, 807, 902,
903, 905, 912,
913,
1002—1004,
1103—1111,
1202—1204,
1302—1304,
1306, 1314,
1317—1319,
1321—1324,
1403, 1410,
1413, 1414,
1505,
1516—1517,
1601, 1602,
1606,
1701—1706,
1903, 2003,
2007—2012, and
the Table of Sign
Requirements
Zoning
883 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
884 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:965
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
885 Chapter 15 § 106 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
886 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
887 Chapter 27 Part 21 Zoning
888 Chapter 20 §§ 106, 109 Solid Waste
889 Chapter 5 § 111 Property Maintenance
Chapter 27 § 2002 Zoning
890 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 408 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
891 Chapter 24 §§ 301—313 Local Services Tax
892 Tax Rate 2008
893 Chapter 1 §§ 801, 802 Administration and
Government
894 Repealed by 904 Nonuniformed Pension
Fund
895 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
896 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
897 Chapter 22 §§ 202, 303, 304,
305, 404, 405,
406, 502, 601,
612, 613, 617,
807
Subdivision and Land
Development
898 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
899 Chapter 1 Part 3B Civil Service
Commission
900 Chapter 18 § 202 Sewer Rental
901 Chapter 15 §§ 403, 408 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
902 Tax Rate 2009
903 Chapter 1 Part 4A Police Pension Plan
904 Chapter 1 Part 4B Nonuniformed
Employee Pension Plan
905 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
906 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
907 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
908 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 403, 404,
408
Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
909 Tax Rate 2010
910 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:966
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
911 Chapter 15 § 406 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
912 Chapter 1 § 411 Nonuniformed
Employee Pension Plan
913 Chapter 1 § 401 Police Pension Plan
914 Chapter 10 § 101 Board of Health
915 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
916 Appendix G Sewers
917 Appendix G Sewers
918 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
919 Appendix E Plan Approval
920 Chapter 15 §§ 902, 904 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
921 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
922 Chapter 16 § 102 Parks and Recreation
923 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
924 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rental
925 Chapter 15 § 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
926 Tax Rate 2011
927 Chapter 15 § 406 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
928 Chapter 15 §§ 403, 407 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
929 Chapter 15 §§ 207, 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
930 Chapter 24 Part 2 Earned Income Tax
931 Chapter 1 Part 4A Police Pension Plan
932 Chapter 1 Part 4B Nonuniformed
Employee Pension Plan
933 Tax Rate 2012
934 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
935 Chapter 2 § 102 Dogs Running at Large
936 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 205, 403 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
937 Chapter 21 § 107 Streets and Sidewalks
938 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:967
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
939 Chapter 15 §§ 411, 412 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
940 Chapter 15 §§ 206, 407 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
941 Chapter 21 § 107 Streets and Sidewalks
942 Chapter 15 § 214 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
943 Tax Rate 2013
944 Chapter 1 § 803 Compensation of
Elected Officials
945 Chapter 5 §§ 111, 114, 115,
119, 303
Code Enforcement
Chapter 7 §§ 101, 103, 108,
203, 301, 302,
401
Fire Prevention and Fire
Protection
Chapter 20 §§ 110, 115 Solid Waste
946 Chapter 27 §§ 201, 502, 503,
902, 903, 905,
908—912, 1002,
1003, 12A02,
12A03, 12A05,
12A06, 12A08,
12A12, 12A17,
1302, 1303,
1319,
1325—1331,
1408, 1413,
1414, 1415,
1502, 1509,
1512, 1601,
1702, 1703,
2005, 2010, 27
Attachment 1
Zoning
947 Chapter 27 Part 21 Zoning
948 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
949 Chapter 15 § 214 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
950 Chapter 13 Part 3 Special Events
951 Tax Rate 2014
952 Chapter 15 § 404 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
953 Appendix F Public Property
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:968
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
954 Chapter 17 Parts 1 – 11 Stormwater
Management
955 Chapter 16 Part 1 Park Regulations
956 Chapter 24 Part 6 LERTA Program
957 Chapter 5 Part 4 Removal of Snow and
Ice
Chapter 21 Parts 1, 2, 3, 4
and 6
Streets and Sidewalks
958 Chapter 15 Part 4 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
959 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
960 Chapter 5 Part 1 Property Maintenance
961 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
962 Chapter 1 Part 4A Police Pension Plan
963 Chapter 1 Part 4B Nonuniformed
Employees Pension Plan
964 Tax Rate 2015
965 Chapter 18 Part 2 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
966 Chapter 18 Parts 4 and 5 Sewers and Sewage
Disposal
967 Chapter 1 Part 3 Police Department
968 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
969 Chapter 10 Part 3 Engine Brakes
970 Tax Rate 2016
971 Chapter 18 § 201 Sewer Rental
972 Chapter 1 § 502 Attorney Fees
973 Chapter 10 § 203 Noise Nuisance
974 Chapter 8 §§ 101 – 603 Floodplains
975 Chapter 5 § 115 Property Maintenance
Chapter 18 Part 6 Penalties
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KO-101
FWD:969
Ordinance Disposition Number Subject
Chapter 27 §§ 201, 301 –
304, 401, 501,
601, 701, 801,
901 – 902, 1001,
1101, 1201,
12A01 – 12A02,
1302, 1306,
1310, 1315,
1321, 1322,
1326, 1515,
1604, 1901,
1905, 2008, 27
Attachment 1
Zoning
976 Chapter 8 §§ 201, 301, 304,
307, 403, 502,
504
Floodplains
977 Chapter 15 §§ 201, 204 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
978 Chapter 15 §§ 209, 406, 407 Motor Vehicles and
Traffic
979 Tax Rate 2017
980 Chapter 5 § 115 Property Maintenance
981 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
982 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
983 Chapter 5 §§ 106, 114, 116,
117, 120, 302,
303
Code Enforcement
Chapter 27 §§ 201, 306, 602,
607, 702, 802,
902, 12A02,
12A04, 1304,
1306, 1310,
1319, 1332,
1333, 1504,
1602, 1903
Zoning
984 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
985 Tax Rate 2018 NCM
986 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
987 Chapter 20 Part 1 Solid Waste Amendment
988 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
989 Tax Rate 2019 NCM
§ KO-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KO-101
FWD:970
Ordinance
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
990 1/17/2019 Zoning Ch. 27, Pt. 2;
Ch. 27, Pt. 8;
Ch. 27, Pt. 13
20
991 4/18/2019 Streets and
Sidewalks; Motor
Vehicles and Traffic
Ch. 21, Pt. 1;
Ch. 15, Pt. 3
20
992 5/16/2019 Administration and
Government
Ch. 1, Pt. 3 20
993 5/16/2019 Taxation, Special Ch. 24, Pt. 6 20
994 12/5/2019 Tax Rate 2020 NCM 20
995 12/19/2019 Administration and
Government;
Animals; Code
Enforcement; Motor
Vehicles and Traffic;
Stormwater
Management; Solid
Waste
Ch. 1, Pt. 7;
Ch. 2, Pt. 1;
Ch. 2, Pt. 2;
Ch. 2, Pt. 3;
Ch. 5, Pt. 1;
Ch. 15, Pt. 4;
Ch. 17, Pt. 4;
Ch. 20, Pt. 1
20
996 1/16/2020 Zoning Ch. 27, Pt. 21 20
Key to Significant Resolutions
Chapter KR
KEY TO SIGNIFICANT RESOLUTIONS
§ KR-101. Key to Significant Resolutions.
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
2/18/1896 Appendix C Franchises and Services
4/19/1938 Appendix F Public Property
5/17/1938 Appendix F Public Property
7/8/1946 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
11/15/1949 Superseded by Ord. 8/21/
1980
Zoning
Appendix J
6/15/1954 Chapter 1 §§ 301-303 Police Department
11/21/1955 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
9/10/1957 Appendix F Public Property
9/17/1957 Repealed by 370 Motor Vehicles
§ KO-101 FOREWORD § KR-101
FWD:971
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
11/12/1957 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
11/12/1957A Appendix G Sewers
12/13/1957 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
8/19/1958 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
6/6/1961 Appendix G Sewers
1/16/1962 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1/16/1962A Appendix G Sewers
4/19/1962 Superseded by 829 Motor Vehicles
5/15/1962 Repealed by 829 Employee Holidays and
Vacations
11/19/1963 Appendix G Sewers
1/6/1964 Appendix G Sewers
2/18/1964 Appendix G Sewers
7/21/1964 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
12/15/1964 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
1/19/1965 Appendix G Sewers
4/20/1965 Appendix G Sewers
5/5/1965 Appendix G Sewers
5/5/1965A Appendix G Sewers
7/1/1965 Appendix G Sewers
-/-/1965 Superseded by Ord. 493 Per Capita Tax
12/28/1967 Tax Rate 1968
3/19/1968 Repealed by 829 Storage of Materials
1/21/1969 Appendix G Sewers
1/19/1971 Appendix F Public Property
11/16/1971 Appendix F Public Property
1/8/1972 Appendix G Sewers
4/13/1972 Appendix F Public Property
12/19/1972 Appendix F Public Property
4/16/1974 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8/20/1974 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8/20/1974A Appendix F Public Property
9/24/1974 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
7/15/1975 Appendix G Sewers
2/17/1976 Appendix G Sewers
3/16/1976 Superseded by Res. 2001-5 Fees
§ KR-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KR-101
FWD:972
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
9/7/1976 Appendix G Sewers
1/31/1977 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2/21/1978 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
4/17/1979 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
5/15/1979 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12/31/1979 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12/18/1980 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
12/17/1981 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1/4/1982 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6/17/1982A Appendix D Governmental Affairs
6/17/1982B Appendix D Governmental Affairs
1/20/1983 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
83-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
83-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
84-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
84-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
84-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
84-4 Superseded by 830 Nonuniformed Pension
Plan
84-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
84-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
85-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
85-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
85-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
85-4 Superseded by 89-3 Civil Service Commission
86-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
86-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Agr. 7/17/
1986
Appendix C Franchise and Services
87-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
87-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KR-101 FOREWORD § KR-101
FWD:973
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
87-3 Appendix H Streets and Sidewalks
87-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
88-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
88-2 Chapter 5 § 131 Inspections
88-3 Superseded by 95-2 Nonuniformed Personnel
Policy
88-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
88-5 Appendix F Public Property
89-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
89-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
89-3 Superseded by Res. 4/16/
1998
Civil Service Commission
89-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
89-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
89-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
89-7 Superseded by Res. 2001-5 Fees
90-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
90-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
90-3 Superseded by Res. 4/16/
1998
Civil Service Commission
90-4 Repealed by 829 Central Business District
Commission
90-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
90-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
90-8 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
90-9 Appendix F Public Property
91-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
91-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
91-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
92-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
92-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
92-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
8/20/1992 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
92-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
93-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
93-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
93-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KR-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KR-101
FWD:974
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
94-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
94-2 Repealed by Ord. 950 Parades
94-3 Superseded by Res. 2001-5 Fees
94-4 Appendix F Public Property
94-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
95-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
95-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
96-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
96-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
96-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
96-5 Superseded by Res. 2001-5 Fees
96-6 Appendix F Public Property
96-7 Appendix F Public Property
97-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
97-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
97-3 Appendix F Public Property
97-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
97-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
97-6 Appendix B Bond Issues and Loans
97-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
98-1 Superseded by Res. -/-/— Civil Service Commission
2000-6 Appendix G Sewers
2000-7 Superseded by Res. -/-/— Civil Service Commission
2001-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2001-2 Appendix F Public Property
2001-8 Appendix G Sewers
Res. -/-/— Superseded by 899 Civil Service Commission
2001-5 Fee Resolution Fees
2002-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-4 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KR-101 FOREWORD § KR-101
FWD:975
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
2002-8 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-9 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2002-10 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2003-1 Superseded by 2008-8 Right to Know Law
2003-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2003-3 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2003-4 Introduction Fees Fee Resolution
Chapter 3 § 114 Bicycles
2003-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2004-1 Fee Schedule
2004-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2004-3 Fee Schedule
2004-4 Fee Schedule
2004-5 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2004-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2004-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-1 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-2 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-3 Fee Schedule
2005-4 Appendix C Franchises and Services
2005-5 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-6 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-7 Fee Schedule
2005-8 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-9 Fee Schedule
2005-10 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2005-11 Fee Schedule
2005-12 Fee Schedule
2005-13 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2006-4 Fee Schedule
2006-7 Fee Schedule
2006-8 Fee Schedule
2007-10 Fee Schedule
2008-8 Chapter 1 Part 9 Public Records
2009-11 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
2011-7 Appendix D Governmental Affairs
§ KR-101 ELIZABETHTOWN CODE § KR-101
FWD:976
Resolutions Disposition Number Subject
2011-8 Fee Schedule
2014-1 Fee Schedule
2014-16 Fee Schedule
2014-21 Fee Schedule
2015-3 Fee Schedule
2015-10 Fee Schedule
2016-13 Appendix F Public Property
2016-18 Fee Schedule
2016-19 Appendix F Public Property
2018-07 Appendix F Public Property
2018-14 Fee Schedule
Resolution
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition Supp. No.
2019-9 7/18/2019 Fee Resolution Superseded
by 2019-13
20
2019-13 12/5/2019 Fee Resolution FEES 20
§ KR-101 FOREWORD § KR-101
FWD:977