Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Be it enacted and ordained by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Economy, County of Beaver, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
enacted and ordained as follows:
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of ordinances for the Borough of Economy,
County of Beaver, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised, codified and
consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code Publishers
Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 180, is hereby approved,
adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of
Economy, which shall be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of
the Borough of Economy," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same as
those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the enactment of this
ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and not as
new enactments, and the effectiveness of such provisions shall date from
the date of adoption of the prior ordinance. All such provisions are hereby
continued in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their
adoption by the Borough Council of the Borough of Economy, and it is the
intention of said Borough Council that each such provision contained within
the Code is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code.
Only such provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code
shall be deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and
only changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Economy and in force on the date of the adoption
of this Code and not contained in the Code are hereby repealed as of the
effective date given in § 1-15 below, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to January 1, 1985.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending,
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough, or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance, or part of an ordinance, providing for laying out,
opening, altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing
grade, changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any
right-of-way, easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other
public place or property or designating various streets as public
highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; or providing for a
system of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the
§ 1-4 ECONOMY CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed be included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
construction, extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any
part of a system of sewers or water supply lines.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance pertaining to flood damage prevention.
R. All vehicles and traffic legislation not otherwise specifically repealed.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances of the Borough for adoption and revision as part of the
Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes were
made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances so changed had been previously formally amended
to read as such.
B. General deletions.
(1) Sections pertaining to severability, effective dates and repeals have
been deleted, since such provisions are included in this ordinance
or are of no further effect.
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, the following changes and revisions of a
substantive nature are hereby made to various ordinances included in
the Code. These changes are made to bring provisions into conformity
with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of
the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed have been previously formally
amended to read as such. All such changes and revisions shall be
deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of the Code specified in
§ 1-15.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1-6C, the following sections were added or amended:
Nomenclature changes were made to §§ 21-3, 21-4, 29-1, 29-3, 33-3, 55-1B(4), 58-5,
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-7
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held
to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
the Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any
statute, other ordinance or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation
impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of such statute,
other ordinance or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
Three copies of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with the
Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copies
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copies shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code, or in supplements made to the Code, are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
ordinances.
92-13C, 92-14B, 92-15, 92-17A, 92-18, 97-1, 108-13, 108-17, 135-6, 160-25F and 170-31A.
Additional changes were made to §§ 31-9, 108-4B, 114-1, 160-29, 163-20A, 163-30,
171-9C, 170-21, 170-22, 170-23, 170-24, 170-25, 170-32, 170-45A, 170-45C, 170-46,
170-48A, 170-50C, 170-57, 170-58B, 170-58C, 170-59, 170-66, 180-7 and 180-72. Penalty
provisions were added or revised in §§ 43-9, 46-5, 58-6, 62-3, 69-6, 75-7, 81-3, 85-3,
92-14B, 97-5, 102-3, 108-19, 114-3A, 119-17, 135-9, 145-6, 145-11, 145-21, 149-8A, 160-9,
160-22, 160-31, 166-17, 170-7B, 170-19, 170-29, 170-42, 170-53, 170-63, 170-72, 173-3
and 177-4. A complete description of each change is included in Ord. No. 274, which is on
file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ 1-7 ECONOMY CODE § 1-10
1:6
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary, or someone authorized and
directed by him or her, to keep up-to-date the certified copies of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective
date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt specifically
as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included therein by
reference until such changes or new ordinances are printed as supplements
to said Code books, at which time such supplements shall be inserted
therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the maximum penalty
provided by law.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article or part
thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to be
illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article or part thereof rendered. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the
Borough Council that this ordinance and the Code would have been adopted
if such illegal, invalid or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection,
section, article or part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:7
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on February 10, 1987.
§ 1-15 ECONOMY CODE § 1-15
1:8
ARTICLE II
Legislation Enacted During Codification
[During the process of codification, certain complete new
ordinances were adopted by the Borough Council for inclusion in
the Code of the Borough of Economy. Such new enactments are
noted in the histories of individual chapters as "... adopted during
codification; see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. II." During the
course of normal supplementation, specific dates of adoption will be
inserted where pertinent in the text of the chapters.
The enumeration appearing below lists each chapter affected by any
such legislation adopted during codification. The complete text of
any new enactments is on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
where it may be inspected during office hours.]
Chapter
Ordinance
Number Adoption Date
Ch. 78, Dumps and Dumping 285 8-9-1988
Ch. 88, Fire Prevention 286 8-9-1988
GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-15
1:9
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Appointment.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, an independent auditor
shall be appointed for the Borough of Economy.
§ 5-2. Powers and duties.
Said independent auditor shall perform such duties and exercise such
powers as the General Assembly has in such cases made and provided for.2
Chapter 9
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 38.
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Driveways — See Ch. 160, Art. I.
Sidewalks — See Ch. 160, Art. II.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 166.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 9-1. Creation of position; term, compensation and number.
A. Creation of office of Code Enforcement Officer. There is hereby created
by the Town Council of the Borough of Economy the position of Code
Enforcement Officer which shall be under the direction and control of
Borough Council and shall have the responsibility for administering and
enforcing the provisions of this chapter and the following specified
ordinances and no others:
(1) Zoning Ordinance, Ord. No. 230, as amended.3
(2) Building Code Ordinance, Ord. No. 6, as amended.4
(3) Sidewalk Ordinance, Ord. No. 204, as amended.5
(4) Driveway Ordinance, Ord. No. 179, as amended.6
(5) Swimming Pool Ordinance, Ord. No. 158, as amended.7
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46196.
3. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 230, as amended, was superseded by Ord. No. 300. See Ch.
180, Zoning.
4. Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Construction.
5. Editor's Note: See 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II, Sidewalks.
6. Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Driveways.
§ 1-15 ECONOMY CODE § 9-1
5:10
§ 9-2. Powers and duties.
§ 9-3. Application for permit required; examination; fees.
B. Term, compensation and number of Code Enforcement Officers. The
term, compensation and number of the Code Enforcement Officers shall
be solely determined by the Town Council of the Borough of Economy,
by resolution, as it shall from time to time deem appropriate.8
A. Enforcement powers of Code Enforcement Officer. The Code
Enforcement Officer shall enforce and administer all of the provisions of
this chapter and those ordinances as specified in § 9-1A hereof.
B. Duties of Code Enforcement Officer. The duties of the Code
Enforcement Officer shall include the receipt of applications, the
issuance of permits, the submission of written monthly reports to the
Town Council, performing inspections to determine compliance with
applicable codes and ordinances, the undertaking of systematic
inspection programs, the undertaking of research and investigations,
the recommendation of appropriate administrative rules, the collection
of all permit fees and the payment of same to the Borough Secretary
with an itemization of same as well as such other activities as may be
required by the Town Council.
C. Chief Code Enforcement Officer. The Town Council of the Borough of
Economy may appoint a Chief Code Enforcement Officer when it deems
necessary and/or appropriate. In addition to the duties as outlined in
this chapter, the Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall: [Added
5-8-1990 by Ord. No. 302]
(1) Be consulted with by other Code Enforcement Officers before
taking action on legal issues.
(2) Be assigned complicated cases involving legal action.
(3) Distribute workload equally between all Code Enforcement Officers
when required due to volume of work available.
A. Permit required. An application for a permit shall be required in
accordance with the provisions of those ordinances and codes which
said Code Enforcement Officer has the responsibility to administer. Said
application shall be submitted in such form as may be prescribed by the
applicable ordinance or code under which it is submitted and shall be
accompanied by any required fee.
B. Action on application. The Code Enforcement Officer shall examine said
application to determine compliance with the applicable ordinance or
code and shall either approve or reject said application within the time
limits prescribed by the particular ordinance or code under which the
7. Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Swimming Pools.
8. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 38, Salaries and Compensation.
§ 9-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 9-3
9:11
§ 9-4. Violations and penalties.
§ 9-5. Variances and appeals.
Any person requesting a variance or aggrieved by a decision of the Code
Enforcement Officer may utilize the appeal procedure set forth in the
applicable ordinance or code under which a decision has been rendered by
the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 9-6. Purpose.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to vest in the Code Enforcement
Officer the power and duty to administer the ordinances as specified herein
and each of the following ordinances are hereby partially amended so
that any and all references which relate to the individual responsible for
administration and enforcement shall now hereafter refer to the Code
Enforcement Officer as the individual responsible for administration and
enforcement:
application is submitted. If said application is rejected, the Code
Enforcement Officer shall inform the applicant in writing of the reasons
for such rejection.
C. Fees. Applicants for permits required by any of the ordinances and
codes administered and enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer shall
pay at the time of the application to the Code Enforcement Officer the
permit fees established by the particular ordinance or code under
which the application is being submitted.
D. All permits granted by the Code Enforcement Officer shall be valid for
that amount of time as specified in the applicable ordinance or code
under which the permit has been granted.
A. Procedure in case of violations. Whenever the Code Enforcement
Officer determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe that
there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of the
other applicable ordinances or codes, or of any rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto, he shall forthwith initiate the procedure
specified in the applicable ordinance or code under which the violation
is alleged to have occurred.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to correct a violation or institute a
remedial action as ordered by the Code Enforcement Officer or who
violates a provision or fails to comply with any requirements of the
applicable ordinance shall be subject to the penalties as contained in
that ordinance.
A. Zoning Ordinance, Ord. No. 230, as amended.9
B. Building Code Ordinance, Ord. No. 6, as amended.10
9. Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 9-3 ECONOMY CODE § 9-6
9:12
Chapter 11
COOPERATIVE AND INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
C. Sidewalk Ordinance, Ord. No. 204, as amended.11
D. Driveway Ordinance, Ord. No. 179, as amended.12
E. Swimming Pool Ordinance, Ord. No. 158, as amended.13
10.Editor's Note: See Ch. 55, Building Construction.
11.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. II, Sidewalks.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 160, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. I, Driveways.
13.Editor's Note: See Ch. 166, Swimming Pools.
§ 9-6 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 9-6
9:13

ARTICLE I
Beaver Valley Council of Governments
[Adopted 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 253]
§ 11-1. Borough to become member.
The Borough of Economy elects to become a member of the Beaver Valley
Council of Governments.
§ 11-2. Terms of agreement.
The conditions of the agreement, the manner and extent of financing the
agreement, the duration of the term of the agreement and the
organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement are as
specified within the bylaws of the Beaver Valley Council of Governments,
which were presented before the Town Council of the Borough of Economy
at the public meeting of June 12, 1984, and which are set forth in Appendix
A to this article and incorporated herein.14
§ 11-3. President of Council authorized to enter agreement.
The President of Council is hereby authorized and directed to take whatever
steps necessary, sign whatever documents are necessary and do all things
necessary to become a member of the Beaver Valley Council of
Governments.
§ 11-4. Appropriation.
There is hereby appropriated from the municipal treasury an amount
sufficient to pay the annual dues as determined for this municipality under
the terms of the above-mentioned agreement.
14.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 11-1 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-4
9:15

ARTICLE II
Police and Fire Protection
[Adopted 7-24-1991 by Ord. No. 315]
§ 11-5. Authority to execute agreement.
Pursuant to the authority set forth in the Borough Code, Act of February
1, 1966, P.L. 581, Section 1202 [53 P.S. § 46202(35)], the proper officials
of the Borough of Economy and the Borough of Economy Volunteer Fire
Department are hereby authorized to execute a mutual aid agreement
for police and fire protection between the Borough of Economy and the
Township of Harmony. A true and correct copy of said agreement is attached
hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this reference thereto.15
15.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 11-5 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-5
9:17

ARTICLE III
Multimunicipal Comprehensive Planning
[Adopted 6-10-2003 by Ord. No. 388]
§ 11-6. Execution and delivery of agreement.
The proper officers of the Borough of Economy are authorized and directed
to execute and deliver the intergovernmental cooperation agreement for
multimunicipal planning dated as of June 10, 2003, by and among the
communities of Ambridge Borough, Economy Borough, Harmony Township,
Leetsdale Borough, and South Heights Borough, a copy of which is attached
hereto (the "cooperative planning agreement"). The specific terms,
conditions and provisions to the cooperative planning agreement are made
a part hereof.16
§ 11-7. Provisions of cooperative planning agreement.
The conditions, duration and terms, purpose and objective, scope and
authority delegated, manner and extent of financing, organizational
structure and manner in which real and/or personal property shall be
acquired, managed and disposed of, are set forth in the attached
cooperative planning agreement.17
16.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
17.Editor's Note: The agreement is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 11-6 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-7
9:19

ARTICLE IV
Intergovernmental Risk Management Association
[Adopted 11-11-2003 by Ord. No. 390]
§ 11-8. Membership; intergovernmental contract.
This municipality shall join with other municipalities in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Intergovernmental Cooperation Act18 by becoming a member
of the association19 and entering into the intergovernmental contract which
was adopted by reference with the same effect as if it had been set out
verbatim in this section and a copy of which shall be filed with the minutes
of the meeting at which this article was adopted.20
§ 11-9. Authorization.
This municipality is authorized to enter into the intergovernmental contract
for the purposes contained therein, as well as any amendments or
modifications thereto as the same may be required from time to time. These
actions are to be taken by the member(s) or employee(s) of this municipality
designated for this purpose, pursuant to general or specific instructions by
the governing body adopting this article.
§ 11-10. Custody of invested funds.
The Association is designated as having official custody of this
municipality's funds which are invested by the association pursuant to the
terms of the intergovernmental contract.
§ 11-11. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,21 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the intergovernmental
contract referred to in § 11-8.
B. This municipality's participation in the association shall be terminable
at any time by ordinance.
C. The purposes and objectives of the agreement are set forth hereinabove
and the intergovernmental contract and actions contemplated thereby
and purposes and objectives contained therein are otherwise legal as
part of a pooled arrangement with other governmental units, thereby
achieving economic and other advantages of intergovernmental
cooperation.
18.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
19.Editor's Note: Per the title of Ord. No. 390, "the association" refers to the Pennsylvania
Intergovernmental Risk Management Association.
20.Editor's Note: Said contract is on file in the Borough offices.
21.Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 11-8 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-11
9:21
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
municipal funds except through the contribution of this municipality's
basis rate (as such term is defined in the intergovernmental contract) to
the association.
E. The association shall be managed by a Board of Commissioners or
Executive Committee as set forth in the by-laws of said Association, a
copy of which has been provided for review in connection with the
adoption of this article.
F. All property, real or personal, shall be acquired, managed, or disposed
of by the association in accordance with the terms of the
intergovernmental contract.
§ 11-11 ECONOMY CODE § 11-11
9:22
ARTICLE V
Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments
[Adopted 9-12-2006 by Ord. No. 409]
§ 11-12. Membership.
Economy Borough has joined the Upper Beaver Valley Council of
Governments as a full member.
§ 11-13. Conditions of agreement.
That any action taken by the Upper Beaver Valley COG which creates a
legal obligation, whether it be contractual, financial or otherwise upon a
member municipality shall not be binding upon a member municipality
affected unless and until its municipal legislative body ordains, resolves
or otherwise enacts the actions recommended by the Upper Beaver Valley
COG, according to the procedure set forth in the appropriate municipal
code and laws of the commonwealth.
§ 11-14. Duration of term.
This agreement will stand for the duration of the Borough's membership.
§ 11-15. Purpose and objectives.
That the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments shall assist the
member municipalities individually or collectively to execute their
governmental responsibilities in as effective and responsible a manner as
possible; further, that the UBVCOG shall undertake such other projects
related to municipal governments as the Board of Directors may direct,
subject to the provisions of § 11-13.
§ 11-16. Manner and extent of financing.
That the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments be financed by
annual dues paid by member municipalities and by funds obtained by the
organization from public or private sources.
§ 11-17. Organizational structure.
That the Upper Beaver Council of Governments be the agent for the
Borough of Economy in matters pertaining to this Agreement; that a
legislative officer of each municipality be a representative of the UBVCOG,
there shall also be appointed an alternate from among the legislative body
to take the representatives place in his/her absence; and that the officers
of the UBVCOG be authorized to act as they deem necessary, in accordance
with its bylaws.
§ 11-12 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-18
9:23
§ 11-18. Acquisition/management/ disposal of property.
That the real or personal property necessary to implement this agreement
be acquired, managed and disposed by the Upper Beaver Valley Council of
Governments, in accordance with the bylaws of the COG and any laws or
contracts which apply.
§ 11-19. Bylaws.
That the bylaws of the Upper Beaver Valley Council of Governments
attached hereto, and made a part hereof and marked as Exhibit A are
hereby approved.22
22.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is included at the end of this chapter as Attachment 3.
§ 11-18 ECONOMY CODE § 11-19
9:24
ARTICLE VI
Regional Board of Appeals
[Adopted 10-9-2012 by Ord. No. 437]
§ 11-20. Board established.
A Regional Board of Appeals shall be established by the Beaver County
Regional Council of Governments in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Construction Code Act, as amended from time to time.
§ 11-21. Applicability; purpose.
The Regional Board of Appeals will be applicable to the Borough of
Economy in matters relating to the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, as
amended from time to time, providing a process for challenging decisions
made by the Building Code Official as employed by or retained by the
Borough of Economy.
§ 11-22. Voting rights of Borough.
The Borough of Economy through its membership in the Beaver County
Regional Council of Governments and through its appointed, voting
delegate, will have a vote on the selection of qualified members on the
Regional Board of Appeals.
§ 11-23. Agreement with Regional Council of Governments.
The Borough of Economy agrees to enter into an Intergovernmental
Cooperation Agreement with the Beaver County Regional Council of
Governments in order to effectuate the provisions of this article.
§ 11-20 CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER § 11-23
9:25
Chapter 14
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
§ 14-1. Economy Borough Volunteer Fire Department recognized.
The Economy Borough Volunteer Fire Department, organized and existing
in the Borough of Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, is hereby
designated as the officially recognized Fire Department for the Borough.
§ 14-2. Authorized activities.
§ 14-3. Authorized activities of members.
In addition to participating in the activities of the Fire Department as
authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the Fire Department are also authorized to do the following:
A. The Fire Department is hereby authorized to provide such services to
the Borough as may be necessary for the protection of property and
persons situated therein, including, by way of example and not of
limitation, the extinguishment and prevention of loss of life and
property from fire, automobile accidents, medical emergencies,
hazardous materials incidents and other dangerous situations.
B. The Fire Department may also provide nonemergency and public
service functions, such as, again by way of example and not of
limitation, the removal of water from property after storms and
assisting in the removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury
to persons or property, whether through natural causes or man-made
situations.
C. The Fire Department may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Borough, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the Department to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The Fire Department may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Borough.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the Fire
Department.
B. Engage in fundraising activities for the Fire Department when
authorized by an officer or officers of the Fire Department.
§ 11-23 ECONOMY CODE § 14-3
14:26
§ 14-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize the Fire Department as the
official Fire Department of the Borough and to delineate additional
authorized activities for firefighters for workmen's compensation purposes.
Chapter 21
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 75.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized Fire Department.
§ 14-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 14-4
21:27

ARTICLE I
Animal Control Officer
[Adopted 3-9-1982 by Ord. No. 239]
§ 21-1. Office created.
Pursuant to the powers and duties vested in the Borough of Economy by
the laws and statutes of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, there is hereby
created the position of Animal Control Officer.
§ 21-2. Powers and duties.
The Animal Control Officer is hereby charged with the authority and power
to administer and enforce the Dog Law of 1965 (3 P.S. § 460-101 et seq.)23
and Economy Borough Ordinance No. 22324 within the geographical
boundaries of the Borough of Economy and further to administer and
enforce any applicable state, county and municipal regulations not
inconsistent therewith.
§ 21-3. Terms and conditions of employment. [Amended 2-10-1987
by Ord. No. 274]
The terms and conditions of employment of the said Animal Control Officer
shall be determined from time to time by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Economy as it shall deem necessary and proper.
§ 21-4. Expenditures. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
In the administration and enforcement of this chapter, the Borough Council
shall have the authority to authorize the expenditure of such moneys from
the general revenue as it deems fit, proper and necessary to implement the
provisions and policy of this chapter.
§ 21-5. Confirmation of other regulations.
All provisions of Ordinance No. 223 of the Borough of Economy, enacted
August 12, 1980, are hereby confirmed and continued in full force and
effect.
23.Editor's Note: Said Dog Law of 1965 was repealed by Act of December 7, 1982, P.L. 784,
No. 225. See now 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
24.Editor's Note: Editor's Note: See Ch. 75, Dogs.
§ 21-1 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 21-5
21:29

ARTICLE II
Borough Manager
[Adopted 7-15-1992 by Ord. No. 325]
§ 21-6. Office created.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Economy.
§ 21-7. Appointment and removal.
The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of all
members of the Council. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council, and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its
members. At least 30 days before such removal is effective, the Council shall
furnish the Manager with a written statement setting forth its intention to
remove him.
§ 21-8. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the office as
outlined herein. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough or of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of appointment, but during
the tenure of office he must reside within a reasonable distance of the office
of the Borough of Economy as determined by Council.
§ 21-9. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Council,
in the sum of $50,000 conditioned upon the faithful performance of his
duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the Borough.
§ 21-10. Compensation.
The salary of the Borough Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
Council.
§ 21-11. Powers and duties.
A. The Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the Borough
and shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough placed in his
charge. The powers and duties of administration of all Borough
business shall be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or
conferred by statute or ordinance upon other Borough officers.
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of the Council, the powers and duties of
the Borough Manager shall include the following:
§ 21-6 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 21-11
21:31
(1) To supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments. Nothing in this provision is intended, however, to
apply to the office of Borough Solicitor or to supervision of the
Police Department.
(2) To recommend to the Council the hiring and, when necessary for
the good of the service, to recommend the suspension or discharge
of any employee under his supervision, provided that persons
covered by the civil service provisions of the Borough Code shall be
hired, suspended or discharged in accordance with such
provisions, and provided, further, that the Manager shall report, at
the next meeting thereafter of the Council, any action taken by
authority of this subsection.
(3) To recommend to Council wages and salaries of all personnel under
his supervision with a range previously determined by Council and
to demonstrate to Council that there is an adequate wage and
salary program in operation within his administration.
(4) To prepare and submit to Council, before the end of October, a
budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message.
In preparing the budget, the manager, or an officer designated by
him, shall obtain from the head of each department, agency or
board or any qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and such other supporting data as is required. The
Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before
submitting the budget to Council.
(5) To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by Council.
(6) To develop, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, long range fiscal plans for the Borough.
(7) To hold such other municipal office and to head such municipal
departments as Council may from time to time direct, in
accordance with law.
(8) To attend all scheduled meetings of Council with the right to take
part in the discussions. The Manager shall receive notice of special
meetings of council and its committees and attend upon request.
(9) To prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply facts
pertinent thereto.
(10) To keep Council informed on a monthly basis as to the conduct of
Borough affairs; to submit monthly reports on the condition of the
Borough finances and such other reports as Council requests; and
to make such recommendations to Council as he deems advisable.
§ 21-11 ECONOMY CODE § 21-11
21:32
§ 21-12. Right of Borough to amend provisions.
The Borough reserves the right at any time by ordinance to amend or
otherwise modify or repeal this article in any particular.
§ 21-13. Power of Mayor to delegate duties.
The Mayor may, upon Council approval, delegate in writing to the Borough
Manager, subject to revocation by written notification at any time, any of his
nonlegislative and nonjudicial duties.
(11) To submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the finances and the administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(12) To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(13) To employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Borough.
(14) To attend to the awarding of contracts in due form of law. The
manager shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of
the same except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by
statute upon some other Borough officer.
(15) To see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Borough's claims.
(16) To serve as Purchasing Officer of the Borough and to purchase in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code,25 all budgeted
supplies and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments and
other offices of the Borough. Purchases in excess of an amount to
be set from time to time by Council will require prior Council
approval. The Manager shall keep an account of all purchases and
shall make a full written report thereof, monthly. He shall also issue
rules and regulations subject to the approval of Council, governing
the procurement of all municipal supplies and equipment.
(17) To investigate and dispose of or to inform the appropriate officer to
investigate and dispose of all complaints regarding Borough
services and to report to the Council thereon.
(18) To perform such other duties as may be from time to time conferred
upon him by ordinance.
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 21-11 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 21-14
21:33
§ 21-14. Procedural limitations on Council.
Other than for the purposes of inquiry, Council or any of its members or any
of Council's committees or its members shall deal with the administrative
service solely through the Borough Manager, and neither Council nor any
of its members nor any of Council's committees or its members shall give
orders, publicly or privately, to any subordinate of the Manager.
§ 21-15. Disability or absence of Manager.
If the Manager becomes ill or needs to be absent from the Borough, he shall,
upon notification and approval of Council, designate one qualified member
of his staff to perform the duties of the Manager during his absence or
disability.
§ 21-16. Word usage.
Wherever in this article a masculine pronoun is used, it includes the
feminine.
§ 21-14 ECONOMY CODE § 21-16
21:34
Chapter 23
PENSION PLAN FOR EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund — See Ch. 31.
§ 23-1. Establishment of plan.26
The Borough of Economy has established a pension plan, effective January
1, 1988, which shall be known as the "Economy Borough Nonuniform
Employee Pension Plan," hereinafter called the "plan." The effective date of
the restated plan shall be January 1, 1995. The provisions of the restated
plan shall apply only to an employee who terminates employment after the
effective date of the restated plan.
§ 23-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCRUED BENEFIT — As of any given date, the participant's retirement
benefit, determined in accordance with the formula provided under § 23-5A,
but based on average monthly earnings and service as of the date of
determination.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — Two forms of payment under §§ 23-6B and
23-7A of equal actuarial present value on a specified date. The factors
used in determining actuarial equivalents shall be 6% interest and UP-1984
Mortality Table rates.
AVERAGE MONTHLY EARNINGS — The average monthly compensation of
the participant paid by the employer during the highest three years paid
out of the last 10 years immediately preceding retirement or termination of
employment.
BENEFICIARY — Any person or legal entity designated by a participant to
receive death benefits under the plan.
COMPENSATION — The total of all amounts paid to a participant by the
employer for personal services as reported on the participant's federal
income tax withholding statement (Form W-2) and excluding any benefits
paid under the plan.
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The date when a participant retires or
terminates employment with the employer if such date is prior to the
26.Editor's Note: Resolution No. 445 established procedures and requirements for entering
into professional service contracts designed to guide the Borough in the maintenance and
performance of the Uniform and Nonuniform Employee Pension Plans in accordance with
Act 44 of 2009. This resolution, along with any other related procedures, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 21-16 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 23-2
21:35
participant's normal retirement date but on or after the later of the
following dates:
ELIGIBLE SPOUSE — The spouse to whom a participant was married on the
date benefit payments under the plan commenced, or if benefit payments
had not so commenced, the spouse to whom the participant was married on
the date of his death.
EMPLOYEE — Any person regularly employed by the employer whose
customary employment is 40 hours or more in one week and for more than
five months in a calendar year.
EMPLOYER — The Borough of Economy.
FUND — The fund administered under the terms of the plan and which shall
include all money, property, investments, policies, and contracts standing in
the name of the plan.
LATE RETIREMENT DATE — The first day of the month coincident with or
next following the date when a participant retires subsequent to his normal
retirement date, pursuant to the provisions of § 23-5C.
NORMAL RETIREMENT AGE — The later of:
NORMAL RETIREMENT DATE — The first of the month coincident with or
next following the date when an employee attains normal retirement age.
PARTICIPANT — A person who is or has been in the employment of the
employer in an eligible classification (§ 23-3A) and for whom a benefit to
which he is or may become entitled under the plan has accrued under the
plan on account of such employment.
PARTICIPANT ACCOUNT — The ending annuity value of the employer
contribution account under the plan prior to this restatement as shown
on the statement dated in 1995 from American General Life Insurance
Company, accumulated at 6% interest per year from the statement date in
1995 until commencement of benefits or payment of a lump sum under the
plan.
PLAN YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 and ending
on December 31.
SERVICE — That period during which an employee was employed
continuously by the employer. Fractions of a year of employment will be
included in computing an employee's service based on the ratio that the
number of complete months of service bears to 12. Service shall include
authorized leave without pay of not more than 12 months.
A. The date when the participant attains age 60; and
B. The date when the participant completes five years of service.
A. The date when a participant attains age 65; and
B. The date when the participant completes five years of service.
§ 23-2 ECONOMY CODE § 23-3
21:36
§ 23-3. Eligibility.
§ 23-4. Contributions.
§ 23-5. Benefits.
A. The class of employees who may become eligible for participation in the
plan includes all employees of the employer except those law
enforcement officers eligible to participate in the Economy Borough
Police Pension Plan.
B. An employee in the above class shall be eligible for participation on the
later of the effective date of the plan or the date the employee
completes his probationary period.
C. A participant who terminates employment and is subsequently
reemployed by the employer shall again participate in the plan on the
date he is reemployed.
D. Transfers.
(1) For the purpose of determining eligibility to participate in the plan
and service for vesting purposes, an employee transferred from an
ineligible class to an eligible class shall receive recognition of his
employment with the employer, provided that all such employment
is determined in accordance with the provisions of the definition of
"service" in § 23-2.
(2) If a participant is transferred to employment in an ineligible class,
his participation under the plan shall be suspended; provided,
however, that during the period of his employment in such
ineligible position:
(a) Service for vesting purposes shall continue to accrue;
(b) He shall continue to accrue interest on his participant account
under the definition of "participant account" in § 23-2; and
(c) Service for benefit purposes shall not accrue.
A. Employer contributions. The employer shall contribute to the plan an
amount that is sufficient to meet the minimum funding requirements of
Act 205.
B. Contributions by participants. Participants are not required to make
any contributions under this plan.
A. Normal retirement. A participant who retires upon attainment of
normal retirement age shall be entitled to a pension benefit, payable as
a monthly annuity for life, commencing at normal retirement date in an
amount equal to 1.1% as of January 1, 1998, and an amount equal to
1.2% as of January 1, 2000, of the average monthly earnings multiplied
by service.
§ 23-3 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 23-5
21:37
§ 23-6. Payment of benefits.
§ 23-7. Preretirement death benefit.
B. Early retirement. A participant who retires on an early retirement date
shall be entitled to receive an immediate benefit commencing on his
early retirement date equal to the participant's accrued benefit.
C. Late retirement. A participant who remains in the employ of the
employer subsequent to normal retirement date shall continue to be
eligible to participate hereunder. A participant who retires on a late
retirement date shall be entitled to receive a benefit determined in
accordance with § 23-5A, using service and average monthly earnings
at the time of the participant's late retirement date or at the time of
attainment of normal retirement age if the amount of the monthly
benefit would be greater.
A. Life annuity. The automatic form of payment of monthly benefits under
§ 23-5A, B and C to a participant who does not have an eligible spouse
shall be an immediate life annuity. At the retired participant's death, a
lump sum shall be payable to the beneficiary equal to the participant
account reduced by any benefits paid from the plan.
B. 50% contingent annuity benefit. The automatic form of payment of
monthly benefits under § 23-5A, B and C to a participant who has an
eligible spouse shall be a 50% contingent annuity which is the actuarial
equivalent of the accrued benefit, where the eligible spouse is named as
the contingent annuitant unless the participant and his eligible spouse
elect payment in the form of a life annuity or a lump sum. The
participant and his eligible spouse may make such election on forms
provided by the employer any time prior to payment of benefits. Upon
the later of the death of the retired participant or the retired
participant's eligible spouse, a lump sum shall be payable to the
beneficiary equal to the participant account reduced by any benefits
paid from the plan.
C. Lump sum. An employee who was a participant of the plan on December
31, 1995, may elect to receive his benefits in the form of a lump sum.
Such lump sum shall be calculated based on the participant's accrued
benefit and "applicable mortality table" determined under IRC 417
(e)(3)(A)(ii)(1) and the "applicable interest rate" determined under IRC
417(e)(3)(A)(ii)(11) for the month of December preceding the plan year
for which the determination is made but shall in no event be less than
the participant account determined in accordance with the definition of
"participant account" in § 23-2. An employee who becomes a participant
of the plan after December 31, 1995, shall not be entitled to receive his
benefits in the form of a lump sum.
A. 50% contingent annuity benefit. If a participant dies after becoming
eligible for a vested benefit under § 23-8 and such participant has an
eligible spouse, the death benefit shall be 50% of the actuarial
§ 23-5 ECONOMY CODE § 23-7
21:38
§ 23-8. Termination of employment.
equivalent of the accrued benefit in the form of a 50% contingent
annuity where the eligible spouse is the contingent annuitant. Payment
of the death benefit shall commence at the date which would have been
the participant's early retirement date.
B. Additional provision for employees who were participants prior to
January 1, 1996. If such participant dies, in lieu of the benefit in
Subsection A of this section, the eligible spouse may elect to receive a
benefit in the form of a lump sum, calculated in accordance with
§ 23-6C. If such participant dies without an eligible spouse, the
beneficiary shall receive a benefit in the form of a lump sum calculated
in accordance with § 23-6C.
A. Rights of terminated employees. If a participant ceases to be employed
by the employer as an employee, his interest and right under the plan
shall be determined in accordance with the following.
B. Vested benefits. A participant who terminates his employment for a
reason other than retirement or death and who has completed five or
more years of service shall be entitled to a deferred vested benefit
equal to his accrued benefit determined as of the date his employment
terminates; however, a participant as of December 31, 1995, who
terminates his employment for a reason other than retirement or death
shall be vested in his accrued benefit determined as of the date his
employment terminates according to the following schedule:
Years of Service Vested Percentage
Less than 3 0%
3 but less than 4 20%
4 but less than 5 40%
5 or more 100%
C. Payment of vested benefits. Payment of vested benefits under this
section shall be in accordance with § 23-6 or 23-7. Payment of a
deferred vested benefit shall commence at the date that would have
been the former participant's early retirement date had he continued
his employment.
D. Forfeitures. A participant who terminates his employment with the
employer at a time when he is not vested in any portion of his accrued
benefit shall cease to be a participant hereunder and shall not be
entitled to any benefits under the plan.
E. Application of forfeitures. Amounts forfeited by any participant may not
be used to increase the benefits which other participants would
otherwise receive under the plan; they shall be used only to reduce the
employer's contributions to the plan.
§ 23-7 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 23-9
21:39
§ 23-9. Fund.
A. Establishment of fund. The employer shall create a Nonuniformed
Employee Pension Fund. Such fund shall be administered by the
Council of the employer and shall be applied under such regulations as
the Council of the employer may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe
for the benefit of such employees of the employer. The Council of the
employer shall appoint a trustee to hold, invest, reinvest, and distribute
all funds or other property received pursuant hereto, in trust, for the
purpose of the plan. The Council of the employer shall have the duty
and responsibility as administrator to approve and sign any and all
pertinent documents as shall be required in the administration of said
fund.
B. Powers of Council. The Council shall have full power and authority by
majority action, either directly or through its designated
representatives, to do all acts, execute, acknowledge, and deliver all
instruments and exercise for the sole benefit of participants hereunder
any and all powers and discretion necessary to implement and
effectuate the purpose of this section.
C. Administrative expenses. All reasonable expenses for the
administration of the plan may be paid from the fund to the extent
permitted under applicable law and not otherwise paid by the employer.
D. Trustee. The trustee shall be the owner of all moneys or property paid
into or acquired by the fund or deposited with insurance companies
under the trust or invested in mutual fund companies hereunder and
the owner of all insurances, annuity, retirement income or similar
contracts acquired hereunder; and no participant prior to retirement,
termination, or death shall have any right or interest in any portion of
said moneys, property, deposits or contracts except as and to the extent
required by any applicable law.
E. Assignment of funds. No participant or beneficiary of a participant shall
have any right to alienate, encumber, or assign any assets of the fund
held by the trustee on his behalf or any of the benefits or payments or
proceeds or avails of any contract or agreement purchased or acquired
by the trustee. Any contract or agreement purchased or acquired by the
trustee pursuant to this section shall contain provisions in substance
that, to the extent provided by law, none of the benefits or payments or
proceeds of such contract or agreement shall be subject to any legal
process by any creditor of such participant or any beneficiary of such
participant.
F. Prior retirement contracts. All contracts, agreements or funds held by
the employer for the purpose of providing pension benefits on any
employee who shall be a participant of the plan herein established shall
be and hereby are transferred and assigned to the fund herein created.
Any and all rights and benefits conferred by prior contracts on any
employee who shall be a participant in the program herein established
§ 23-9 ECONOMY CODE § 23-9
21:40
§ 23-10. Compliance with other provisions. [Added 12-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 432]
shall be and the same are hereby terminated, subject to the condition
that any changes in said prior contracts as set forth herein constitute a
reasonable enhancement of the actuarial soundness of the fund and do
not affect adversely any participant's rights which existed under prior
retirement contracts.
G. The employer reserves to itself the right to transfer or assign to any
pension or other employee benefit plan or program which the employer
may be required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
establish for participants in the program herein established all funds,
contracts, agreements or other property.
A. The purpose of these plan amendments is to comply with the Pension
Protection Act of 2006 (PPA)27 and the Heroes Earnings Assistance
Relief Tax Act (HEART Act).28 Notwithstanding anything in this plan to
the contrary, this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the
applicable required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.
B. For the purposes of Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1,
2008 the applicable mortality table and applicable interest rate are
found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The applicable mortality table in Rev. Rul.
2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002, through December 31,
2007. From January 1, 2009, through December 31, 2013, the
applicable mortality table is found in IRS Notice 2008-85.
C. 415(c) compensation. For the purposes of this section, compensation
includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-2(b)1 or (2)
and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of
which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. Effective as of
January 1, 2009, to the extent required by the Heroes Earnings
Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act), differential wage
payments shall be included in compensation.
D. Effective as of January 1, 2007, an eligible rollover distribution shall
include an eligible rollover distribution containing after-tax
contributions that is transferred in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer
to a 403(b) annuity contract or a qualified trust under Code Section
401(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred,
including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution
which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution
which is not so includible.
E. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement
plan.
27.Editor’s Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq.
28.Editor’s Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.
§ 23-9 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES § 23-10
21:41
Chapter 25
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 25-1. Planning Commission created.
There shall be an Economy Borough Planning Commission, which shall
have all the powers and duties conferred upon it by Borough Council, as
permitted by law.
§ 25-2. Membership.
The Economy Borough Planning Commission shall consist of seven
members, as appointed by Borough Council.
§ 25-3. Annual report.
The Planning Commission shall make an annual report to Borough Council,
showing its transactions and recommendations.
§ 25-4. Purpose.
The purpose of the Planning Commission shall be to provide advisory
recommendations to Borough Council on certain land development and
subdivision applications submitted to the Borough for Council's approval.
F. Nonspousal rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is
not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an
eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary may, in accordance with
Code Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that
amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an
endowment contract); provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).
G. HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing
qualified military service [as defined in Code Section 414(u)] on or after
January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service
credit to the extent required by the HEART Act.
§ 23-10 ECONOMY CODE § 25-4
21:42
These recommendations shall be based on the specific requirements of the
Borough's Zoning, Subdivision, and Land Development Ordinances.29 The
Commission shall also advise on community planning processes and the
development of appropriate land development and zoning ordinances that
fulfill the vision of the Borough's Comprehensive Plan.
§ 25-5. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall exercise the powers and be subject to the
duties as set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code.30
Chapter 29
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Fund - See Ch. 31.
29.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning, and Ch. 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
30.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 25-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 25-5
29:43

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
[Adopted 5-8-1958 by Ord. No. 12]
§ 29-1. Department established. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
A Police Department is hereby formally established in and for the Borough
of Economy. The Mayor shall be the chief executive of the Police
Department. He shall be in charge of the police force and have supervision
over its members in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
§ 29-2. Classifications of officers.
The following classifications are hereby established in the Police
Department: Chief of Police, Lieutenant, Sergeant, patrolman, street safety
patrolman, deskman and radio operator and such clerical help as the
Council may appoint from time to time. The number of persons to serve
in each of such subordinate classifications on a full-time or a part-time
basis and the compensation of each shall be as determined by the Borough
Council from time to time.
§ 29-3. Special policemen. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor or to
appoint special policemen in accordance with the provisions of the Borough
Code.
§ 29-4. Ratification of acts, deeds and appointments.
All acts and deeds heretofore lawfully performed by the existing police
force and the appointments of all members of the present police force,
effective as of the dates of their employment, are hereby ratified, adopted
and approved.
§ 29-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 29-4
29:45

ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Police Assistance
[Adopted 9-12-1963 by Ord. No. 67-P]
§ 29-5. Transfer of officers and equipment upon emergency request;
jurisdiction.
§ 29-6. Request for assistance; jurisdiction; powers.
A. Upon the occurrence of any disaster or emergency, other than a labor
disturbance, in any neighboring municipality, or occasions when an onduty
policeman may have to leave the Borough on business, if the
Mayor or the Chief of Police of said municipality, requests the Mayor of
Economy Borough the emergency assignment of police equipment,
auxiliary police and members of the regular police force for the period
of such emergency, the Mayor, in his discretion, shall transfer the police
equipment, auxiliary police and members of the regular police force to
the requesting municipality, in sufficient numbers and amount to aid in
meeting the disaster or emergency.
B. During such period the transferred police and equipment shall be under
the jurisdiction of the Chief of Police of the municipality to which they
are transferred.
A. Upon the occurrence of any disaster or emergency, other than a labor
dispute, in the Borough of Economy, the Mayor or Chief of Police of the
Borough of Economy may request from any neighboring municipalities
the emergency assignment of police equipment, auxiliary police and
members of the regular police forces of other municipalities for the
period of such emergency.
B. During such period, the transferred police and equipment shall be
under the jurisdiction of the Chief of Police of the Borough of Economy.
C. During such period, the transferred police shall have the same powers
as regular police officers of the Borough of Economy.
§ 29-5 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 29-6
29:47
Chapter 31
POLICE PENSION FUND
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 29. Pension Plan for Employees – See Ch. 23.
§ 31-1. Fund established.
Pursuant to provisions of Act 600 of 1956 of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, as amended, the Borough of Economy hereby repeals all
previously enacted ordinances related to the Police Pension Fund and
hereby establishes a new Police Pension Fund, to be funded by investments
allowed by the commonwealth. For those officers hired prior to 1983, the
fund purchased life insurance policies in the amount of $30,000 and upon
retirement the proceeds will go back to the fund.
§ 31-2. Maintenance of fund.
The fund is to be maintained by payments made by the State Treasurer to
the Borough from monies received from taxes paid on premiums for foreigncasualty
insurance companies, by a charge against each member of the
police force, if required, by annual appropriations made by the Borough of
Economy, if required, and by gifts, grants, devises or bequests granted to
such fund pursuant to the provisions of the Act.
§ 31-3. Administration.31
Such Police Pension Fund shall be administered by the Economy Borough
Council and shall be applied under such regulations as the Borough Council
may, by ordinance or resolution, prescribe for the benefit of such members
of the Economy Borough Police Department.
§ 31-4. Acceptance of gifts or grants.
The Borough of Economy is hereby authorized to take, by gift, grant, devise
or bequest, any money or property, real, personal or mixed, in trust, for the
benefit of such fund; and the care, management, investment and disposal
of such trust funds or property shall be vested in the Borough of Economy
Council, the person, agent and the company having the management of
such Police Pension Fund and the right to appoint a trustee for the fund;
and said trust funds shall be governed thereby subject to such directions
31.Editor’s Note: Resolution No. 445 established procedures and requirements for entering
into professional service contracts designed to guide the Borough in the maintenance and
performance of the Uniform and Nonuniform Employee Pension Plans in accordance with
Act 44 of 2009. This resolution, along with any other related procedures, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 29-6 ECONOMY CODE § 31-4
29:48
not inconsistent therewith as the donors of such funds and property may
prescribe.
§ 31-5. Participants.
Each police officer who, on the effective date of this chapter or thereafter,
is employed by the Borough on a full-time basis for six months, shall be
eligible to be and shall be a participant in the police pension program herein
established.
§ 31-6. Credit for military service.
§ 31-7. Determination of eligibility; benefits.
A. Any member of the police force who has been on duty for at least six
months and who thereafter enters into the military service of the United
States shall have credited to his employment record for pension or
retirement benefits all of the time spent by him in such military service,
if such person returns or has heretofore returned to his employment
within six months after his separation from the service.
B. Any member of the police force shall be eligible to receive service credit
for intervening or nonintervening military service as provided in
Section 4 (a) and (b) of the Act, provided that he is not entitled to
receive, eligible to receive now or in the future, or is receiving
retirement benefits for such service under a retirement system
administered and wholly or partially paid for by any other governmental
agency, with the exception of a member eligible to receive or receiving
military retirement pay earned by a combination of active duty and
nonactive duty with a reserve or national guard component of the
armed forces which retirement pay is payable only upon the attainment
of a specified age and period of service under 10 U.S.C. Ch. 67 (relating
to retired pay for nonregular service).
A. Eligibility for receiving retirement benefits shall be determined by the
following:
(1) An officer reaches age 50.
(2) An officer has completed 25 years aggregate total service with the
Borough.
(3) An officer has completed 20 years aggregate total service with the
Borough, but at a reduced benefit.
(4) There is no social security offset.
B. Average monthly earnings are those received during the last 36 months
immediately preceding retirement.
C. Cost-of-living adjustments will be made in accordance with the Act.
§ 31-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-7
29:49
§ 31-8. Revisions of some benefits.
In addition to the benefits listed above, the following benefits are revised as
a result of Act 30 of 2002.
D. As a result of the above provisions, each retired participant shall be
entitled to receive a pension, payable in equal monthly installments
during his lifetime, in an amount equal to 1/2 of the average monthly
earnings of the participant paid by the employer during the last 36
months immediately preceding retirement. Participants shall receive
service increments of $100 per month after completion of 26 years of
service. In addition, each retired participant shall be entitled to receive
a life insurance policy of $5,000, which shall be paid for from the
Borough of Economy general funds and not by the Police Pension Fund.
E. Cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs). Effective January 1, 1999, cost-of
living adjustment (COLAs), as defined and permitted by Act 600, are
provided. Such COLAs are defined and limited to the percentage
increase in the Consumer Price Index from the year in which the officer
last worked; in no case shall the total pension benefit exceed 75% of the
salary used to compute retirement benefits; the total cost-of-living
increase shall not exceed 30%; and no COLA will be granted that would
impair the actuarial soundness of the pension fund.
F. Service increment. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the
contrary, each participant who shall retire upon completion of the 26th
anniversary of aggregate service or thereafter may be entitled to
receive a monthly service increment benefit. Such service increment
shall only be available to a participant who shall retire on a retirement
date on or after the attainment of normal retirement age and whose
aggregate service for purposes of this subsection shall only include any
period of time when the participant actively renders service in
employment and shall not include any period of time during which the
participant received a disability benefit under the terms of this plan.
Such service increment shall be an amount equal to $100 for each year
of completed aggregate service in excess of 25 years, up to maximum of
$500 after five completed years of aggregate service in excess of 25
years, and shall be paid monthly in addition to the amount of normal
retirement benefit calculated pursuant to § 31-7D. [Added 11-14-2006
by Ord. No. 410]
A. Killed in service. Pensions for the families of members killed in service
shall be calculated at 100% of the member's salary at the time of death.
B. Survivor benefit. A lifetime survivor's benefit shall be provided to the
surviving spouse (or if no spouse survives or if he or she subsequently
dies, the child or children under 18 years of age or, if attending college,
under or until attaining the age of 23) of 50% of the pension the
member was receiving or would have been entitled to receive had he
been retired at the time of death. "Attending college" shall mean the
eligible children are registered at an accredited institution of higher
§ 31-7 ECONOMY CODE § 31-8
29:50
§ 31-9. Service as police reserve.
Retired participants shall be subject to service, from time to time, as a
police reserve, in cases of riot, tumult or preservation of the public peace
until determined by the Council to be unfit for such service, when they may
be finally discharged by reason of age or disability.
§ 31-10. Life insurance.
learning and are carrying a minimum course load of seven credit hours
per semester.
C. Service-related disability benefit. When an officer becomes disabled
due to a service-related injury he shall receive a benefit of 50% of his
salary at the time the disability was incurred, reduced by the amount of
social security disability benefits received for the same injury.
D. Member contributions. If covered by social security, members shall pay
into the fund, monthly, an amount determined as follows: 1) if the
pension plan provides for no social security offset, 5% of total
compensation; or 2) if the pension plan provides for a social security
offset: a) on compensation on which social security taxes are payable, at
a rate calculated by subtracting from 5% the product obtained by
multiplying 3% by such offset percentage; and b) on compensation in
excess of that on which social security taxes are payable, if any, 5%. The
governing body of the municipality may, on an annual basis, by
ordinance or resolution, reduce or eliminate payments into the fund by
members.
E. Pre-vesting death benefit. The surviving spouse of a member of the
police force who dies before his pension has vested or if no spouse
survives or if he or she survives and subsequently dies, the child or
children under the age of 18 years, or, if attending college, under or
attaining the age of 23 years, shall be entitled to receive repayment of
all money which the member invested in the pension fund plus threepercent
interest or other increases in value of the member's investment
in the pension fund, unless the member has designated another
beneficiary for this purpose.
A. For those members who were hired prior to 1983 and are insurable, the
Borough shall direct the trustee to purchase pension life insurance and
annuity contracts as an incidental death benefit for such participant,
the purpose of said purchase being primarily to fund the pension
program.
B. Said participant shall be insured for $30,000, which is payable to
participant's beneficiary by a pension annuity life insurance contract.
The participant shall have the right to name and change his beneficiary.
Said policy shall be owned by the Police Pension Fund and, upon
retirement of the participant, the cash value of the policy shall become
an asset of the fund.
§ 31-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-11
29:51
§ 31-11. Powers of Council.
The Council shall have full power and authority by majority action, either
directly or through its designated representatives, to do all acts, execute,
acknowledge and deliver all instruments and to exercise for the sole benefit
of the participant's hereunder any and all powers and discretion necessary
to implement and effectuate the purpose of this chapter. Administrative
expenses to carry out this authority shall be paid by the fund.
§ 31-12. Responsibility for fund; entitlement on termination of
employment.
The trustee shall be the owner of all moneys or property paid into or
acquired by the fund or deposited with insurance companies under the
trust or invested in mutual fund companies hereunder and the owner of
all insurance, annuity, retirement income or similar contracts acquired
hereunder; and no participant, prior to retirement, permanent injury or
disability or death, shall have any right or interest in any portion of said
moneys, property, deposits or contracts except as and to the extent required
by any applicable law; provided, however, that each participant shall be
entitled, in the event of termination of his employment with the Borough
for reasons other than retirement, permanent injury or disability or death,
to have returned to him the total amount of his contributions to the fund
herein created, plus interest at the rate of 3% per annum.
§ 31-13. Assignment of funds.
No participant or beneficiary of a participant shall have any right to
alienate, encumber or assign any assets of the fund held by the trustee on
his behalf or any of the benefits or payments or proceeds or avails of any
contract or agreement purchased or acquired by the trustee. Any contract
or agreement purchased or acquired by the trustee pursuant to this chapter
shall contain provision, in substance, that, to the extent provided by law,
none of the benefits or payments or proceeds of such contract or agreement
shall be subject to any legal process by any creditor of such participant or
any beneficiary of such participant.
§ 31-14. Prior retirement contracts.
All contracts, agreements or funds held by the Borough of Economy for the
purpose of providing police pension benefits on any police officer who shall
be a participant in the program herein established shall be and hereby are
transferred and assigned to the fund herein created. Any and all rights and
benefits conferred by prior contracts on any police officer who shall be a
participant in the program herein established shall be and the same are
hereby terminated subject to the condition that any changes in said prior
contracts as set forth herein constitute a reasonable enhancement of the
actuarial soundness of the retirement fund and do not affect adversely any
participant's rights which existed under prior retirement contracts.
§ 31-11 ECONOMY CODE § 31-15
29:52
§ 31-15. Limitations.
§ 31-16. Termination of employment. [Amended 7-9-2013 by Ord.
No. 443]
Should a police officer, before completing superannuation retirement age
and service requirements but after having completed 12 years of total
service, for any reason cease to be employed as a full-time police officer
by the municipality in whose pension fund he has been a member, he shall
be entitled to vest his retirement benefits by filing with the governing
body within 90 days of the date he ceases to be a full-time police officer
a written notice of his intention to vest. Upon reaching the date which
would have been his superannuation retirement date if he had continued
to be employed as a full-time police officer the participant shall be paid
a partial superannuation retirement allowance determined by applying the
percentage his years of service bears to the years of service which he
would have rendered had he continued to work until his superannuation
retirement date to the gross pension, using however the monthly average
salary during the appropriate period prior to his termination of
employment.
§ 31-17. Compliance with other provisions. [Added 12-13-2011 by
Ord. No. 433]
A. The Borough reserves to itself the right to transfer or assign to any
pension or other employee benefit plan or program which the Borough
may be required by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
establish for participants in the program herein established all funds,
contracts, agreements or other property held by the Borough for the
purpose of providing the benefits of said program for such participant
who may be included in such mandatory pension or retirement income
plan or program; and all rights and benefits conferred upon police
officers of the Borough by this chapter shall be subject to the limitations
of this section.
B. The Council reserves the right at any time and from time to time to alter
and amend any or all of the provisions of this chapter.
A. The purpose of these plan amendments is to comply with the Pension
Protection Act of 2006 (PPA)32 and the Heroes Earnings Assistance
Relief Tax Act (HEART Act).33 Notwithstanding anything in this plan to
the contrary, this plan shall be interpreted so as to comply with the
applicable required provisions of the PPA and the HEART Act.
B. For the purposes of Code Section 415(b)(1)(A), effective as of January 1,
2008, the applicable mortality table and applicable interest rate are
found in Rev. Rul. 2007-67. The applicable mortality table in Rev. Rul.
2001-62 was effective from December 31, 2002, through December 31,
32.Editor’s Note: See 29 U.S.C. § 1001 et seq.
33.Editor’s Note: See 26 U.S.C. § 1 et seq.
§ 31-15 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-17
29:53
§ 31-18. 2013 Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP). [Added
4-23-2013 by Ord. No. 441]
2007. From January 1, 2009, through December 31, 2013, the
applicable mortality table is found in IRS Notice 2008-85.
C. 415(c) compensation. For the purposes of this section, compensation
includes only those items specified in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-2(b)1 or (2)
and excludes all items listed in Treas. Reg. § 1.415(c)-2(c), the terms of
which are specifically incorporated herein by reference. Effective as of
January 1, 2009, to the extent required by the Heroes Earnings
Assistance Relief Tax Act of 2008 (HEART Act), differential wage
payments shall be included in compensation.
D. Effective as of January 1, 2007, an eligible rollover distribution shall
include an eligible rollover distribution containing after-tax
contributions that is transferred in a direct trustee-to-trustee transfer
to a 403(b) annuity contract or a qualified trust under Code Section
401(a) that agrees to separately account for amounts so transferred,
including separately accounting for the portion of such distribution
which is includible in gross income and the portion of such distribution
which is not so includible.
E. Effective as of January 1, 2008, a Roth IRA is an eligible retirement
plan.
F. Nonspousal rollover. Effective January 1, 2007, if a beneficiary who is
not a surviving spouse is entitled to receive what would otherwise be an
'eligible rollover distribution, the beneficiary may, in accordance with
Code Section 402(c)(11), make a trustee-to-trustee transfer of that
amount to an IRA or individual retirement annuity (other than an
endowment contract); provided that:
(1) The transfer is made not later than the end of the fourth year after
the year of the participant's death; and
(2) The account or annuity to which the amount is transferred is
treated as an inherited IRA or individual retirement annuity in
accordance with Code Section 408(d)(3)(C).
G. HEART Act. Effective for participant deaths occurring while performing
qualified military service [as defined in Code Section 414(u)] on or after
January 1, 2007, the plan will provide retirement benefits and service
credit to the extent required by the HEART Act.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this § 31-18 the
defined terms used herein shall have the meaning assigned to them in
the remainder of Chapter 31.
DROP — The DROP is created as an optional form of benefit under the
existing Borough of Economy Police Pension Fund ("fund"). The DROP
shall be for a maximum one-year term.
§ 31-17 ECONOMY CODE § 31-18
29:54
DROP ACCOUNT — A separate ledger account created to accumulate
the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.
DROP PARTICIPANT — An employee and participant in the fund who
attains the later of age 50 and 25 years of service, and who has elected
to participate in the DROP program.
QUALIFYING OFFICER — Any full time active police officer of Economy
Borough who has attained age 50 with 25 years of service and thus
is eligible for normal retirement under the fund prior to September 1,
2013.
B. Eligibility. Qualifying officers who so elect between May 1, 2013, and
August 31, 2013, may enter into the DROP on the first day of any month
following the attainment of the later of age 50 and 25 years of service.
C. Written election.
(1) A qualifying officer in the fund electing to participate in the DROP
program must complete and execute a DROP election form, which
shall evidence the DROP participant's participation in the DROP
program, the DROP participant's election to forego active
membership in the fund and document the DROP participant's
rights and obligations under the DROP. The form must be signed by
the DROP participant and the Chief Administrative Officer of the
fund and submitted to the employer prior to the date on which the
DROP participant elects to enter the DROP ("election date"). The
election date must be prior to September 1, 2013. The DROP
election form shall include an irrevocable notice to the employer by
the DROP participant that the DROP participant shall terminate
from employment with the employer effective on a specific date not
more than one year from the effective date of the DROP
participant's entry into the DROP. In addition, all retirement
documents required by the Borough must be filed and presented to
Council for approval of retirement and commencement of the
monthly pension benefit. Once the retirement application has been
approved by Council, it shall become irrevocable. A DROP
participant's participation shall become effective the day following
his election date.
(2) After a DROP participant enters the DROP program, contributions
to the fund by the participant will cease, and the amount of the
monthly benefits will be frozen except for any applicable cost-ofliving
adjustment (COLA) increases, if any awarded to all pension
recipients.
(3) Participants should consult a tax advisor of their choice prior to
considering the DROP program, as there may be serious tax
implications and/or consequences to participating in the DROP.
D. Limitation on pension accrual. After the effective date of the DROP
election, the participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years
§ 31-18 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-18
29:55
of service for pension purposes, including the calculation of any service
increment should such a service increment become available to active
participants in the fund. The DROP participant shall also forego any
growth in salary after the election date for the purpose of calculating
retirement benefits under the fund.
E. Ineligibility for Reenrollment in DROP. Once a DROP participant's
DROP participation terminates he shall be ineligible to reenroll in the
DROP even if the former DROP participant is reemployed by the local
government with renewed active membership in the fund.
F. Benefit calculation. For all fund purposes, service of a DROP participant
shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of
participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits
payable by the fund, including any service increments that may be
available. The average monthly earnings of the DROP participant for
pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective
date of commencement of participation in the DROP program. Earnings
or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for
the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the fund.
The pension benefit payable to the participant shall increase only as a
result of cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs), if any, effective on or after
the date of the DROP participant's participation in the DROP.
G. Payments to DROP account.
(1) The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had
the DROP participant elected to cease employment and receive a
retirement benefit shall, upon the DROP participant commencing
participation in the DROP program, be credited on the first day of
each month into a separate ledger account established by the fund
administrator to track and accumulate the participant's monthly
pension benefits. This account shall be designated the DROP
account. The DROP account shall not contain a guaranteed interest
rate but shall be credited with interest at the actual rate earned by
the DROP account but shall not be less than 0% nor greater than
4.5%, and shall be compounded monthly. The DROP account shall
be a segregated account into which each DROP participant's
monthly retirement benefit shall be deposited. All earnings or
losses credited to the DROP account will be included in the final
cash settlement. The DROP account shall be invested in an insured
savings account, money market account or a mutual fund invested
in ultra short-term treasuries as may be selected by the Fund
Administrator. All earnings or losses credited to the DROP account
will be included in the final cash settlement.
(2) The DROP shall at all times comply with the annual benefit
limitations of IRC § 415 and the regulations thereto.
§ 31-18 ECONOMY CODE § 31-18
29:56
H. Early termination. A DROP participant may withdraw from the DROP
program at any time and effectuate a complete retirement from service.
No penalty shall be imposed for early termination of DROP
participation. However, the DROP participant shall not be permitted to
make any withdrawals from the DROP account until DROP participation
has ended.
I. Payout.
(1) Upon the termination date set forth in the DROP election form or
on such date as the DROP participant withdraws or is terminated
from the DROP program, if earlier, the retirement benefits payable
to the participant shall be paid directly to the participant and shall
no longer be credited to the DROP account. Within a period not to
exceed 45 days following the actual termination of a participant's
employment with the Borough of Economy, the DROP participant or
the DROP participant's designated beneficiary, where applicable,
shall elect one of the following options: 1) the accumulated balance
in the DROP account, less any withholding taxes required to be
remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP
participant or his designated surviving beneficiary in a single lumpsum
payment; or 2) the balance of the DROP participant's DROP
account shall be paid within 45 days directly to the custodian of an
eligible retirement fund as defined in § 402(c)(8)(b) of the Internal
Revenue Code of 1986 (IRC) or in the case of an eligible rollover
distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased DROP
participant, an eligible retirement fund that is an individual
retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as
described in IRC § 402(c)(9). If the DROP participant or designated
beneficiary fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days after
the DROP participant's termination date, the DROP participant's
DROP account shall be paid in a lump-sum as provided above. All
distributions of the DROP account shall comply with IRC
§ 401(a)(9).
(2) Under this Subsection I, a distributee may elect to have an eligible
rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible rollover retirement
fund by way of a direct rollover. For purposes of this section a
"distributee" includes a DROP participant, a DROP participant's
survivor as provided by Act 600 of 1956, 53 P.S. § 767 et seq., or in
lieu thereof, the DROP participant's designated beneficiary and a
DROP participant's former spouse who is an alternate payee under
a qualified domestic relations order. For purposes of this section,
"eligible rollover distribution" has the meaning given the term by
IRC § 402(f)(2)(A) except that a qualified trust shall be considered
an eligible fund only if it accepts the distributee's eligible rollover
distribution and, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to a
surviving spouse, an eligible retirement fund is an "individual
retirement account" or an "individual retirement annuity" as those
terms are defined in IRC § 408(a) and (b).
§ 31-18 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-18
29:57
J. Death.
(1) A DROP participant's eligibility to participate in the DROP
terminates upon the death of the DROP participant. If a DROP
participant dies on or after the effective date of participation in the
DROP but before the first monthly retirement benefit due the DROP
participant for that month has been credited to his DROP account,
the fund shall pay the monthly retirement benefit as though the
DROP participant had not elected DROP participation and had died
after the DROP participant's effective date of retirement but before
receipt of the DROP participant's first regular retirement benefit. If
a DROP participant dies while participating in the DROP and after
his monthly retirement benefits have begun to have been credited
to his DROP account, the monthly retirement benefit credited to
the DROP participant's DROP account during the month of the
DROP participant's death shall be the final monthly retirement
benefit from the fund credited to his DROP account.
(2) Except for those benefits specifically payable as a result of death
incurred in the course of performing a hazardous public duty, the
survivors of the DROP participant who dies shall not be eligible to
receive retirement system death benefits payable in the event of
the death of an active member. The DROP participant's survivor(s)
shall be eligible to receive survivor benefits normally payable in the
event of the death of a retired participant.
K. Disability. If a DROP participant becomes eligible for a disability benefit
from the fund and terminates employment, the monthly nondisability
retirement benefit of the DROP participant shall terminate.
L. Eligibility for other benefits. Except for benefits specifically foregone by
the DROP participant pursuant to Subsection D, a DROP participant
shall be eligible for the employee benefits provided to active employees
that is appended to this section as Appendix A.34
M. Eligibility for statutory benefits. A DROP participant shall be eligible for
all preretirement benefits for employees otherwise provided by law
including, but not limited to the following:
(1) The Workers' Compensation Act [the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736,
No. 338)].
(2) The Enforcement Officer Disability Benefits Law [the Act of June
28, 1935 (P.L. 477, No. 193)].
(3) The Unemployment Compensation Law [the Act of December 5,
1936 (2nd Sp. Sess., 1937 P.L. 2897, No. 11)].
(4) The Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death Benefits
Act [the Act of June 24, 1976 (P.L. 424, No. 101)].
34.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 31-18 ECONOMY CODE § 31-18
29:58
(5) The Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976 (Public Law 94-430,
42 U.S.C. § 90 Stat. 1347).
N. Designation of beneficiary. A DROP participant may designate a DROP
beneficiary who shall be entitled to apply for and receive the DROP
participant's DROP account in the event of the DROP participant's
death while participating in the DROP. In the event that a DROP
participant does not designate a beneficiary and dies while
participating in the DROP, his DROP account will be paid to his
survivor(s) as determined under Act 600 of 1956 and if no such
survivors exist, then to his estate.
O. Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP ordinance shall be
consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement option
plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement or
state or federal law, and shall be binding upon all future participants
and upon all DROP participants who have balances in their DROP
accounts.
P. Taxation, attachment and assignment. Except as provided in this
section, the right of a DROP participant to any benefit or right accrued
or accruing under the provisions of this § 31-18 and moneys in the
DROP participant's DROP account are exempt from any state or
municipal tax, levy and sale, garnishment, attachment, spouse's
election or any other process whatsoever. Rights and benefits under
this § 31-18 shall be subject to forfeiture as provided by the Public
Employees Forfeiture Act [the Act of July 8, 1978 (P.L. 752, No. 140)].
Forfeitures under this section or under any other provision of law may
not be applied to increase the benefits that any DROP participant
otherwise would receive under this § 31-18. Rights under this § 31-18
shall be subject to attachment in favor of an alternate payee as set forth
in a qualified domestic relations order.
Q. Trust requirement. A DROP participant's DROP account shall be held in
trust for the exclusive benefit of fund participants who are or were
DROP participants and for their beneficiaries.
R. Severability. The provisions of this § 31-18 shall be severable, and if any
of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this § 31-18 shall not be
affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the intent of the
Borough that this § 31-18 has been adopted as if such unconstitutional
or illegal provision or provisions have not been included herein.
S. Auditor General findings. If the Auditor General issues a finding of
noncompliance with the provisions of Act 44 of 2009 that govern this
DROP, the Borough shall be authorized to reform this § 31-18 to bring it
into compliance with the DROP within 90 days of the date the Auditor
General's finding becomes final.
§ 31-18 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-18
29:59
§ 31-19. (Reserved)
§ 31-20. 2016 Deferred Retirement Option Plan (DROP). [Added
2-23-2016 by Ord. No. 453]
T. Termination. The ability of a qualifying officer to elect into this one-year
window DROP benefit shall as of September 1, 2013, be terminated and
shall no longer be a plan feature.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise specifically set forth in this § 31-20, the
defined terms used herein shall have the meanings assigned to them in
the remainder of Chapter 31.
DROP — The DROP is created as an optional form of benefit under the
existing Borough of Economy Police Pension Fund ("fund)". The DROP
shall be for a maximum two-year term.
DROP ACCOUNT — A separate ledger account created to accumulate
the DROP pension benefit for a DROP participant.
DROP PARTICIPANT — An employee and participant in the fund who
attains the later of age 54 and 25 years of service, and who has elected
to participate in the DROP program.
QUALIFYING OFFICER — Any full-time active police officer of Economy
Borough who has attained age 54 with 25 years of service and thus is
eligible for normal retirement under the fund prior to entry into the
DROP program.
B. Eligibility. Qualifying officers who so elect between July 1 and
December 31 of the year in which they become a qualifying officer may
enter into the DROP during this period but no earlier than the first day
of any month following the attainment of the later of age 54 and 25
years of service.
C. Written election. A qualifying officer in the fund electing to participate
in the DROP program must complete and execute a "DROP election
form" which shall evidence the DROP participant's participation in the
DROP program and the DROP participant's election to forego active
membership in the fund and document the DROP participant's rights
and obligations under the DROP. The form must be signed by the DROP
participant and the chief administrative officer of the fund and
submitted to the employer prior to the date on which the DROP
participant elects to enter the DROP ("election date"). The DROP
election form shall include an irrevocable notice to the employer by the
DROP participant that the DROP participant shall terminate from
employment with the employer effective on a specific date not more
than two years from the effective date of the DROP participant's entry
into the DROP. In addition, all retirement documents required by the
Borough must be filed and presented to Council for approval of
retirement and commencement of the monthly pension benefit. Once
the retirement application has been approved by Council, it shall
§ 31-18 ECONOMY CODE § 31-20
29:60
become irrevocable. A DROP participant's participation shall become
effective the day following his election date.
(1) After a DROP participant enters the DROP program, contributions
to the fund by the participant will cease, and the amount of the
monthly benefits will be frozen except for any applicable cost-ofliving
adjustment (COLA) increases, if any, awarded to all pension
recipients.
(2) Participants should consult a tax advisor of their choice prior to
considering the DROP program, as there may be serious tax
implications and/or consequences to participating in the DROP.
D. Limitation on pension accrual. After the effective date of the DROP
election, the participant shall no longer earn or accrue additional years
of service for pension purposes, including the calculation of any service
increment should such a service increment become available to active
participants in the fund. The DROP participant shall also forego any
growth in salary after the election date for the purpose of calculating
retirement benefits under the fund.
E. Ineligibility for reenrollment in DROP. Once a DROP participant's DROP
participation terminates, he shall be ineligible to reenroll in the DROP
even if the former DROP participant is reemployed by the local
government with renewed active membership in the fund.
F. Benefit calculation. For all fund purposes, service of a DROP participant
shall remain as it existed on the effective date of commencement of
participation in the DROP program. Service thereafter shall not be
recognized or used for the calculation or determination of any benefits
payable by the fund, including any service increments that may be
available. The average monthly earnings of the DROP participant for
pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the effective
date of commencement of participation in the DROP program. Earnings
or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or used for
the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the fund.
The pension benefit payable to the participant shall increase only as a
result of cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs), if any, effective on or after
the date of the DROP participant's participation in the DROP.
G. Payments to DROP account.
(1) The monthly retirement benefits that would have been payable had
the DROP participant elected to cease employment and receive a
retirement benefit shall, upon the DROP participant commencing
participation in the DROP program, be credited on the first day of
each month into a separate ledger account established by the fund
administrator to track and accumulate the participant's monthly
pension benefits. This account shall be designated the "DROP
account." The DROP account shall not contain a guaranteed
interest rate but shall be credited with interest at the actual rate
earned by the DROP account, but shall not be less than 0% nor
§ 31-20 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-20
29:61
greater than 4.5%, and shall be compounded monthly. The DROP
account shall be a segregated account into which each DROP
participant's monthly retirement benefit shall be deposited. All
earnings or losses credited to the DROP account will be included
in the final cash settlement. The DROP account shall be invested
in an insured savings account, money market account or a mutual
fund invested in ultra-short-term treasuries as may be selected by
the fund administrator. All earnings or losses credited to the DROP
account will be included in the final cash settlement.
(2) The DROP shall at all times comply with the annual benefit
limitations of IRC § 415 and the regulations thereto.
H. Early termination. A DROP participant may withdraw from the DROP
program at any time and effectuate a complete retirement from service.
No penalty shall be imposed for early termination of DROP
participation. However, the DROP participant shall not be permitted to
make any withdrawals from the DROP account until DROP participation
has ended.
I. Payout.
(1) Upon the termination date set forth on the DROP election form or
on such date as the DROP participant withdraws or is terminated
from the DROP program, if earlier, the retirement benefits payable
to the participant shall be paid directly to the participant and shall
no longer be credited to the DROP account. Within a period not to
exceed 45 days following the actual termination of a participant's
employment with the Borough of Economy, the DROP participant or
the DROP participant's designated beneficiary, where applicable,
shall elect one of the following options: the accumulated balance in
the DROP account, less any withholding taxes required to be
remitted to the Internal Revenue Service, shall be paid to the DROP
participant or his designated surviving beneficiary in a single lumpsum
payment; or the balance of the DROP participant's DROP
account shall be paid within 45 days directly to the custodian of an
eligible retirement fund as defined in Section 402(c)(8)(b) of the
Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (IRC) or, in the case of an eligible
rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a deceased DROP
participant, an eligible retirement fund that is an individual
retirement account or an individual retirement annuity as
described in IRC § 402(c)(9). If the DROP participant or designated
beneficiary fails to elect a method of payment within 60 days after
the DROP participant's termination date, the DROP participant's
DROP account shall be paid in a lump sum as provided above. All
distributions of the DROP account shall comply with IRC
§ 401(a)(9).
(2) Under this Subsection I, a distributee may elect to have an eligible
rollover distribution paid directly to an eligible retirement fund by
way of a direct rollover. For purposes of this section, a "distributee"
§ 31-20 ECONOMY CODE § 31-20
29:62
includes a DROP participant, a DROP participant's survivor as
provided by Act 600 of 1956, 53 P.S. § 767 et. seq., or, in lieu
thereof, the DROP participant's designated beneficiary, and a
DROP participant's former spouse who is an alternate payee under
the qualified domestic relations order. For purposes of this section,
"eligible rollover distribution" has the meaning given the term by
IRC § 402(f)(2)(A), except that a qualified trust shall be considered
an eligible fund only if it accepts the distributee's eligible rollover
distribution; and, in the case of an eligible rollover distribution to
a surviving spouse, an eligible retirement fund is an "individual
retirement account" or an "individual retirement annuity," as those
terms are defined in IRC § 408(a) and (b).
J. Death.
(1) A DROP participant's eligibility to participate in the DROP
terminates upon the death of the DROP participant. If a DROP
participant dies on or after the effective date of participation in the
DROP but before the first monthly retirement benefit due the DROP
participant for that month has been credited to his DROP account,
the fund shall pay the monthly retirement benefit as though the
DROP participant had not elected DROP participation and had died
after the DROP participant's effective date of retirement but before
receipt of the DROP participant's first regular retirement benefit. If
a DROP participant dies while participating in the DROP and after
his monthly retirement benefits have begun to have been credited
to his DROP account, the monthly retirement benefit credited to
the DROP participant's DROP account during the month of the
DROP participant's death shall be the final monthly retirement
benefit from the fund credited to his DROP account.
(2) Except for those benefits specifically payable as a result of death
incurred in the course of performing a hazardous public duty, the
survivors of the DROP participant who dies shall not be eligible to
receive retirement system death benefits payable in the event of
the death of an active member. The DROP participant's survivor(s)
shall be eligible to receive survivor benefits normally payable in the
event of the death of a retired participant.
K. Disability. If a DROP participant becomes eligible for a disability benefit
from the fund and terminates employment, the monthly nondisability
retirement benefit of the DROP participant shall terminate.
L. Eligibility for other benefits. Except for benefits specifically foregone by
the DROP participant pursuant to Subsection D, a DROP participant
shall be eligible for the employee benefits provided to active officers.
M. Eligibility for statutory benefits. A DROP participant shall be eligible for
all preretirement benefits for employees otherwise provided by law,
including, but not limited to, the following:
§ 31-20 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-20
29:63
(1) The Workers' Compensation Act [the Act of June 2, 1915 (P.L. 736,
No. 338)].
(2) The Enforcement Officer Disability Benefits Law [the Act of June
28, 1935 (P.L. 447, No. 193)].
(3) The Unemployment Compensation Law [the Act of December 5,
1936 (2nd Sp. Sess., 1937 P.L. 2897, No. 11)].
(4) The Emergency and Law Enforcement Personnel Death Benefits
Act [the Act of June 24, 1976 (P.L. 424, No. 101)].
(5) The Public Safety Officers' Benefit Act of 1976 (Public Law 94-430,
42 U.S.C. § 90 Stat. 1347).
N. Designation of beneficiary. A DROP participant may designate a DROP
beneficiary who shall be entitled to apply for and receive the DROP
participant's DROP account in the event of the DROP participant's
death while participating in the DROP. In the event that a DROP
participant does not designate a beneficiary and dies while
participating in the DROP, his DROP account will be paid to his
survivor(s) as determined under Act 600 of 1956, and if no such
survivors exist, then to his estate.
O. Amendment. Any amendments to the DROP Ordinance shall be
consistent with the provisions covering deferred retirement option
plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement or
state or federal law and shall be binding upon all future participants
and upon all DROP participants who have balances in their DROP
accounts; provided, however, that the provisions of this § 31-20 shall
apply exclusively to those DROP participants electing to participate in
the DROP program on or after January 1, 2014.
P. Taxation, attachment and assignment. Except as provided in this
section, the right of a DROP participant to any benefit or right accrued
or accruing under the provisions of this § 31-20 and moneys in the
DROP participant's DROP account are exempt from a state or municipal
tax, levy and sale, garnishment, attachment, spouse's election or any
other process whatsoever. Rights and benefits under this § 31-20 shall
be subject to forfeiture as provided by the Public Employees Forfeiture
Act [the Act of July 8, 1978 (P.L. 752, No. 140)]. Forfeitures under this
section or under any other provision of law may not be applied to
increase the benefits that any DROP participant otherwise would
receive under this § 31-20. Rights under this § 31-20 shall be subject to
attachment in favor of an alternate payee as set forth in a qualified
domestic relations order.
Q. Trust requirement. A DROP participant's DROP account shall be held in
trust for the exclusive benefit of the fund participants who are or were
DROP participants and for their beneficiaries.
§ 31-20 ECONOMY CODE § 31-20
29:64
Chapter 33
PROPERTY, SALE OF SURPLUS
§ 33-1. Determination of value of property.
The Property and Supplies Committee of the Borough of Economy shall
be vested with the authority and power to determine whether the surplus
personal property to be disposed of has an estimated sale value of less than
$200.
§ 33-2. Disposal of surplus personal property.
If it is determined that the surplus personal property to be disposed of does
have an estimated sale value of less than $200, then, in its discretion, the
Property and Supplies Committee shall determine the proper method and
manner of disposing of the surplus personal property and shall so dispose
of the property.
§ 33-3. Reports. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
The Property and Supplies Committee shall, from time to time, submit to the
Borough Council its report detailing the items of personal property disposed
of, the estimated sale value(s) thereof and the disposition thereof.
Chapter 36
RECREATION BOARD
§ 36-1. Board created.
There is hereby created a Recreation Board known as the "Recreation Board
of the Borough of Economy."
R. Severability. The provisions of this § 31-20 shall be severable; and if any
of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal, the
validity of any of the remaining provisions of this § 31-20 shall not be
affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the intent of the
Borough that this § 31-20 has been adopted as if such unconstitutional
or illegal provision or provisions had not been included herein.
S. Auditor General findings. If the Auditor General issues a finding of
noncompliance with the provisions of Act 44 of 2009 that govern this
DROP, the Borough shall be authorized to reform this § 31-20 to bring it
into compliance with the DROP within 90 days of the date the Auditor
General's finding becomes final.
§ 31-20 PROPERTY, SALE OF SURPLUS § 36-2
33:65
§ 36-2. Membership; terms; compensation; vacancies.
The Board shall consist of seven members who shall be appointed by the
Economy Borough Council and shall serve no longer than five years. The
terms of the members shall be staggered in such a manner that at least one
expires annually. Members of the Board shall serve without pay. Vacancies
in such Board shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as
original appointments.
§ 36-3. Officers; meetings.
The members of the Recreation Board shall elect their own Chairman and
Secretary and select all other necessary officers, to serve for a period of one
year. The Board shall have the power to adopt rules and regulations for the
conduct of all business within its jurisdiction, The Board shall hold regular
meetings at such times and places as it may designate.
§ 36-4. Operation and maintenance of recreation places.
The Recreation Board shall have the power to equip, operate and maintain
recreation places, subject to budgetary restrictions hereinafter set forth.
§ 36-5. Acceptance of grants or donations; authority to enter
contracts.
The Recreation Board may accept any grant, gift, bequest or donation of
services, equipment, real estate or money from any individual or group,
to be used as specified by the donor or by the terms of acceptance. The
Recreation Board shall have no authority to enter into any contract or incur
any obligation binding upon the Borough of Economy, other than current
obligations or contracts to be fully executed within the then current fiscal
year, all expenditures to be within the budget appropriations made by the
governing body of the Borough of Economy.
§ 36-6. Disbursement of funds.
Funds appropriated by the governing body of the Borough of Economy and
budgeted to the Recreation Board shall be disbursed by the fiscal disbursing
officer of the Recreation Board and within the budget appropriations made.
Funds received by the Recreation Board from sources other than budget
appropriations shall be deposited by the Recreation Board to the credit and
for the use of said Board and disbursed as the above budget funds are
disbursed, except that funds received by gift, bequests or otherwise shall be
disbursed in accordance with the terms of such gift or bequest or the terms
of the acceptance thereof.
§ 36-7. Reports to governing body.
The Recreation Board shall make full and complete reports to the governing
body. The fiscal year of said Recreation Board shall conform to that of the
fiscal year for the Borough of Economy.
§ 36-2 ECONOMY CODE § 36-8
36:66
§ 36-8. Powers.
Such powers as are now or may hereafter be provided by statute of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or by ordinances of the Borough of
Economy relating to the development and operation of recreation systems,
public parks and playgrounds are hereby vested in the Recreation Board,
to be exercised by it subject to any and all restrictions contained in such
powers and ordinances.
Chapter 38
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
Chapter 40
WORKERS' COMPENSATION
§ 40-1. Execution of agreement.
§ 40-2. Duration of agreement.
The duration of the term of the agreement is four years from the date of
admission to the trust as a participant.
§ 40-3. Purpose and objectives.
The purpose and objectives of the agreement are set forth in Article V of the
agreement.
§ 40-4. Powers and scope of authority.
The powers and scope of authority delegated are set forth in Article II,
Article V, Article VI, Article VIII and Article IX of the agreement.
§ 40-5. Appropriation of funds.
The funds for meeting the obligations of the political subdivision under the
agreement shall be appropriated from the general funds of the political
subdivision.
A. The proper municipal officers are hereby authorized to execute and
deliver the following documents:
(1) The Municipal Risk Management Workmen's Compensation Pooled
Trust Agreement (hereafter the "agreement").
(2) The participant application.
B. These documents are attached hereto and made a part hereof and may
be inspected by any interested citizen at the office of the Municipal
Secretary.
§ 36-8 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 40-6
38:67
§ 40-6. Organization.
The organizational structure necessary to implement the agreement
consists of the trust, trustees, service agents and fiscal agents created by
the agreement.
§ 40-7. Disposal of property acquired.
Property acquired for purposes of the trust shall be acquired, managed and
disposed of under the terms of the attached trust agreement.
§ 40-8. Power to enter into contracts.
The trust shall be empowered to enter into contracts for policies of group
insurance and employee benefits, including social security for its
employees.
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 43
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department - See Ch. 29.
Fire prevention - See Ch. 88.
Smoke detectors - See Ch. 149.
§ 43-1. Purpose and scope.
§ 43-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM BUSINESS — The business by any individual, partnership,
corporation or other entity of selling, leasing, maintaining, servicing,
repairing, altering, replacing, moving or installing any alarm system or
causing to be sold, leased, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered, replaced,
moved or installed any alarm system in or on any building, structure or
facility.
A. The purpose of this chapter is to protect the emergency services of the
community from misuse.
B. This chapter governs all alarm systems, requires permits, establishes
fees, provides for punishment of violations and establishes a system of
administration.
§ 40-6 ECONOMY CODE § 43-2
43:68
ALARM SUBSCRIBER — Any resident person, corporation, institution or
company who has connected an alarm system in the Borough to a
designated or trunk line.
ALARM SYSTEM — Any assembly of equipment, mechanical or electrical,
arranged to signal the occurrence of an illegal entry or other activity
requiring urgent attention and to which the Police Department or Fire
Department is expected to respond.
ALARM USER — The person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind in control of premises wherein an
alarm system is maintained.
AUTOMATIC DIALING SERVICE — A device which is interconnected to a
telephone line and is programmed to transmit by voice message or code
signal to a designated trunk line (selected telephone number other than a
primary trunk line) indicating a need for emergency response.
DESIGNATED TRUNK LINE — A telephone line or lines serving the Police
Department that are designated to receive calls from automatic dialing
devices.
FALSE ALARM — An emergency alarm activated by inadvertence,
negligence or unintentional acts to which the Borough Police Department
or Fire Department responds, including malfunction of the alarm system.
The definition excludes alarms caused by malfunctions of the indicator at
the police station; malfunction, testing or repairing of telephone equipment
or lines; acts of God, such as earthquakes, floods, windstorms, thunder
or lightning; an attempted illegal entry of which there is visible evidence;
the user acting under a sincere belief that a need exists to call the Police
Department or Fire Department; and a call to police canceling the alarm
by giving the proper identification number, prior to arrival of the Police
Department or Fire Department. If a doubt exists as to the cause of a
"false alarm," the Chief of Police or the Chief of the Fire Department shall
resolve it in favor of the alarm user. Multiple alarms received by the Police
Department before the system can be deactivated within a reasonable
period of time shall be considered a single alarm.
FIRE COMPANY — The Economy Borough Volunteer Fire Department.
INTERCONNECT — To connect an alarm system, including an automatic
dialing device, to a telephone line, either directly or through a mechanical
device that utilizes a telephone for the purpose of using the telephone line
to transmit a message upon the activation of the alarm system.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Economy Borough Police Department.
PRIMARY TRUNK LINE — A telephone line or lines serving the Police
Department that is designated to receive emergency calls.
§ 43-3. Permit required.
A. Within 180 days from the effective date of this chapter, all alarm users
shall obtain an alarm user's permit for each premises from the Borough
§ 43-2 ALARM SYSTEMS § 43-3
43:69
§ 43-4. Instructions; cutoff, notification of tests.
§ 43-5. Liability; false alarms.
Secretary. Application for the alarm user's permit, and a fee of $15,
will be filed with the Borough Secretary on an application form to be
designated by the Borough. Each permit shall bear the signature of the
Borough Secretary and shall be available for inspection by the Borough.
B. All information furnished pursuant to this section shall be kept
confidential and shall be for the exclusive use of the Borough.
C. A residential alarm user who is over the age of 65 and is the primary
resident of the residence, if no business is conducted in the residence,
may obtain a user's permit from the Borough according to Subsection A
without the payment of a fee.
D. Every alarm user who refuses to disclose the location of the control box
as provided in the permit application shall, upon the second false alarm
within a twelve-month period, be notified, in writing by the Borough
Secretary, that the permit for the alarm system is revoked and that the
system shall be disconnected within 48 hours after receipt of the
notification. Refusal to comply with the disconnect notice is hereby
deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the violations
and penalties as set forth in § 43-9 herein. [Added 6-14-1986 by Ord.
No. 269]
A. Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm
system which is installed on premises located within the area served by
the Police Department or Fire Department shall furnish that user with
instructions that provide information to enable the user to operate the
alarm system properly and to locate and obtain service for the alarm
system at any time.
B. Every alarm business selling, leasing or furnishing to any user an alarm
system which is installed on premises located within the area served by
the Police Department and Fire Department shall be required to
provide an automatic audible-alarm cutoff within five minutes of initial
activation of any audible alarms installed to all alarm systems. This
section shall be construed to apply to any alarm user installing and/or
maintaining his own system. [Amended 7-14-1987 by Ord. No. 278]
C. Every alarm business or user shall be required to notify the Police
Department prior to conducting any tests upon any alarm system
whereupon such tests would cause emergency information to be
received by the Police Department.
A. Each subscriber shall enter into an agreement with Economy Borough
whereby the Borough shall be held harmless for any damage or
breakage caused by the Borough while making forced entry to answer
an alarm, whether false or authentic.
§ 43-3 ECONOMY CODE § 43-5
43:70
§ 43-6. Notice of false alarms.
B. False alarms.
(1) Each subscriber or user shall be required to pay the following
charges for false or accidental activation of alarms where police
respond:
(a) Up to two false or accidental alarms within any twelve-month
period: no charge.
(b) Three to five false or accidental alarms within any twelvemonth
period: a charge of $25 for each false or accidental
alarm.
(c) Six to 10 false or accidental alarms within any twelve-month
period: a charge of $50 for each false or accidental alarm.
(d) Eleven or more false or accidental alarms within any twelvemonth
period: a charge of $100 for each false or accidental
alarm.
(2) Each subscriber or user shall be required to pay the following
charges for false or accidental activation of alarms where fire
fighters respond:
(a) One false or accidental alarm within any twelve-month period:
no charge.
(b) Two false or accidental alarms within any twelve-month period:
a charge of $50 for each false or accidental alarm.
(c) Three false or accidental alarms within any twelve-month
period: a charge of $100 for each false or accidental alarm.
(d) Four or more false or accidental alarms within any twelvemonth
period: a charge of $200 for each false or accidental
alarm.
(3) The charges in Subsection B(1) and (2) are to be assessed for each
alarm received or reported within the aforementioned category.
A. Upon receipt of the second false or accidental alarm within a twelvemonth
period to which police respond or upon receipt of the first false
or accidental alarm within a twelve-month period to which fire fighters
respond, the Economy Borough Police Department shall notify, in
writing, the subscriber or user at his last known address. The
subscriber or user shall be responsible for notifying the Economy
Borough Police Department of a change of address within 30 days.
Compliance with this subsection by the Police Department shall be a
precondition to assessment of penalty.
§ 43-5 ALARM SYSTEMS § 43-6
43:71
§ 43-7. General standards.
B. Upon receipt of any false or accidental alarm in excess of two to which
police respond or in excess of one false or accidental alarm to which fire
fighters respond, the Economy Borough Police Department shall notify,
in writing, the subscriber or user, stating:
(1) The number of false or accidental alarms received during the
current twelve-month period; and
(2) The penalty fee assessed to the subscriber or user in accordance
with § 43-5.
C. The subscriber or user shall have 30 days upon receipt of notice to pay
the assessed false alarm fee.
D. Failure of the subscriber and/or user to respond to notice sent or refusal
to pay the fee required shall constitute a violation of this chapter,
subject to the penalties provided in § 43-5.
E. It shall be unlawful to intentionally activate a holdup alarm to summon
police or fire fighters except for the reporting of the specific occurrence
intended by the alarm.
A. The sensory mechanism used in connection with any alarm system must
be adjusted to suppress false indications of intrusion so that the device
will not be activated by impulses due to fleeting pressure changes in
water pipes, flashes of light, the rattling or vibrating of doors and
windows, the vibrations of the premises caused by passing vehicles or
any other force not related to genuine alarm. All such devices must be
maintained by the user in good repair to ensure maximum reliability of
operation. For the purposes of this chapter, any alarm transmitted or
activated without any physical sign of entry or fire, other than a
reported holdup, shall be construed to be a false alarm.
B. In the event that two or more false alarms from unrelated locations are
received within a relatively short period of time, the Police Department
or Fire Department may, in its sole discretion, not credit such false
alarms to the subscribers or users if, in their judgment, such false
alarms were caused by unusual phenomena, such as an intense
electrical storm or a nearby explosion, that would activate even a
properly adjusted alarm.
C. Automatic dialers, where a recorded voice message is received, shall
transmit a message approved by the Chief of Police. Said equipment
shall not make more than two telephone calls to the Police Department.
The message shall be no longer than 30 seconds in duration and shall
not be repeated more than twice.
D. The equipment shall not be keyed to the primary telephone lines of the
Police Department but shall only be keyed to designated phone
numbers.
§ 43-6 ECONOMY CODE § 43-7
43:72
§ 43-8. Nonliability of Borough.
This chapter or any agreement resulting therefrom shall not constitute
acceptance by Economy Borough for any liability to maintain any
equipment, to answer any alarm or other occurrence in connection
therewith.
§ 43-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter, with the
exception of § 43-5B shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding be
punishable by a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution for each
and every offense or by imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or
both. Each day that such violation is continued shall constitute a new and
separate offense, punishable by like fine, penalty or imprisonment.
Chapter 46
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
E. Audible alarms shall be designed to deactivate after five minutes of
operation. After 180 days of the effective date of this chapter, all
automatic alarm systems and audible alarms not in compliance with
this requirement shall be unlawful and must be disconnected.
§ 43-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 43-9
46:73

ARTICLE I
Possession and Consumption
Adopted 3-8-1983 by Ord. No. 242]
§ 46-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE — Any alcoholic beverages defined by the Liquor
Code of 1951, April 12, P.L. 90, Art. I, § 101, as amended (47 P.S. § 1-101 et
seq.).
CONTAINER — Any metal, glass, plastic or paper receptacle of any kind
suitable for holding liquids.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any place to which the public or a substantial group of
persons has access, including but not limited to any highway, street, road,
alley, bypass, sidewalk, parking area, shopping area, playground, park or
recreation facility located within the Borough of Economy, except that the
definition of "public place" shall not include those premises within and/or
on private property that is not a "public place" as defined in this section.
SPECIAL EVENT — Any fair, picnic, block party, sidewalk activity or other
community gathering in any public place.
§ 46-2. Possession in public places prohibited.
No person shall carry, transport or have in his or her possession in any
public place any open, resealed or partly empty container or similar article
containing an alcoholic beverage of any nature as defined by the Liquor
Code of 1951, as aforesaid.
§ 46-3. Depositing of containers prohibited.
No person shall break, leave, discard or deposit any container or receptacle
of any kind in any public place except in duly marked and designated trash
cans or bins.
§ 46-4. Permits for special events.
A. At least 10 calendar days prior to the proposed date of any special event
and upon payment of a fee of $10, any person may apply to the Borough
Secretary, on his own behalf or on behalf of an organization, for a
permit to possess and consume any alcoholic beverages described
herein during or in the conduct of such special event.
B. The application shall contain the following information:
(1) The name of the applicant(s) and the address and telephone
number of each. Where the applicant is an organization, the name
and address of the organization and its officers shall be given.
§ 46-1 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-4
46:75
§ 46-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $300 or, in default of such fine, imprisonment for a term of
not more than 90 days.
(2) The purpose of the special event, the date when it is proposed to be
held, the approximate times when this event will start and
terminate and the location of the assembly area.
§ 46-4 ECONOMY CODE § 46-5
46:76
ARTICLE II
Intermunicipal Liquor License Transfers
[Adopted 3-27-2007 by Ord. No. 413]
§ 46-6. Borough approval procedure.
Any person, corporation or other entity seeking Borough approval for an
intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license under Pennsylvania Liquor Code,
47 PA 4-461 et seq.; as amended,35 shall comply with the requirements set
forth below.
§ 46-7. Application for approval of license transfer.
A. Any person, corporation or other entity seeking Borough approval for
an intermunicipal transfer of a liquor license shall file an application
with the Borough Secretary in form approved from time to time by the
Borough.
B. This application shall, at a minimum, include the following information:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the applicant.
(2) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all parties who
have or propose to have a financial interest or ownership in the
business where the liquor license is proposed to be locate.
(3) The proposed location to which the liquor license is being
transferred, including a legal description of the property, street
address and telephone number, if any.
(4) The current location of the liquor license proposed to be
transferred, including the street address, telephone number and
business name.
(5) The name, address and telephone number of the current owner of
the liquor license proposed to be transferred.
(6) The name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property where the liquor license is proposed to be transferred.
(7) The name of the establishment sought to be licensed.
(8) The Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board (PLCB) license number for
the liquor license proposed to be transferred.
(9) The date at which the applicant proposes to relocate the liquor
license to the Borough.
(10) The type of liquor license proposed to be transferred.
35.Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
§ 46-6 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-7
46:77
(11) All other locations owned or operated by the applicant which
currently hold and/or utilize liquor licenses, including name,
address and license number of these establishments.
(12) The names, addresses and telephone numbers of all owners of
property fully or partially within 500 feet of the proposed license
location.
(13) A list of all liquor license violations cited against the applicant, and/
or any party that will have a financial interest in the business where
the liquor license is proposed to be located. This list shall include
the dates, locations and specific grounds for each such violation.
(14) A list of all crimes committed by the applicant, and/or any party
that will have a financial interest in the business where the liquor
license is proposed to be located. This list shall include the dates,
locations and specific grounds for each such violation.
(15) A copy of the completed application form required by the PLCB for
the transfer of a liquor license.
(16) Name, address and distance from the proposed licensed premises
for:
(a) Nearest liquor-licensed establishment.
(b) Nearest school.
(c) Nearest park.
(d) Nearest church.
(e) Nearest private recreation or amusement facility.
(17) Detailed information regarding the following operating details for
the business where the license is proposed to be transferred:
(a) Amusement permit.
(b) Extended hours food permit.
(c) Sunday sales permit.
(d) Days of operation.
(e) Hours of operation.
(f) Seating capacity.
(g) A detailed and scaled plan of the configuration of the premises
where the liquor license is proposed to be transferred,
including all entrances, exits, emergency exits, rest rooms,
offices, rooms, private areas, fixtures, pay telephones, seating
areas, dance floors, dining or snack areas, amusement devices,
§ 46-7 ECONOMY CODE § 46-7
46:78
§ 46-8. Application fee.
In order for any application to be accepted by the Borough as
administratively complete, the applicant must submit an application fee to
defray the Borough's expenses related to the public notices, public hearing
requirements, secretarial and administrative functions, and investigative
costs. The required application fee shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 46-9. Public hearing advertisement and posting.
Upon receipt of an administratively complete application, including the
appropriate fee(s) required by this chapter, the Borough shall schedule a
bar and any other items or areas which the Borough deems
important.
(h) Characteristics of the neighborhood.
(i) Type of menu (breakfast, lunch, dinner).
(j) General food and drink price range.
(18) A list of existing licenses in the Borough which are inactive, in
safekeeping and/or for sale, including name, address and telephone
number of contact person for each.
(19) The number of existing liquor licenses of all types with the
Borough.
(20) The population of the Borough taken from the latest federal census.
(21) A signed verification by the applicant, property owner,
establishment owner and operator/manager that the facts set forth
in the application are true and correct to the applicant's, property
owner's, establishment owner's and operator/manager's personal
knowledge, information and belief, and that any false statements
made therein are subject to the penalties of 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 4904, as
amended, relating to unsworn falsifications to authorities.
(22) Any other information deemed appropriate by the Borough
Solicitor.
C. All distances under this section shall be measured from the proposed
license area to the zoning lot boundaries of the other use or property in
question.
D. The Borough Solicitor shall review the application for completeness in
accordance with the requirements of this section. If all required
materials and information have not been submitted, the Borough
Secretary shall reject the application, in writing, citing the specific
deficiencies and the specific requirements of this section which have
not been met.
§ 46-7 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-9
46:79
public hearing. The Borough shall advertise a public notice for the hearing
at least one week prior to the hearing date in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough. The Borough shall also conspicuously post the
property identified as the location of the proposed liquor license in a
manner consistent with the requirements of the Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended, for the posting of a property for
a proposed rezoning.
§ 46-10. Board action.
In deciding whether the proposed transfer would adversely affect the
welfare, health, peace and morals of the Borough or its inhabitants, the
Borough Council may consider any or all of the following:
§ 46-11. Public hearing.
The Borough Council shall conduct a public hearing to determine whether
or not to approve the transfer of the liquor license into the Borough.
Proceedings before the Borough Council shall be in accordance with
551-555 of the Local Agency Law, 2 Pa. C.S.A. § 551-555, as amended.
§ 46-12. Council decision.
The Borough Council shall render a written decision either approving or
denying the transfer of the liquor license within 45 days of the filing
of an administratively complete application. The Borough Council may:
1) approve an application; 2) approve an application subject to certain
specified conditions; or 3) deny an application. A denial of an application
shall be based on a finding that the proposed transfer would adversely
A. A report and recommendation from the Borough Solicitor and Police
Chief.
B. The population of the Borough including the number of residents under
the age of 21.
C. The proximity of the proposed licensed establishment to existing
licensed establishments (all types of licenses), schools, churches, adult
businesses, and other relevant uses.
D. The concerns expressed by area residents, businesses, public interest
organizations and the Ambridge Area School District.
E. A copy of the completed application required by the PLCB, and the
applicant's complete criminal history.
F. The names of and information regarding other businesses in which the
applicant has an ownership interest.
G. Any other issue or fact that may adversely affect the welfare, health,
peace, and morals of the Borough or its inhabitants and which the
Borough Council deems appropriate and relevant to the proceedings.
§ 46-9 ECONOMY CODE § 46-12
46:80
affect the welfare, health, peace and morals of the Borough or its residents.
Any approval of an application under this chapter shall be limited to the
individual applicant, the proposed transfer location, and the type of
establishment proposed. Any proposed change in ownership, location or
type of establishment will require a new application and Borough approval.
§ 46-12 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 46-12
46:81
Chapter 55
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 58.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Sewers — See Ch. 145.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 55-1. Adoption of standards.
There are hereby adopted by the Borough of Economy for the purpose of
establishing rules and regulations for the construction, alteration, removal,
repair, demolition, maintenance and occupancy, including permits and
penalties, the following codes:
§ 55-2. Amendments and modifications.
The following amendments and modifications to the codes have been
adopted:
§ 55-3. Fees.
All fees associated with the building codes and related permits shall be
governed by the most recent Fees Resolution, as adopted by Borough
A. The 2000 International Building Code.
B. The 2000 International Residential Code.
C. The 2000 International Property Maintenance Code.
D. The 2000 International Fire Code
A. Qualifications for the Board of Appeals are changed to: The three
primary Council members on the Ordinance and Recreation Committee,
as well as the Borough Engineer and Borough Solicitor.
B. The penalty for violations is changed to: Any person, firm or corporation
violating any of the provisions of the code or failing to comply with any
order issued pursuant to any section thereof shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine
not less than $300 and not in excess of $1,000 for each violation. In
default of payment of such fine, the violator shall be subject to
imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period not in excess of 30
days. Each day that a violation continues, after a service of notice as
provided for in the code, shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 46-12 ECONOMY CODE § 55-3
55:82
Council, and may be changed from time to time via resolution as Council
deems necessary.36
Chapter 58
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
§ 58-1. System established. [Amended 7-24-1991 by Ord. No. 316]
There is hereby established a building and structure numbering system
for certain existing properties within the Borough of Economy, County of
Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The system shall be generated
and maintained by the Planning Commission of the Borough of Economy
in conjunction with Borough Council and shall be documented in written
resolution form.
§ 58-2. Posting of street number required.
Within 90 days after notification by the Borough, the owners or occupants
of each building and structure within the Borough of Economy shall
conspicuously post the street number of such building or structure at some
location on the premises on which the building or structure is located so
that the number is clearly visible from a street which provides public access
to such premises.
§ 58-3. Numbering as area develops.
Any area that is not numbered according to the system referred to above
shall be numbered as said area is developed.
§ 58-4. Mailboxes.
Buildings and structures that are not visible from a public roadway shall be
conspicuously numbered on the mailbox at the public roadway.
§ 58-5. Notice of violation. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
The Borough Council or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give written notice, by
personal service or by United States Mail, to the owner or occupant, as the
case may be, of any premises whereupon the street number at the premises
is not posted in violation of the provisions of this chapter, directing and
requiring such owner or occupant to post a street number so as to conform
36.Editor's Note: The Fees Resolution is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 55-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 58-5
58:83
to the requirements of thin chapter, within 15 days after issuance of such
notice. In case any owner, owners or occupants shall neglect, fail or refuse
to comply with such notice within the period of time stated herein, the
Borough authorities may post a street number on the premises and collect
the cost thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by law,
from such owner, owners or occupant in the manner provided by law.
§ 58-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any owner, owners or occupants who shall violate or fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default
of payment of such fine, to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days, provided that each day's violation shall constitute a separate offense;
and notice to the offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an
offense.
Chapter 62
BURNING, OUTDOOR
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
§ 62-1. Open fires restricted.
§ 62-2. Exceptions; regulations.
Burning of anything on private property is prohibited except as follows:
A. Burning of anything on public streets, sidewalks or public grounds is
prohibited. Charcoal and propane grills are permitted at public parks
for the express purpose of cooking food, provided the coals are
extinguished or otherwise safeguarded from igniting a fire upon
departure from the park.
B. General restrictions. [Added 8-10-2010 by Ord. No. 429]
(1) A person shall not kindle or maintain or authorize to be kindled or
maintain any open burning unless conducted and approved in
accordance with this chapter.
(2) The burning of rotted tree wood, or construction wood that is
chemically preserved or treated, or all leaves is prohibited and
shall be a violation of this chapter.
A. The property owner's permission must be obtained.
§ 58-5 ECONOMY CODE § 62-2
58:84
B. Fires for cooking purposes on commercially made grills are permitted
at all times. Fires for cooking purposes on homemade fire pits, etc. are
restricted as follows:
(1) The area where the fire will burn must be well contained, attended
at all times, and be fully extinguished and not left smoldering when
finished.
(2) A means to suppress sparks and ashes from escaping upwards and
potentially igniting another fire must be in place.
(3) A fire extinguisher, water source or other means of dousing the fire
quickly must be on hand.
(4) It must be abundantly apparent that the purpose of the fire is for
cooking, and the mere presence of a marginal amount of food as a
subterfuge will be considered a violation of this chapter.
C. Burning of dry, readily combustible household items such as paper and
boxes is permitted under the following circumstances:
(1) Tuesday through Saturday except federal holidays, sunrise to
sunset, for no more than one hour during any day.
(2) The burning area must be well contained, such as in a burn barrel,
including a means to suppress sparks and ashes from escaping
upwards, attended at all times, and be fully extinguished and not
left smoldering when finished.
(3) A fire extinguisher, water source or other means of dousing the fire
quickly must be on hand.
(4) Must be at least 50 feet from any dwelling and more than 15 feet
from any accessory structure.
D. Burning of dry, readily combustible yard waste such as brush and
sticks, etc. is permitted under the following circumstances:
(1) Under one cubic yard of loose material, the same as Subsection C
above.
(2) One cubic yard or more of loose material:
(a) By permit issued by the Fire Code Official or duly authorized
representative.
(b) Tuesday through Saturday except federal holidays, sunrise to
sunset, for no more than three hours during any day.
(c) The burning area must be well contained or otherwise situated
as being deemed safe by the Fire Code Official or duly
authorized representative on days when wind gusts do not
exceed 10 miles per hour, attended at all times, and be fully
extinguished and not left smoldering when finished.
§ 62-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 62-2
58:85
§ 62-3. Violations and penalties.
Anyone who violates or fails to conform to any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof,
be fined not more than $300, and in default of payment of such fine, be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days. Each day's violation shall constitute
a separate and distinct offense.
Chapter 66
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 66-1. Adoption of building code by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of Economy, Borough of Economy, being marked and designated
as the International Building Code, 2003 edition, including Appendix
Chapters A, B, F, G, H, I, and J (see international Building Code Section
101.2.1, 2003 edition), as published by the International Code Council, be
and is hereby adopted as the building code of the Borough of Economy,
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the
conditions and maintenance of all property, buildings and structures: by
providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities and other
physical things and conditions essential to ensure that structures are safe,
sanitary and fit for occupation and use; and the condemnation of buildings
and structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of
such structures as herein provided; providing for the issuance of permits
and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the regulations,
(d) A fire extinguisher of sufficient size, water source or other
means of dousing the fire quickly must be on hand.
(e) Must be at least 100 feet from any dwelling and more than 50
feet from any accessory structure.
E. Commercial burning is permitted in the Industrial Zone and will be
controlled by the Fire Code Official or duly authorized representative
on a case-by-case basis. Commercial burning is defined as burning that
is an integral and ongoing part of a business.
F. The Borough, through its agents, shall determine what constitutes a
“well contained” burning area and all other subjective terms herein,
with the Fire Code Official or duly authorized representative having
final say if there is a dispute.
§ 62-2 ECONOMY CODE § 66-1
58:86
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said building code on file in
the Office of the Secretary of the Borough of Economy are hereby referred
to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in this chapter, with
the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 66-2
of this chapter.
§ 66-2. Modifications to building code standards.
The following sections are hereby revised:
§ 66-3. Adoption of residential code by reference.
A certain document, three copies of which are file in the office of the
Secretary of Economy, Borough of Economy, being marked and designated
as the International Residential Code, 2003 edition, including all appendix
chapters (see International Residential Code Section R102.5., 2003 edition),
as published by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted
as the residential code of the Borough of Economy, in the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, for regulating and governing the construction, alteration,
movement, enlargement, replacement, repair, equipment, location, removal
and demolition of detached one- and two-family dwellings and multiple
single-family dwellings (townhouses) not more than three stories in height
with separate means of egress as herein provided; providing for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees therefor; and each and all of the
regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said residential
code on file in the Office of the Secretary of the Borough of Economy are
hereby referred to, adopted, and made a part hereof, as if fully set out in
this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if any,
prescribed in § 66-4 of this chapter.
§ 66-4. Modifications to residential code standards.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1. Insert: Borough of Economy, Beaver County.
B. Section 1612.3. Insert: Borough of Economy, Beaver County.
C. Section 1612.3. Insert:
D. Section 34l0.2. Insert:
A. Section R101.1. Insert: Borough of Economy, Beaver County.
B. Table R301.2(1) Insert: see attached exhibit A to this chapter.
C. Section P2603.6.1 Insert: 36 inches and 48 inches, respectively.
D. Section P3103.1 Insert: 18 inches and 6 inches, respectively.
§ 66-1 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 66-5
58:87
§ 66-5. Election to administer and enforce.
The Borough of Economy hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35
P.S. §§ 7210.101 through 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its
regulations.
§ 66-6. Adoption and incorporation of Uniform Construction Code
by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
through 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and
incorporated herein by reference as the municipal building code of the
Borough of Economy.
§ 66-7. Methods for administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within Economy Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the governing
body of this Economy Borough from time to time by resolution:
§ 66-8. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of Economy Borough in conformity with the requirements of the
relevant provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the
purposes set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration
is undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said Board
of Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 66-9. Effect on other regulations.
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough of Economy to serve
as the municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough of Economy;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality; and
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 66-5 ECONOMY CODE § 66-9
58:88
§ 66-10. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough of Economy for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 69
CURFEW
§ 69-1. Definitions.
Within this chapter, the following words shall be construed so as to have the
following meanings:
AFTER HOURS — That period between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00
a.m. Eastern standard or daylight saving time, whichever may apply at the
time in question.
BUSINESS ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business, any
place of amusement or entertainment to which the public is invited and any
similar place.
MINOR or MINORS — Any person less than 18 years of age. For the purpose
of this chapter, any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the
date of his or her 18th birthday and not before that time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
owning, operating, managing or conducting any establishment; and
whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, the word "operator," as
applied to association or partnership, shall include the members, officers
and managers thereof or any of them and as applied to corporations shall
include officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PARENT — The natural parent or guardian or adult person 21 years of age
or over, responsible for the custody of any minor.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by the Borough of Economy on or before July 1, 1999, and
which equal or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in
full force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or
exceed the minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time
to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough of
Economy not governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 66-9 CURFEW § 69-1
69:89
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Police Department of the Borough of
Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground,
vacant lot, public building, railway station, bus terminal or similar place.
REMAIN — Loiter, idle, wander, stroll, play or be.
§ 69-2. Remaining in public places after curfew hours prohibited;
exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain in or upon any public place or
establishment in the Borough of Economy after hours unless accompanied
by a parent or on an errand or other legitimate business directed by a
parent or unless engaged in gainful, lawful employment after hours, in
which case said minor shall carry written identification and evidence of
employment.
§ 69-3. Permitting minors to remain prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any operator of a business establishment knowingly
to permit any minor to remain in or upon the premises of said establishment
after hours.
§ 69-4. Separate offenses.
Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 69-5. Enforcement.
§ 69-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No.
254; 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
A. Any police officer who finds a minor violating any provisions of this
chapter shall endeavor to obtain the name, age, date of birth and
address of the minor and the names of the minor's parents. The minor
shall, at the discretion of the police officer, be brought to the police
station, and the parents notified, or shall be taken or instructed to
proceed directly to his home. The information obtained from the minor,
together with a full report, shall be transmitted to the Mayor, who shall
cause a written notice to be delivered, mailed or otherwise, to the
parents of the minor advising them of the violation of this chapter. A
record of all violations shall be kept. The police officer so acting shall
use his discretion in determining age and, in doubtful cases, may bring
the minor into the police station until satisfactory proof of age is
furnished.
B. Where the minor is not a resident of the Borough of Economy, the Police
Department shall forward a copy of the report and such additional data
as the Police Department may deem helpful in the handling of the case
to the Police Department of the municipality where the minor resides.
§ 69-1 ECONOMY CODE § 69-6
69:90
§ 69-7. Extension of curfew hour.
The Mayor of the Borough of Economy or, in his absence, the designated
police officer of the Borough of Economy is authorized to extend the curfew
hour for special occasions. When the Mayor of the Borough of Economy
or the designated police officer of the Borough of Economy grants such
extension of time, then the date, hour and, if applicable, the place of such
extension shall be clearly set forth by written promulgation. Such extension
of time shall not be construed to extend beyond the limits as set forth in
such promulgation.
Chapter 75
DOGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animal Control Officer — See Ch. 21, Art. I.
§ 75-1. Running at large prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or keeps any dog to permit
such dog to run at large in the Borough of Economy in violation of the
provisions of the Dog Law of 1965 (3 P.S. § 460-101 et seq.). Any dog
running at large in violation of said law shall be subject to seizure, detention
and disposal as provided therein.
§ 75-2. Disturbing the peace prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to own, harbor or keep in custody any dog which
disturbs the peace by barking, howling or making other loud noises to
the annoyance and discomfort of any person in the Borough of Economy.
Continuous barking, howling or the making of other loud noises by any
dog for more than any one hour or continuous barking for periods of less
than one hour but more than 1/2 hour, which periods occur on two or more
consecutive days, shall be deemed to be a disturbance of the peace and a
cause of annoyance and discomfort to persons in the Borough of Economy.
§ 75-3. Warnings.
A. Any parent who shall permit a minor to violate the provisions of this
chapter after having received notice of a prior violation shall, after
conviction, be subject to a fine not exceeding $300 and, in default of
payment of such fine, to undergo imprisonment for not exceeding 90
days.
B. Any operator who shall violate this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
subject to a fine not exceeding $300 and, in default of payment of such
fine, imprisonment for not exceeding 90 days.
§ 69-6 DOGS § 75-3
75:91
§ 75-4. Attacks on human beings.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to permit said dog to injure any
human being by biting, jumping on, knocking down or attacking said human
being, except policemen's dogs used by the Borough Police Department for
the purpose of keeping peace and maintaining law and order.
§ 75-5. Nuisances.
No person owning, harboring, keeping or in charge of any dog shall cause,
suffer or allow such dog to soil, defile, defecate on or commit any nuisance
on any common thoroughfare, sidewalk, passageway, bypath, play area,
park or any place where people congregate or walk or on any public
property whatsoever or on any private property without the permission of
the owner of said property.
§ 75-6. Number of dogs limited.
It shall be unlawful to keep four or more dogs six months of age or older on
any premises, regardless of the number of owners; provided, however, that
this section shall not apply to any premises for which a kennel license has
been obtained pursuant to the Dog Law of 1965 (3 P.S. § 460-208 et seq.).
§ 75-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who violates or fails to comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense,
punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 and, in default of payment of such
A. Any person may request the Borough Police Department to warn any
person who shall own, harbor or keep in custody any dog which disturbs
the peace by barking, howling or making other loud noise to the
annoyance and discomfort of persons in the Borough of Economy.
B. A warning by the police shall consist of a delivery of a copy of this
chapter to the residence in the Borough of Economy of any such owner,
keeper or custodian. In the absence of any such warning made by said
police, the complaining person may request the Secretary of the
Borough of Economy to provide such warning.
C. Any such request shall be in writing and shall identify and specify the
residence of the owner, keeper or custodian of the dog or other animal
and shall identify and specify the residence of the person making the
request. Upon receipt of such request, the Borough Secretary shall mail
a copy of this chapter to the person identified as the owner, keeper or
custodian of the dog or other animal.
D. A violation of this chapter shall be deemed to have occurred upon a
second or subsequent violation of § 75-3C above after the date of
delivery of the warning.
§ 75-3 ECONOMY CODE § 75-7
75:92
fine, by a term of imprisonment in the county jail of not more than 90 days.
The continuation of such violation for each successive day shall constitute
a separate offense, and the person or persons allowing or permitting the
continuation of a violation may be punished as provided above for each
separate offense.
Chapter 78
DUMPS AND DUMPING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 62. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 97.
§ 78-1. Rubbish deposits restricted.
No paper, trash, rubbish, ashes, junk, waste or discarded materials of any
kind shall be thrown, deposited or dumped in any ravine, quarry, ditch
or gutter, on any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, alley, sidewalk or
footpath in the Borough of Economy nor on any public place or private
property, vacant or occupied, within the limits of said Borough.
§ 78-2. Burning by public highways.
No leaves, grass, weeds, hedges, tree trimmings or any other material shall
be burned within the boundaries of any public highway; nor shall any fire
be made which will cause damage to a highway or street paving.
§ 78-3. Open drainage.
It shall be unlawful for all individuals, corporations and businesses owning
or occupying property along any public highway, road, street, avenue, lane
or alley in the Borough of Economy to drain or allow to flow into or upon any
highway, road, street, avenue, lane or alley, by pipe or any other channel,
whether natural or artificial, any water or drainage from sinks, bathtubs,
washstands, lavatories, water closets, swimming pools, privies or cesspools
of any kind or nature whatsoever or any other foul or offensive water or
drainage of any kind or to allow any such water or drainage to percolate
into or upon said highway, road, street, avenue, lane or alley.
§ 78-4. Municipal dumps.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit municipal dumps
maintained by the Borough of Economy or a reasonable accumulation of
ashes and rubbish on private property by the owners thereof.
§ 75-7 DUMPS AND DUMPING § 78-5
78:93
§ 78-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, corporation, partnership or other entity whatsoever
violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed the maximum fine of $300, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such costs and prosecution,
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days; provided, however, that, if
the District Justice determines that the defendant is without the financial
means to pay the fines and costs immediately or in a single remittance, such
defendant shall be permitted to pay the fines or costs in installments and
over such periods of time as the District Justice deems to be just.
Chapter 81
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 81-1. Fences required for certain uses.
All owners or operators of commercial amusement parks, drive-in theaters
and pitch-and-putt golf courses or miniature golf establishments are hereby
required to erect a chain link fence or a solid physical barrier six feet in
height along the boundary line or lines of its property where said boundary
line or lines adjoin or abut residential property or properties.
§ 81-2. Applicability; time for compliance.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the hereinabove-designated
commercial establishments presently existing, as well as those which are
established in the future. Establishments presently in existence shall have
three months from the date of enactment of this chapter to comply with the
requirements herein.
§ 81-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof before any District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding
$300 and, in default of payment thereof, shall be sentenced to undergo
imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period of not more than
90 days. Each day that a violation is permitted to exist shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 78-5 ECONOMY CODE § 81-3
81:94
Chapter 85
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting and sporting associations — See Ch.
102.
§ 85-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AIR GUN — Any gun which uses air under pressure from any pump or other
means to discharge missiles or projectiles at a muzzle velocity in excess of
200 feet per second.
DEADLY WEAPON — Any type of weapon or device which in the manner in
which it is used or intended to be used impels a projectile through the use
or force that is calculated or can reasonably be expected to cause bodily
harm. This includes, but is not limited to, traditional, compound, crossbow
and arrow.
FIREARMS — Any type of firearm or device which impels a pellet or
projectile through the use of a force that is calculated or can reasonably
be expected to cause bodily harm, including but not limited to, pistol,
revolver, shotgun, or rifle, whether automatic, semiautomatic or single-shot
or muzzle-loading.
§ 85-2. Unlawful acts.
A. No person shall discharge a firearm or air gun within 150 yards of any
school or playground.
(1) No person shall discharge a firearm or air gun within 75 yards of
any dwelling, farm building or occupied structure.
B. No person shall discharge a firearm or air gun or deadly weapon within
25 yards of any public roadway or pathway.
C. No person shall discharge a firearm before 9:00 a.m. or 1/2 after
sunset, Sunday through Saturday. Sunset shall be determined by the
National Weather Service.
D. No person shall discharge a deadly weapon within 25 yards of any
dwelling, farm building, or occupied structure.
E. No person shall discharge a deadly weapon within 50 yards of any
school or playground.
§ 81-3 FENCES § 85-3
81:95
§ 85-3. Exceptions.
Exceptions are as follows:
§ 85-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter, upon conviction thereof in an action brought before a district judge
in the manner provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the
Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 90 days. Each day that
a violation of this chapter continues, or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 88
(RESERVED)
Chapter 92
A. Any person licensed to hunt in this Commonwealth and lawfully
engaged in hunting as defined and regulated by the Pennsylvania Game
and Wildlife Code. (34 Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended);
B. Any person over the age of 18 years using a firearm to control wildlife in
the protection of cultivated crops, fruit trees, vegetables, livestock,
poultry or other property; provided, however, that such use of the
firearms shall comply with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Game
and Wildlife Code;
C. Individuals engaging in target shooting, skeet, trap and the like,
provided that said activities in no way endanger life or public property
and provide a suitable backstop that any projectile does not traverse
the boundary lines of the property on which the use, firing or discharge
occurs, and permission was granted by property owners, that fall in the
definitions of § 85-2A(1) and D.
D. Any person who discharges a firearm, air gun, deadly weapon, in
defense of his person or property.
E. An officer of the Borough of Economy police force, any peace officer of
the United States or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any member
of the armed services, when such individuals are engaged in the
performance of official duties.
F. Sportsman clubs.
G. Posting of signs. Legible signs giving public notice of this chapter shall
be posted at or near the public highways at the boundaries of the
Borough of Economy.
§ 85-3 ECONOMY CODE § 85-4
88:96
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 66.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 119.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 85-4 (RESERVED) § 85-4
88:97

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 92-1. Statutory authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,37 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Economy does hereby
order as follows.
37.Editor’s Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 92-1 (RESERVED) § 92-1
88:99

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 92-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 92-3. Applicability.
§ 92-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 92-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of the
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the chapter, which shall remain in
full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 92-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
F. Repeal in its entirety Chapter 92 (Flood Damage Prevention) of the
Economy Borough Code.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Economy unless a permit
has been obtained from the floodplain administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
§ 92-2 (RESERVED) § 92-6
88:101
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur, or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Economy or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 92-6 ECONOMY CODE § 92-6
88:102
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 92-7. Designation of floodplain administrator.
§ 92-8. Permit required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Economy.
§ 92-9. Duties and responsibilities of floodplain administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the "floodplain administrator."
The floodplain administrator may:
(1) Fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations;
(2) Delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations
to qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and
other employees; or
(3) Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another
agency or private-sector entity to administer specific provisions of
these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations
by another entity shall not relieve the community of its
responsibilities pursuant to the participation requirements of the
National Flood Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of
Federal Regulations at 44 CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated floodplain administrator, the floodplain
administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Code Enforcement Officer.
A. The floodplain administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this chapter and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the floodplain administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended;38 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended;39 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);40 and the United States
Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be
issued until this determination has been made.
38.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
39.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 92-7 (RESERVED) § 92-9
88:103
§ 92-10. Application procedures and requirements.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the floodplain administrator shall review the
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the floodplain administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the floodplain administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the floodplain administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by the applicant, the floodplain administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The floodplain administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The floodplain administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the floodplain administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in this chapter as the floodplain administrator/manager.
J. The floodplain administrator shall consider the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such permit shall be made, in writing, to the floodplain
administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of Economy. Such
application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
§ 92-9 ECONOMY CODE § 92-10
88:104
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location, including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction of development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the floodplain administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this chapter and all
other applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the floodplain
administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 92-10 (RESERVED) § 92-10
88:105
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale, showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon the North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood; and that the Floodway Area (see § 92-19A),
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
development, will not increase the base flood elevation at any
point.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within any identified floodplain area (see
§ 92-18), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not cause any increase in the
base flood elevation.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
§ 92-10 ECONOMY CODE § 92-10
88:106
§ 92-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the floodplain administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the floodplain administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 92-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the floodplain administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 92-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the floodplain administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the floodplain administrator. Requests for
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 92-25F, Storage, and § 92-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 92-25F and 92-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 92-26
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan, meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the floodplain administrator.
§ 92-10 (RESERVED) § 92-13
88:107
any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the applicant
to the floodplain administrator for consideration.
§ 92-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the floodplain administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit and the date of
its issuance and be signed by the floodplain administrator.
§ 92-15. Start of construction.
§ 92-16. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of the issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire, unless a time extension is
granted, in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The issuance of a
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The "actual start of construction" means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the "actual start of construction" means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a
building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions
of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
floodplain administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the floodplain administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the floodplain
administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
§ 92-13 ECONOMY CODE § 92-16
88:108
§ 92-17. Appeals.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time, not to exceed a period of 30 days, for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the floodplain
administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Economy of not less than $25 nor more than $600,
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity, for the
proper enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty
for any violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not
excuse the violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the
Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the floodplain
administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the floodplain administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code41 and
any other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.
41.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 92-16 (RESERVED) § 92-17
88:109

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 92-18. Identification of areas.
§ 92-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. Any areas of the Borough of Economy classified as special flood hazard
areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs), dated August 17,
2015, and issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), or the most-recent revision thereof, including all digital data
developed as part of the Flood Insurance Study.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Economy and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area shall be those areas identified in the FIS and the
FIRM as floodways and which represent the channel of a watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge
the base flood without increasing the water surface elevation by more
than one foot at any point. This term shall also include floodway areas
which have been identified in other available studies or sources of
information for those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has
been identified in the FIS or FIRM.
(1) Within any Floodway Area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development,
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) Within any Floodway Area, no new construction or development
shall be allowed, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
B. The AE Area/District shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base flood
elevations have been provided.
(1) The AE Area adjacent to the floodway shall be those areas
identified as an AE Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared
by FEMA for which base flood elevation have been provided and a
floodway has been delineated.
§ 92-18 (RESERVED) § 92-19
88:111
§ 92-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 92-23B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 92-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Borough of Economy, and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 92-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
C. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality. [Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 450]
§ 92-19 ECONOMY CODE § 92-22
88:112
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 92-23. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection's
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When a community proposes to permit the following encroachments:
any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations within
the floodway; or any development occurring in Zones A1-30 and Zone
AE without a designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than
one foot in the base flood elevations; or alteration or relocation of a
stream (including, but not limited to, installing culverts and bridges),
the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR Part 65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 92-23 (RESERVED) § 92-23
88:113
§ 92-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
Within any identified floodplain area, any new construction or substantial
improvements shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained for new
construction or substantial improvements in the identified floodplain area
in accordance with the criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions
apply:
D. Within any identified floodplain area, no new construction or
development shall be located within the area measured 50 feet
landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement shall have the lowest floor (including basement)
elevated up to or above the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 92-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE, A1-30 and AH Zones, any new construction or substantial
improvement of a nonresidential structure shall have the lowest
floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory
flood elevation, or be designed and constructed so that the space
enclosed below the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
§ 92-23 ECONOMY CODE § 92-24
88:114
floodproofed up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 92-19C of this chapter.
(3) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have their lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992), or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above-referenced standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most-recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized, where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement, as
§ 92-24 (RESERVED) § 92-24
88:115
defined in his ordinance, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an
historic structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance
requirement will cause removal of the structure from the National
Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places
must be obtained from the Secretary of the Interior or the State
Historic Preservation Officer. Any exemption from ordinance
requirements will be the minimum necessary to preserve the historic
character and design of the structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances, such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation,
collapse, and lateral movement and shall be designed to
automatically provide for the entry and exit of floodwater for the
purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for
meeting this requirement must either be certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the following
minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
§ 92-24 ECONOMY CODE § 92-25
88:116
§ 92-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
A. Fill. Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the floodplain administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages," and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities, such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems, shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
§ 92-25 (RESERVED) § 92-25
88:117
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life, and
not listed in § 92-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
§ 92-25 ECONOMY CODE § 92-25
88:118
§ 92-26. Development which may endanger human life. [Amended
10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 450]
Within any identified floodplain area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A below shall be prohibited. No variance shall be granted.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or apparatus
shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event floodwater infiltration
occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as
amended, and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009, or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009, or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R322, Appendix E and
Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply for more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances; shall be
prohibited. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
§ 92-25 (RESERVED) § 92-26
88:119
§ 92-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 92-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
§ 92-26 ECONOMY CODE § 92-28
88:120
§ 92-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation;
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse or lateral movement; and
(4) Have all ductwork and utilities, including HVAC/heat pump,
elevated to the regulatory flood elevation.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "US Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing" 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401-405 shall apply.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most-recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the proposed unit's(s') installation.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, recreational vehicles shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must:
(1) Be on site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
(2) Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; and
(3) Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 92-28.
§ 92-28 (RESERVED) § 92-29
88:121

ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 92-30. Prohibited activities.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act, the following activities shall be
prohibited within any identified floodplain area in Economy Borough:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
§ 92-30 (RESERVED) § 92-30
88:123

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 92-31. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 92-32 shall apply.
§ 92-32. Improvements.
A. The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is
made to an existing structure located within any identified floodplain
area.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any identified floodplain area that would cause any increase in
BFE. In A Area/Districts, BFEs are determined using the methodology
in § 92-19C.
(1) No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be
allowed within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in BFE.
(2) The above activity shall also address the requirements of 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
(3) Within any Floodway Area/District (see § 92-19A), no new
construction or development shall be allowed, unless the
appropriate permit is obtained from the Department of
Environmental Protection's regional office.
(4) Within any AE Area/District without floodway (see § 92-19B), no
new construction or development shall be located within the area
measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection's regional office.
(5) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
(6) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 92-31 (RESERVED) § 92-32
88:125

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 92-33. General provisions.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Economy may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 92-34. Variance procedures and conditions.
A. Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Economy
in accordance with the procedures contained in § 92-17 and the
following:
(1) No variance shall be granted within any identified floodplain area
that would cause any increase in BFE. In A Area/Districts, BFEs are
determined using the methodology in § 92-19C.
(2) No variance shall be granted for prohibited activities (Article VI) or
to development which may endanger human life (§ 92-26).
[Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 450]
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Borough of Economy shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Economy shall
notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Economy
shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(a) That there is a good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will:
[1] Neither result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in
flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or
extraordinary public expense;
§ 92-33 (RESERVED) § 92-34
88:127
[2] Nor create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the
public, or conflict with any other applicable state or local
ordinances and regulations.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough of Economy. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to FEMA.
B. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 92-34 ECONOMY CODE § 92-34
88:128
ARTICLE IX
Terminology
§ 92-35. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 92-36. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, and A1-30 that indicates
the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or
greater chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including, but not limited to, the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 92-35 (RESERVED) § 92-36
88:129
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually on the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 92-36 ECONOMY CODE § 92-36
88:130
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 92-18 and 92-19 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal of change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drian leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after August 17, 2015, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures. Any construction started after June 15,
1981, and before August 17, 2015, is subject to the ordinance in effect at the
time the permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within
180 days of permit issuance.[Amended 10-13-2015 by Ord. No. 450]
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 92-36 (RESERVED) § 92-36
88:131
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or before the
Borough's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated June 15, 1981,
whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant with the
regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), dated June 15, 1981,
whichever is later, and as such, would not be required to be compliant with
the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-30, AE, A99 or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit, unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the floodplain administrator. The "actual start" means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as a temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 92-36 ECONOMY CODE § 92-36
88:132
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
"actual start of construction" means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss," regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standards applicable to state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
§ 92-36 (RESERVED) § 92-36
88:133
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5)k, (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 92-36 ECONOMY CODE § 92-36
88:134
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 92-37. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on August 17, 2015, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by the Borough of Economy, Beaver
County, Pennsylvania.
§ 92-37 (RESERVED) § 92-37
88:135
Chapter 96
GARAGE SALES
§ 96-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
GARAGE SALE — All general sales open to the public conducted from
or on a residential premises for the purpose of disposing, by sale, barter
or otherwise, of personal property, including but not limited to all sales
entitled "garage," "lawn," "yard," "attic," "porch," "room," "backyard,"
"patio," "flea market," "rummage sales" or "auctions." This definition shall
not include a situation where no more than five specific items are held out
for sale and all advertisements of such sales specifically name those items
to be sold.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, corporations, charitable or religious
institutions or nonprofit corporations, homeowners' associations,
unincorporated associations and family groups.
PERSONAL PROPERTY — Property which is owned, utilized and maintained
by an individual or members of his or her residence and acquired in the
normal course of living or in maintaining a residence.
§ 96-2. License required.
Whenever three or more persons or family groups conduct a garage sale in
concert with one another, a license must be first secured from the Borough.
§ 96-3. Fees.
The fee for a license pursuant to this chapter shall be set forth from time
to time by resolution of the Borough Council. Such fee shall be paid to the
Borough at the time of submission of the application for such license.
§ 96-4. Application for license.
For the purposes of this chapter, any person desiring to secure a license
to conduct a garage sale shall, at least two weeks prior to the date and
time set for such sale, complete and submit to the Borough Secretary an
application for the issuance of a license and shall pay the required fee. Said
application shall be in such form as the Borough may establish and contain
the following information:
A. The location of the proposed garage sale.
B. The dates and times of such proposed sale.
C. The names of owners of premises on which the proposed garage sale is
to be conducted.
§ 92-37 ECONOMY CODE § 96-4
96:136
§ 96-5. Issuance of license.
The Borough Secretary shall receive the application and accept the
required filing fee and, if upon review of the application the same is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall issue the license, and said Secretary shall
number the applications and licenses in chronological order.
§ 96-6. Nontransferability of license.
No license issued by the Borough shall be transferable by the licensee
to any other person, nor shall the place of the sale be changed without
cancellation of the license and issuance of a new license upon application
and payment of the required fee for the new location.
§ 96-7. Enforcement.
§ 96-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, family group, corporation or other entity conducting any such
sale or similar activity without being properly licensed therefor or who shall
violate or fail to comply with any of the terms and provisions of this chapter
or any other rules, regulations or provisions adopted or approved by the
Council shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and shall be liable for a
fine not to exceed $300, plus costs of prosecution, and each day that such
sale or violation continues without being licensed shall be considered and
shall constitute a separate offense.
D. The name or names of person or persons other than the owners, if any,
who will be conducting said proposed garage sale.
E. A description of signs, handbills or circulars, if any, and the location
thereof within the Borough intended to advertise such proposed garage
sale.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Economy Borough Police
Department.
B. The licensee is hereby made responsible for the maintenance of good
order and decorum on the premises during the hours of such garage
sale.
C. No licensee shall permit any loud or boisterous conduct on the premises
where the sale is being held or permit vehicles to impede passage of the
traffic on any roads or streets in the area of the premises where the sale
is being conducted.
§ 96-4 GARAGE SALES § 96-8
96:137
Chapter 97
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Outdoor burning — See Ch. 62. Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 78.
§ 96-8 ECONOMY CODE § 96-8
97:138
ARTICLE I
Refuse Hauler's Permit
[Adopted 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 182]
§ 97-1. Right to collect garbage granted. [Amended 2-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 274]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Economy shall give and grant unto
certain persons, firms or corporations the exclusive right and privilege to
collect, remove and dispose of garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, paper, brush
and yard waste at such times and under such conditions and for such
periods as determined by the Borough Council of the Borough of Economy
from time to time.
§ 97-2. Permit required; fees.
The persons, firms or corporations who have received the exclusive right
and privilege as hereinabove referred to shall not exercise such right or
privilege unless and until the same have applied for and received from the
Borough of Economy a refuse hauler's permit and shall have paid unto the
Borough Secretary the annual sum of $10 for each such permit issued.
§ 97-3. Schedule of collection, spring and fall cleanup.
Issuance of the aforementioned refuse hauler's permit shall be conditioned
upon the applicant's agreeing to specify a regular scheduled day of
collection weekly, setting forth rates to be charged for the service and
further agreeing to issue timely quarterly billings. Applicants shall also be
required to provide, at applicant's cost, a spring and fall cleanup, limited to
customers only, said cleanup not to include auto parts, building materials,
dirt, cement, gravel, sod, freezers, screens and storm doors.
§ 97-4. Collection by unauthorized persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation who has not applied
for and received the aforesaid permit to collect, remove and dispose of such
garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, paper, brush and yard waste or attempt to
collect, remove and dispose of garbage, trash, rubbish, ashes, paper, brush
and yard waste from any property within the Borough of Economy during
such period of time that such permit is effective.
§ 97-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, firm or corporation who violates any provision of this Article
shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall
be required to pay a fine for the use of the Borough of Economy in the
amount of $300, together with the costs of prosecution, or, in default of such
payment, shall be imprisoned in the Beaver County Jail for a term not in
excess of 90 days.
§ 97-1 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 97-5
97:139

ARTICLE II
Collection and Disposal
[Adopted 5-28-1986 as Ord. No. 26742 ]
§ 97-6. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Sanitation, Garbage and Rubbish
Disposal Ordinance."
§ 97-7. Definitions.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases or words shall
have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context
in which the word is used clearly indicates otherwise:
ASHES — Cold residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke or other
combustible material.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Economy, the Mayor and the Borough
Council.
BOROUGH COLLECTOR — That individual, partnership, firm, corporation
or business entity designated by the Borough Council by means of an
independent contract, as the person having the exclusive right to collect
garbage and rubbish within the Borough, but shall not be construed as
meaning that said person is an employee, official or representative of the
Borough.
COMMERCIAL — The non-business use of premises other than as a
residence.
DWELLING — A building used for residential purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms in a dwelling which room or rooms
have fixed cooking facilities arranged for occupancy by one person, two or
more persons living together, or one family.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of foods.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
RUBBISH — Includes glass, metal, paper, plant growth, wood or similar
nonputrescible solid wastes.
§ 97-8. Type of truck to be used; collector to be designated.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such person as is duly
authorized by the Borough to collect and haul garbage and rubbish of
any nature within or from the Borough or to haul except in a truck
utilizing a packer type waterproof body or in another type of truck
approved by Council.
42.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that it become effective 5-28-1986.
§ 97-6 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 97-8
97:141
§ 97-9. Precollection practices.
B. The Borough Council shall, by resolution, designate one person as the
Borough collector. Said Borough collector shall have the exclusive
privilege and obligation to collect and haul garbage and rubbish within
the Borough.
(1) The privilege may be renewed by Council for such additional period
and upon such terms as Council deems wise with or without
competitive proposals.
(2) Bond or other security in an amount set by Council in a form
satisfactory to Council must be given.
(3) Insurances of a type and in an amount set by Council shall be in
effect.
A. Preparation of garbage and rubbish.
(1) All garbage shall be drained of liquid and wrapped in paper before
being placed in the container.
(2) Newspapers, magazines and other printed matter, not placed in
containers, shall be securely tied in bundles not exceeding 40
pounds in weight.
B. Garbage and rubbish containers.
(1) All garbage and all other rubbish, when possible, shall be placed in
thirty-two-gallon containers, or thirty-two-gallon plastic bags.
(2) Containers containing garbage shall be covered with a lid which
fits securely and prevents access by flies, other insects and
animals.
C. Accumulation of garbage and rubbish.
(1) No person shall place any garbage and rubbish upon any street,
alley, walk or other public place or upon any private property,
except in proper receptacles for collection. Where the garbage and
rubbish is of such size and shape as not to permit its being placed
in containers, it may be set next to the container.
(2) No person shall deposit garbage or rubbish in any stream or body
of water. In no event shall garbage or rubbish be placed on the
property of another resident.
(3) No person, except the occupants of the property on which the
container is placed and an authorized collector shall remove the
lids of the container and/or remove the contents thereof.
(4) Garbage or rubbish of a highly inflammable or explosive nature, or
highly infectious or contagious garbage or rubbish shall not be
stored for collection.
§ 97-8 ECONOMY CODE § 97-9
97:142
§ 97-10. Collection practices.
(5) No person shall allow garbage or rubbish to accumulate so that it
shall or may afford food, harborage or breeding areas for rats, flies
or other vectors, whether that be inside or outside a building or
dwelling.
D. Location of containers.
(1) Garbage and rubbish containers shall be placed for collection at
ground level on the property, not within the cartway of a street or
alley and accessible to and not more than 10 feet from the side or
curb of the street or alley from which collection is made.
(2) It shall be unlawful to permit containers to remain at the curbside
or along a public right-of-way for periods longer than 10 hours
prior to or following regularly scheduled collection days.
A. Garbage and rubbish collected by the Borough Collector will be made at
least once a week except where conditions beyond the control of the
collector prevent collection. Businesses disposing of their own garbage
and rubbish shall provide for collection at intervals short enough to
prevent unsafe, unsightly or unsanitary accumulations of garbage and
rubbish.
B. The Borough Collector will collect all garbage and rubbish placed at the
designated collection site.
C. The following items will not be collected by the Borough collector:
(1) Tree stumps.
(2) Vehicle motors or crank shafts or tires, or auto parts or tires.
(3) Explosives or flammable liquids.
(4) Bricks, concrete or concrete blocks.
(5) Building materials.
(6) Ashes.
D. The following items and others too large for usual pickup will be picked
up weekly by the collector: appliances, furniture, plumbing fixtures,
hot-water heaters, furnaces, radiators, bed springs, bicycles, large
metal toys and similar items.
E. The collection practices of the Borough Collector and any other person
removing garbage and rubbish from the Borough by special permit of
the Borough shall conform to all applicable rules and regulations of the
Borough and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and any contract or
contracts between the parties and all practices shall be subject to
review or approval of Borough Council.
§ 97-9 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 97-11
97:143
§ 97-11. Fees.
§ 97-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this Article
shall, upon conviction therefor, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$100 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that each day's
violation of any of the provisions of this Article shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 97-13. Performance bond.
The Borough collector will post a performance bond in an amount set
by Council and furnish evidence of liability and worker's compensation
coverage satisfactory to Council.
A. Residential.
(1) The fees for collection and disposal of garbage and rubbish from
residential property shall be at a rate set by Council per two thirtytwo-
gallon containers per quarter for the first two containers.
Beginning with the third container there shall be a rate set by
Council per thirty-two-gallon container per quarter. All fees
charged shall be set and approved by Council by resolution. There
shall be reduction of fees and alteration of collection practices for
aged or disabled residents as determined by Council.
(2) The fees herein provided for are owed to and shall be billed by the
collector and paid quarterly by the resident of the dwelling unit to
the collector. The fee for garbage and rubbish disposal shall be the
responsibility of the dwelling unit resident.
(3) For the purposes of this section (§ 97-11), a "quarter" shall be
defined as any one of the following three-month calendar periods:
January, February, March; April, May, June; July, August,
September; October, November, December.
§ 97-11 ECONOMY CODE § 97-13
97:144
ARTICLE III
Waste Flow Control
[Adopted 7-13-1993 as Ord. No. 335]
§ 97-14. Definitions.
Unless the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms used in
this Article shall have the following meanings:
ACT 101 — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, Act of July 28, 1988, P.L. 528, No. 101, as now or hereafter amended.43
DISPOSAL — The deposition, injection, dumping, spilling, leakage or
placing of solid waste into or on the land or water in a manner such that
the solid waste or a constituent of the solid waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air or is discharged to the water of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
LANDFILL — A facility using land for disposing of municipal waste. The
facility includes land affected during the lifetime of operations, including
but not limited to areas where disposal or processing activities actually
occur, support facilities, borrow areas, offices, equipment sheds, air and
water pollution control and treatment systems, access roads and
transportation and storage facilities. The term does not include
construction/demolition waste landfills or a facility for the land application
of sewage sludge.
MUNICIPALITY — Any city, Borough, incorporated town, township or home
rule municipality located in the county.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material, resulting from operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments and from community activities
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
in the Solid Waste Management Act from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or
air pollution control facility. The term does not include source-separated
recyclable materials.
MUNICIPAL WASTE LANDFILL — Any facility that is designed, operated
or maintained for the disposal of municipal waste, whether or not such
facility possesses a permit from the Department under the Solid Waste
Management Act. The term shall not include any facility that is used
exclusively for disposal of construction/demolition waste or sludge from
sewage treatment plants or water supply treatment plants.
PERMIT — Permit No. issued by the Department of Environmental
Protection for the operation of the landfill by the operator.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
43.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 97-14 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 97-14
97:145
Federal Government or agency, state institution or agency or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
RECYCLING — The collection, separation, recovery and sale or reuse of
metals, glass, paper, leaf waste, plastics and other materials which would
otherwise be disposed or processed as municipal waste or the mechanized
separation and treatment of municipal waste (other than through
combustion) and creation and recovery of reusable material other than a
fuel for the operation of energy.
SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT ACT — Act 97 of 1980, 35 P.S. § 6018.101
et seq., and the Department of Environmental Protection regulations
promulgated thereunder.
§ 97-15. Licensing of collectors and/or transporters.
Not later than 120 days after the effective date of County Ordinance No.
082092-SWM, all persons collecting and/or transporting waste within the
municipality shall be required to obtain a county license pursuant to County
Ordinance No. 082092-SWM.
§ 97-16. Disposal at designated municipal waste processing or
disposal facilities.
All municipal waste collectors and transporters shall deliver and dispose of
all municipal waste generated within the municipality, other than recyclable
materials as designated in the municipality's recycling ordinance, at the
site(s) designated by the municipality. The Borough of Economy has already,
and will in the future, contract for a period of five years with the option to
renew said contract for an additional five years.
§ 97-17. Regulations.
All collectors and transporters shall comply with all county rules and
regulations adopted by the county and this municipality pursuant to Act
101, County Ordinance No. 082092-SWM and this Article.
§ 97-18. New municipal waste processing or disposal facilities
prohibited; continuation of existing facilities.
A. Prohibition of new municipal waste processing and disposal facilities.
No person, other than the county, the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or this municipality, shall use or permit
to be used any property owned or occupied by that person within the
municipality as a new municipal waste processing or disposal facility
for the processing or disposal of waste generated within Beaver County
without the express written approval of the county and the Department
of Environmental Protection (DEP).
§ 97-14 ECONOMY CODE § 97-18
97:146
§ 97-19. Unlawful activity, nuisance.
§ 97-20. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $300 or by a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both.
§ 97-21. Injunction; concurrent remedies.
B. Existing facilities. The prohibition set forth in § 97-18A of this Article
shall not interfere with the operation of any existing facility, provided
that:
(1) The owner/operator of the facility has an approved permit or has
submitted a permit application to DEP prior to April 9, 1990.
(2) The facility does not accept municipal waste from any sources
within the county other than those authorized by the facility's
permit.
C. Recycling. The prohibition set forth in § 97-18A of this Article shall not
interfere with the operation of any program adopted by the municipality
for recycling.
A. Unlawful conduct. It shall be unlawful for any person to:
(1) Violate, cause or assist in the violation of any provision of this
Article, County Ordinance No. 082092-SWM or any rule, regulation
or order promulgated by the county pursuant to County Ordinance
No. 082092-SWM.
(2) Cause to be processed, treated or disposed of municipal waste
generated within this municipality at a facility other than those
contracted disposal facilities, pursuant to the Borough of
Economy's waste disposal agreement and the County Solid Waste
Management Plan.
(3) Collect or transport municipal waste generated within this
municipality without a valid county license.
(4) Hinder, obstruct, prevent or interfere with this municipality in the
performance of its duties under this Article and Act 101 or any
enforcement of this Article.
(5) Act in any matter that is contrary to Act 101, the county's municipal
waste management plan, County Ordinance No. 082092-SWM, this
Article or any county or municipality rule or regulation
promulgated pursuant to this Article or County Ordinance No.
082092-SWM or the terms of any licenses issued by the county.
B. Public nuisance. Any unlawful conduct set forth in § 97-19A hereof shall
constitute a public nuisance.
§ 97-18 GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE § 97-21
97:147
§ 97-22. Construal of provisions.
The terms and provisions of this Article are to be liberally construed in para
materia with County Ordinance No. 082092-SWM and Act 101.
A. Restraining violations. In addition to any other remedy provided in this
Article, the municipality may institute a suit in equity if unlawful
conduct or a public nuisance exists as defined in this Article for an
injunction to restrain a violation of this Article or rules, regulations or
order issued pursuant to this Article or County Ordinance No.
082092-SWM. In addition to an injunction, the court may impose
penalties as authorized by § 97-20 hereof.
B. Concurrent remedies. The penalties and remedies prescribed by this
Article shall be deemed concurrent; the existence or exercise of any
remedy shall not prevent the municipality from exercising any other
remedy provided by this Article or otherwise provided at law or equity.
§ 97-21 ECONOMY CODE § 97-22
97:148
Chapter 100
HANDICAPPED PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parking regulations — See Ch. 175.
§ 100-1. Restricted handicapped residential parking.
Any Borough resident who has been issued a handicapped or severely
disabled veteran license plate by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or
on whose behalf said license plate has been issued, pursuant to § 1338 or
§ 1342 of the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code, shall be eligible for the
installation, in front of said person's residence solely for said person's use,
of a sign indicating that parking in such space is restricted to such person's
vehicle bearing a handicapped or severely disabled veteran license plate,
which eligibility shall expire 12 months from the date such sign is installed.
Application for such restricted parking sign shall be made to the Chief of
Police.
§ 100-2. Application form and content.
Application for a restricted handicapped or severely disabled parking space
shall be made on a form provided by the Economy Borough Public Safety
Committee. The application information shall include the identity of the
handicapped person or severely disabled veteran and said person's place of
residence and shall be accompanied by documentation evidencing issuance
of a handicapped or severely disabled veteran plate by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
§ 100-3. Criteria for approval of applications.
A. In reviewing the application the Economy Borough Public Safety
Committee shall take into consideration the following factors:
(1) Impact on general safety;
(2) Impact on traffic flow;
(3) Impact on neighboring properties;
(4) Nature of disability;
(5) Availability of off-street parking, garage and/or driveway; and
(6) Verification of application in general.
B. Following its review of the application and consideration of the above
factors, the Public Safety Committee shall submit its recommendation
to Borough Council for final determination as to whether the
§ 97-22 HANDICAPPED PARKING § 100-3
100:149
§ 100-4. Annual certification.
§ 100-5. Failure to file completed application.
Failure to file a completed initial application or a timely application for
renewal shall result in such application being denied or not renewed. in
the event that an individual fails to file a completed application for
recertification within the time allowed, that is, on an annual basis prior
to expiration of the individuals eligibility, the right to such sign shall be
forfeited and the sign shall be removed by the Borough.
§ 100-6. Removal of sign.
In addition to removal of the sign for failure to properly apply for renewal,
a handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking restriction sign may be
removed after notice to the applicant if, upon investigation, the Borough
determines either that the applicant has moved; or, that the privilege is
being abused in a manner inconsistent with its intent. The notice to the
individual shall state the reason or reasons for the anticipated removal
of the sign and shall give the handicapped individual or severely disabled
veteran 20 days in which to request a hearing before the Public Safety
Committee.
§ 100-7. Installation of sign.
Upon approval of the application, the Chief of Police shall refer all
applications for handicapped or severely disabled veteran restricted
parking which meet the requirements of this chapter to the Economy
application shall be approved or rejected. The application shall not be
approved if off-street parking is available to the applicant unless the
same cannot be utilized or if an undue hardship is created for the other
residents parking in the area.
A. Each renewal period shall be 12 months.
B. Application for renewal must be filed with the Chief of Police no later
than 30 days before the date the prior eligibility is due to expire.
C. The Chief of Police will not accept the application for renewal unless it
is also accompanied by a sworn document containing the following
averments:
(1) The applicant continues to be disabled as evidenced by
documentation submitted and signed by applicant's treating
physician.
(2) The applicant continues to drive an automobile or is being driven
by another identified individual because of applicant's disability.
(3) The applicant resides at the same address.
§ 100-3 ECONOMY CODE § 100-7
100:150
Borough Road Department for installation of a restricted handicapped or
severely disabled veteran parking sign.
§ 100-8. Violations and penalties.
An individual who submits a false application to the Economy Borough
Public Safety Committee shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine not exceeding $600 and shall forfeit his or her privileges to a
handicapped parking sign for a period of 12 months.
Chapter 102
HUNTING AND SPORTING ASSOCIATIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 85.
§ 102-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PISTOLS AND RIFLES — The same meaning ascribed to them in the Penal
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association, club or
organization. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing
penalties, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall mean the
partners or members thereof and, as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
§ 102-2. Purpose; activities involving firearms restricted.
For the purpose of securing the personal safety and property of residents
of the Borough of Economy and in order to avoid danger to the life and
limb of said residents and to protect said residents from offensive noises,
it shall hereafter be unlawful for any person to maintain or establish in the
Borough of Economy, an area devoted to hunting or sporting association
activities, including target practice, rifle ranges, skeet shooting and other
similar activities involving the discharge of pistols, rifles or other firearms,
where said areas are situate in residential neighborhoods or within one mile
from a residential neighborhood, dwelling, school, places of public assembly
or any public or private roadway or within five miles from any other sporting
or shooting association area.
§ 100-7 HUNTING AND SPORTING ASSOCIATIONS § 102-3
102:151
§ 102-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter, upon summary
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in
default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 90 days. Each day's violation shall constitute a
separate offense hereunder.
§ 102-4. Existing associations.
This chapter shall apply to hunting or sportsmen's clubs or associations
presently in existence and operation.
Chapter 108
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumps — See Ch. 78.
Fences — See Ch. 81.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 108-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 108-2. License required. [Amended 9-12-63 by Ord. No. 69;
10-17-68 by Ord. No. 116]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNK — Any old, used or secondhand materials of any kind, including
cloth, rags, clothing, paper, rubbish, bottles, rubber, iron, brass, copper
or other metal, furniture, used motor vehicles or the parts thereof
or other articles which from its worn condition renders it practically
useless for the purpose for which it was made.
JUNK DEALER — Any person, as hereinafter defined, who shall engage
in the business of selling, buying and dealing in junk, including the
operation of an auto wrecking or salvage yard or business; or any
person who shall keep or store on his or other premises one or more
automobiles which are unlicensed, which do not have a current
inspection sticker, which are inoperable or have been stripped or
dismantled.[Amended 9-12-1965 by Ord. No. 69; 10-17-1968 by
Ord. No. 116; 5-11-1976 by Ord. No. 180]
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, firm or corporation.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 102-3 ECONOMY CODE § 108-2
108:152
§ 108-3. Applications.
§ 108-4. Acknowledgment before notary public; bonds.
A. No person shall from the date of this chapter hereafter in the Borough
of Economy keep, conduct or maintain any building, structure, yard or
place for keeping, storing or piling in commercial quantities, whether
temporarily, irregularly or continually, or for the buying or selling at
retail or wholesale or dealing in junk, as herein defined, whether with a
fixed place of business or as an itinerant peddler, without first having
obtained and paid for a junk dealer license.
B. No person shall, from the date herein, in the Borough of Economy keep,
store or accumulate one or more automobiles which are unlicensed,
which do not have a current inspection sticker, which are inoperable or
have been stripped or dismantled on his premises or premises of
another for a period exceeding 30 days without first having obtained
and paid for a junk dealer license. This regulation is not meant to apply
to operable antique motor vehicles, farm tractors, racers and other
vehicles not requiring state inspection. [Amended 5-11-1976 by Ord.
No. 180]
A. Every applicant for a license to engage in the business of junk dealer
shall file with the Borough Secretary a written application upon a form
prepared and provided by the Borough, signed by the applicant or
applicants. Said application shall state:
(1) The names and residences of the applicants, if an individual,
partnership or firm, or the names of the principal officers and their
residences, if the applicant is an association or corporation.
(2) The length of time such applicant or applicants, if an individual,
firm or partnership, or the manager or person in charge, if the
applicant is a firm or corporation, has or have resided in the
Borough of Economy, his or their place of previous employment,
whether married or single, whether he or they, or any of them, have
been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor and, if so, what offense,
when and in what court.
(3) Whether the applicant or applicants or officers or manager of the
applicant had been employed by a junk dealer or had been a junk
dealer as defined herein.
(4) The detailed nature of the business to be conducted and the kind of
materials to be collected, bought, sold or otherwise handled.
(5) The premises where such business is to be located or carried on.
B. Each application shall contain an agreement that the applicant accepts
the license, if granted, upon the condition that it may be suspended or
revoked by the Council upon conviction of violation of this chapter.
§ 108-2 JUNK DEALERS § 108-4
108:153
§ 108-5. Inspections; specifications.
A. Every application for a license to engage in the business of junk dealer
shall be signed and acknowledged before a notary public or other
officer authorized to administer oaths.
B. Such application shall be accompanied by a bond to the Borough of
Economy, approved as to form by the Borough Solicitor, in the penal
sum of $2,500 guaranteeing that in the event that the dealer quits
business or vacates or abandons the auto wrecking or junkyard, said
yard will be cleared of all junk, including automobiles, parts thereof and
all debris. Said bond shall be secured by a judgment note to the
Borough of Economy in the amount of $2,500 which shall be signed by
the dealer and his wife, if married, where the premises on which the
business is located are owned by the applicant. In the event that said
premises are not owned by the applicant, then the required judgment
note shall be executed by the owners of said premises, as well as by the
applicant dealer. A cash bond may be posted in lieu of the judgment
note. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
A. The Borough Secretary shall report such application to the Mayor,
Health Officer, if existing, Fire Chief and Building Inspector, who shall
inspect or cause to be inspected such premises to determine whether it
complies with all laws, ordinances, rules and regulations. Said premises
and all structures thereon shall be so situated and constructed that the
business of junk dealer may be carried on in a sanitary manner, shall
contain no fire hazards and shall be arranged so that thorough
inspection may be made at any time by the proper health, fire, building
and police authorities.
B. No building shall be used for the business of junk dealing unless the
walls shall be fireproof and the floor constructed of concrete or other
fireproof material.
C. Each of the premises upon which the business of junk dealer or auto
wrecking is to be carried on shall be enclosed by a cyclone or wire mesh
fence of at least twelve-gauge thickness, which fence shall be at least
six feet in height. Where any side of the premises adjoins a residential
dwelling now existing or constructed in the future, and said dwelling is
within 150 feet of said side, a visual barrier shall be erected along the
adjoining side for a reasonable distance, the top of which shall be no
less than seven feet from the ground with the provision that a one-foot
space will be permitted between the ground and bottom of the barrier.
Said visual barrier, if desired by the dealer, may be formed by trees or
vines of the required height. If, however, a fence is constructed, it shall
be of solid material. The aforementioned fence or visual barrier, where
required, shall be completely constructed within one year from the date
hereof. Said fence or barrier shall be maintained in good condition at all
times. No article shall be piled so as to protrude above said fence or
barrier. In the interest of vehicular traffic safety, the aforesaid fence
shall be set back at least six feet from any road, street or right-of-way.
§ 108-4 ECONOMY CODE § 108-5
108:154
§ 108-6. Distance from residential dwellings.
Junkyards now in operation shall be at least 150 feet from any existing
residential dwelling, excluding that of the licensee or agent. Any person
who makes application after the date hereof for a junkyard license covering
premises not now used for the operation of a junkyard shall be required to
establish and maintain his business at least 300 feet from any residential
dwelling then existing, excluding that of the licensee or agent.
§ 108-7. Issuance of license.
Upon the filing of the application and bond, as provided in the preceding
section, the Borough Secretary shall, upon receiving a report of approval of
such application, after investigation and the payment to the Borough of the
license fee hereinafter provided, issue to the applicant a license to engage
in business as provided in § 108-2. No license shall be refused except for
a specified reason. All licenses shall be numbered in the order in which
they are issued and shall state clearly the location of the junk business,
auto wrecking or auto salvage business, the date of issuance and expiration
of the licenses and the name and address of the licensee. No applicant
to whom a license has been refused shall make further application until
a period of at least six months shall have elapsed since the last previous
rejection, unless he can show that the reason for such rejection no longer
exists.
§ 108-8. Fee; duplicate license.
§ 108-9. Posting.
Every holder of a junk dealer's license shall at all times keep said license
posted while in force in a conspicuous place on the premises described
in the application for such license. It shall be unlawful for any person to
post it upon the premises other than those mentioned in the application or
knowingly to deface or destroy any such license.
However, said fence or barrier shall be set back at least 15 feet from
the intersection of any roads, streets or rights-of-way.
A. Every junk dealer shall pay an annual license fee of $75 for the license
year or any portion thereof. All licenses shall be issued as of January 1,
1963, and shall continue in force for a period of one year, unless sooner
revoked.
B. Whenever a license shall be lost or destroyed without fault on the part
of the holder or his agent or employee, a duplicate license in lieu
thereof under the original application and bond shall be issued by the
Borough Secretary upon the filing of an affidavit setting forth
circumstances of the loss or destruction and upon the payment of the
sum of $5.
§ 108-5 JUNK DEALERS § 108-10
108:155
§ 108-10. Transfer of license.
Every junk dealer's license shall designate the place of business in or from
which the junk dealer receiving such license shall be authorized to carry on
such business. No licensee shall remove his or its place of business from the
place designated in the license until a written permit has been secured from
the Borough upon approval of the Council, and the same shall have been
endorsed upon the license. All signs required by § 108-9 of this chapter shall
be altered to contain the new address.
§ 108-11. Conduct of business; premises subject to inspection;
vehicles.
§ 108-12. Rules and regulations.
The Council shall formulate reasonable rules and regulations relating to the
conduct of the business of junk dealing which shall protect the health of the
community. No junk dealer shall violate any such rule or regulation.
A. No junk dealer shall carry on the business at or from any other place
than the one designated in the license therefor unless approved as
aforesaid; nor shall said business be carried on after such license has
been revoked or has expired.
B. The contents of the premises of every junk dealer shall be arranged so
as not to constitute a fire hazard or a nuisance. The premises of every
junk dealer shall be subject to inspection by the proper municipal
authorities at any time during business hours.
C. All vehicles without wheels shall be set up on concrete blocks.
A. In general, such premises shall, at all times, be maintained so as not to
constitute a nuisance or a menace to the health of the community or of
residents nearby or a place for the breeding of rodents and vermin.
B. No garbage or other organic waste and no paper, rubbish, rags or other
flammable articles or materials shall be stored in auto wrecking or auto
salvage yards or places of business.
C. Whenever any motor vehicle shall be received in such premises as junk,
all gasoline shall be drained and removed therefrom.
D. The manner of storage and arrangement of junk and the drainage
facilities of the premises shall be such as to prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water upon the premises and to facilitate access for firefighting
purposes.
E. Such premises shall not be open for business nor shall any work be
done therein in connection with the storage, processing and
transporting or removal of junk at any time on the first day of the week,
commonly called "Sunday," or on any other day of the week before 7:00
a.m. All work shall cease at sundown, except for sales.
§ 108-10 ECONOMY CODE § 108-13
108:156
§ 108-13. Ledger. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Each junk dealer shall keep and maintain a daily ledger containing the
description of any part bought or sold sufficient in content for the
identification of the item. Any suspicious article offered to the dealer for
sale shall be reported immediately. The records shall, at all reasonable
times, be open to the inspection of any police officer, the Mayor, any
District Justice or any person duly authorized, in writing, for such purpose
by the Mayor, any District Justice or the Council, who shall exhibit such
authorization to the junk merchant, his agent or employee. No entry in such
records shall be changed, erased, obliterated or defaced.
§ 108-14. Destruction of identity of property; sale of secondhand
items.
No licensee, either acting for himself or itself or by or through his or its
agent or employees, shall wreck, tear down, paint or otherwise destroy the
identity of or dispose of or allow to be taken out of his or its possession
any secondhand motor vehicle, part or accessory purchased or otherwise
secured from other than an insurance company, insurance adjuster or
established dealer until 48 hours after receipt thereof; provided, however,
that the Mayor may, after proper report is made to him, grant special
permission to a licensee permitting a secondhand motor vehicle, part or
accessory to be sold or disposed of and delivered to another when the
Mayor has investigated and determined that there is no question as to the
ownership of such secondhand motor vehicle, part or accessory.
§ 108-15. Removal of serial number.
No person shall knowingly buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have
in his possession any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which the
manufacturer's serial number or any other number or identification mark
has been removed, defaced, covered, altered or destroyed for the purpose
of concealing or misrepresenting the identity of such vehicle, part or
accessory. Every person to whom is offered for sale, storage or wreckage
any motor vehicle, part or accessory from which has been removed,
defaced, covered, altered or destroyed the manufacturer's serial number or
any other number or identification mark shall immediately notify the Police
Department of such offer of sale.
§ 108-16. Report of purchases.
Every junk dealer, upon being served with a written notice to so do by a
member of the Police Department, shall report to the Mayor an accurate
description of all goods, articles or things purchased or received by him in
the course of business of a junk merchant at such time and during such
period of time specified in the notice, as contained in the dealer's existing
records.
§ 108-13 JUNK DEALERS § 108-17
108:157
§ 108-17. Summonses. [Amended 4-27-67 by Ord. No. 111;
2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Upon an information being made, in writing, by any municipal official or
resident of the Borough alleging a violation by a licensee of the provisions
of this chapter, the Mayor or a Justice of the Peace shall issue a summons
to such licensee. The Mayor or a District Justice shall proceed to hear
the matter, after giving proper notice of a hearing; and if he finds the
junk dealer guilty of the violation or violations charged, he shall levy the
appropriate fine and may suspend said junk dealer's license until said dealer
complies with the terms of this chapter.
§ 108-18. Abandoned wrecking yards.
In the event that an automobile wrecking yard, whether licensed or
unlicensed, is abandoned for a period of 90 days or more, said automobile
wrecking yard shall constitute a nuisance, subject to abatement in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code.
§ 108-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-11-1976 by Ord. No.
181; 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Any person who, by himself, his clerk, agent or employee, shall conduct the
business of a junk dealer as herein defined without the license required by
this chapter or shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who,
having had his license revoked, shall continue as a junk dealer may, upon
summary conviction thereof, be subjected to a fine or penalty of not more
than $300 for each day during which said violation shall continue, together
with the costs of prosecution, and, in default of the payment of such fine and
costs of such prosecution, shall be imprisoned in the county jail for a period
of 90 days.
Chapter 111
LEASED PREMISES
§ 111-1. Purpose.
It has been found by the Borough Council of the Borough of Economy to be
to the best interest of the community and to the health, safety and welfare
of the residents thereof if the Borough adopts a procedure whereby the
names and addresses of persons who lease or rent leased premises in the
Borough can be compiled so as to aid in the establishment of a reliable and
complete record of all persons residing in the Borough for use in imposing
appropriate taxes applicable equally to all residents and for other lawful
purposes generally.
§ 108-17 ECONOMY CODE § 111-2
111:158
§ 111-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEASED PREMISES — A home or building or any part thereof, an
apartment, a mobile home or a mobile home lot in the Borough of Economy,
leased or rented to any person.
§ 111-3. Duty to register.
It shall be the duty of all owners of leased premises and of all persons who
assist in the rental process as agents, brokers or otherwise in the leasing
or rental of leased premises within the limits of the Borough of Economy
and who provide or lease premises for human habitation to register with
the Borough Secretary at the Borough office the names and addresses
of all persons who have leased or rented or otherwise arranged for the
occupation of leased promises as defined herein
§ 111-4. Maintenance of registration.
§ 111-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $300, together with costs of the proceedings, or, upon default of
payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for a term
of not more than 30 days.
Chapter 114
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew - See Ch. 69.
A. The registration of the names and addresses of the persons presently
occupying leased premises shall be made by the owners and by all
persons who assist in the rental process as agents, brokers or otherwise
within one month after the effective date of this chapter.
B. The registration of the names of every subsequent tenant, lessee or
renter of any such leased premises shall be made by the owners of such
premises or by all persons who assist in the rental process as agents,
brokers or otherwise within one month from the date of occupancy of
such leased premises by such subsequent tenant or lessee or renter.
C. Registration shall be on a form available from the Borough Secretary.
§ 111-2 LOITERING § 114-1
114:159
§ 114-1. Definitions. [Added 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LOITER — Encompasses, but not necessarily limited to, one or more of the
following acts:
§ 114-2. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
§ 114-3. Violations and penalties.
Obstruction of the free, unhampered passage of pedestrians or
vehicles.
A.
Obstructing, molesting or interfering with any person lawfully upon any
street, park or other public place.
B.
Remaining idle in essentially one location without being able to
establish having a legitimate purpose in so remaining idle or, by general
conduct, exhibiting the absence of a lawful purpose in so remaining
idle. In determining whether or not a legitimate or lawful purpose
for remaining idle has been established, consideration shall be given
to the fact that the person takes flight upon appearance of a law
enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself or manifestly endeavors
to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other
circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall,
prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person
an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would
otherwise be warranted by requesting him to identify himself and
explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an
offense under this section if the law enforcement officer did not comply
with this procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by
the person is true and, if believed by the officer at the time, would have
dispelled the alarm or immediate concern.
C.
Refusing to move on when so requested by a peace officer or other
officer having the power of arrest, provided that such officer has
reasonably exercised his discretion under the circumstances in order to
preserve or promote public peace and order.
D.
A. Loiter on foot, in a motor vehicle or on a bicycle upon any of the
sidewalks, streets, pavements, crossings, street corners, bridges,
highways, alleys or parks in this Borough or at or near the entrance to a
church or any public place, so as to interfere with or obstruct or tend to
interfere with or obstruct the free passage of citizens or travelers along
any of said thoroughfares or into or out of any of said places.
B. Loiter upon private property within the limits of this Borough without
the consent of the owners thereof.
§ 114-1 ECONOMY CODE § 114-3
114:160
Chapter 119
MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92. Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 119-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — Economy Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
HEALTH AUTHORITY — The legally designated health authority of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Department of Health.
LICENSE — Written approval, in whatever form, as issued by the
Pennsylvania Department of Health, authorizing a person to operate and
maintain a mobile home park.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling, which may be
towed on its own running gear, and which may be temporarily or
permanently affixed to real estate, used for nontransient residential
purposes and constructed with the same or similar electrical, plumbing and
sanitary facilities as immobile homes.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park constructed
with the necessary utility connections, patio and other appurtenances
necessary for the erection thereon of a single mobile home and for the
exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, trust, partnership, public or private
association or corporation or other entity.
SERVICE OR RECREATIONAL BUILDING — A structure housing
operational office, recreational, park maintenance and other facilities built
to conform to required local standards.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, for each and every violation, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and costs of prosecution
and, in default of payment of any such fine and costs, to imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 90 days. [Amended 10-8-1974 by Ord. No.
162; 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
B. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 114-3 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-1
119:161
SEWER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the drain outlet of the mobile home to the inlet of the corresponding
sewer riser pipe.
SEWER RISER PIPE — That portion of the sewer lateral which extends
vertical to the ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home space.
WATER CONNECTION — Consists of all pipes, fittings and appurtenances
from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system
within the mobile home.
WATER RISER PIPE — That portion of the water service pipe which extends
vertically to the ground elevation and terminates at a designated spot at
each mobile home lot.
WATER SERVICE PIPE — Consists of all pipes, fittings, valves and
appurtenances from the water main of the park distributing system to the
water outlet of the distribution system within the mobile home.
§ 119-2. Permits.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, operate, alter or extend
any mobile home park within the limits of Economy Borough unless he
holds a valid permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of Health in
the name of the owner of such mobile home park for the specific
construction, operation, alteration or extension proposed and also a
permit issued by the Borough.
B. All applications for permits shall be made by the owner of the mobile
home park or his authorized representative in accordance with
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of Health regulations.
C. A copy of the Department of Health application shall be concurrently
filed with Economy Borough Building Inspector, and the applicant shall
also submit an application to the Building Inspector for a permit to
operate a mobile home park in Economy Borough.
D. Upon receipt of such application, the Building Inspector shall forthwith
inspect the applicant's proposed park to determine compliance with the
provisions of this chapter. After favorable determination and upon
being furnished a copy of the permit issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health to the applicant, said officer shall issue a mobile
home park permit to the applicant, which shall be valid for a period of
one year.
E. Renewal permits for a like period shall be issued by said officer upon
receipt of proof by the applicant that his park continues to meet the
standards of Pennsylvania Department of Health and this chapter.
F. Each application for a new or renewal permit hereunder shall be
accompanied by payment of an inspection fee in an amount equal to $2
per mobile home lot, with a minimum fee of $20, regardless of the
number of mobile home lots. In the event that the Building Inspector is
§ 119-1 ECONOMY CODE § 119-2
119:162
§ 119-3. Registration.
required to perform additional or unusual services in determining said
application, the cost of such additional service shall be borne by the
applicant. Such charges shall be levied whether or not the application
is approved. [Amended 6-12-1984 by Ord. No. 255]
G. Mobile home parks in existence upon the effective date of this chapter
shall be required to meet only the standards of the Pennsylvania
Department of Health as a prerequisite to the issuance of a permit, and
all other minimum standards prescribed herein shall be applicable only
to those parks which are constructed or expanded after the effective
date hereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any mobile home park
within the limits of Economy Borough unless he holds a certificate of
registration issued annually by the Pennsylvania Department of Health
in the name of such person for the specific mobile home park. Proof of
such registration shall be furnished the Building Inspector by no later
than February 1 of each year or at the time of application for a new or
renewal of Borough permit to be issued hereunder.
B. Every person holding a permit for mobile home park shall send notice,
in writing, to the Pennsylvania Department of Health and the Borough
Building Inspector within 10 days after having sold, transferred, given
away or otherwise disposed of interest in or control of any mobile home
park. If the certificate of registration is transferred by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health, proof of such transfer shall be furnished the
Borough Building Inspector prior to transfer of any Borough permit or
license issued hereunder to such new owner or assignee.
C. Whenever, upon inspection of any mobile home park, it is determined
that conditions or practices exist which violate any provision of this
chapter, any amendment thereto or any regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the Borough shall give notice in writing, which notice may be
served by certified mail, personal service on owner or authorized
representative in charge of the premises, or in the event that service
cannot be had by either specified manner, then by posting such notice
in a conspicuous place upon the premises. Such notice shall advise the
person to whom the permit and license are issued to operate such
mobile home park the nature of the violation, the Borough ordinance
section and number which are being violated, the penalty for such
violation and a reasonable time to correct the conditions, not to be less
than five nor more than 30 days. Failure to comply with such notice
shall result in immediate revocation of license to operate in Economy
Borough, and the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to close
down, terminate and issue a cease and desist order to any mobile home
park which fails to obey notice of violation given hereunder.
D. In the event that any mobile home park fails to comply with lawful
notice as herein provided and fails to correct any violative condition
§ 119-2 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-3
119:163
§ 119-4. Inspections.
§ 119-5. Environmental, open space and access requirements.
after notice, the right to operate within the Borough may be suspended
or revoked, and the Borough may require the posting of bond by
owners of such mobile home in an amount to be determined by the
Borough to insure the compliance of any violating permit holder with
the regulations of the Borough or any other governmental body and
may require sufficient surety to secure any such bond.
A. An authorized representative of Economy Borough may inspect any
mobile home park at reasonable intervals and at reasonable times to
determine compliance with the terms of this chapter.
B. The Borough Building Inspector is hereby designated as the person to
make such inspections. Another or additional inspectors may also be
authorized to make inspections or additional inspections at the
discretion of the Borough Council.
C. The Building Inspector may, in his discretion, give notice for violations
of this chapter and issue notice thereof, without express authority from
the Borough Council in each instance.
A. A mobile home park shall have a gross area of at least five contiguous
acres of land.
B. The location of all mobile home parks shall comply with the following
minimum requirements. Mobile home parks shall be:
(1) Free from adverse influence by swamps, marshes, garbage or
rubbish disposal areas or other potential breeding places for
insects and rodents.
(2) Not subject to flooding.
(3) Not subject to any hazard or nuisance, such as excessive noise,
vibration, smoke, toxic matter, radiation, heat, odor or glare.
C. Site drainage requirements.
(1) The ground surface in all parts of every park shall be graded and
equipped to drain all surface water in a safe, efficient manner.
(2) Surface water collectors and other bodies of standing water
capable of breeding mosquitoes and other insects shall be
eliminated or controlled in a manner approved by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health.
(3) Wastewater from any plumbing fixture or sanitary sewer line shall
not be deposited upon the ground surface in any part of a mobile
home park.
§ 119-3 ECONOMY CODE § 119-5
119:164
D. Soil and ground cover requirements.
(1) Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved or
covered with stone screenings or other solid material or protected
with a vegetative growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion
and the emanation of dust during dry weather.
(2) Park grounds at all times shall be maintained free of vegetative
growth which is poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects or
other pests harmful to man.
E. Park areas for nonresidential uses.
(1) No part of any park shall be used for nonresidential purposes,
except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and wellbeing
of park residents' use and for the management and
maintenance of the park.
(2) Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting
the sale of a mobile home located on a mobile home lot and
connected to utilities.
F. Required setbacks, buffer strips and screening.
(1) All mobile homes shall be located at least 25 feet from any park
property boundary line abutting upon a public street or highway
and at least 15 feet from other park property boundary lines.
(2) There shall be a minimum distance of 15 feet between an individual
mobile home, including accessory structures attached thereto and
adjoining pavement of a park street or common areas and
structures.
(3) All mobile home parks located adjacent to industrial or commercial
land uses shall be required to provide screening so as to block out
view of such areas. Such screening may be of fencing or of natural
growth or a combination of fences and natural growth. All such
screening shall be of a minimum height of six feet and shall be
placed on the boundary line separating the park and such adjacent
nonresidential uses.
G. Erection and placement of mobile homes.
(1) Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by at least 15 feet on all sides.
(2) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected
around the entire base of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall
provide sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of
the structure.
H. Park street system.
§ 119-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-5
119:165
(1) A safe and convenient vehicular access shall be provided from
abutting public streets and roads.
(2) The entrance road or area connecting the park with a public street
or road shall have a minimum pavement width of 34 feet, for a
minimum distance of 25 feet.
(3) Surface roadways shall be of adequate width to accommodate
anticipated traffic and, in any case, shall meet the following
minimum requirements:
(a) Where parking is permitted on both sides of the street, a
minimum width of 34 feet will be required.
(b) A minimum road pavement width of 28 feet will be required
where parking is limited to one side.
(c) A minimum road pavement width of 20 feet will be required
where parking is not permitted on either side of the street.
(d) Dead-end streets shall be provided at the closed end, with a
turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80
feet.
(4) All parks shall be furnished with lighting units so spaced and
equipped with luminaries placed at such mounting heights as will
provide average levels of illumination for the safe movement of
pedestrians and vehicles at night.
(5) Street construction and design standards.
(a) Preparation of subgrade. All boulders, organic material, soft
clay, spongy material and other objectionable material shall be
removed and replaced with approved material. The subgrade
shall be properly shaped, each five-inch layer rolled and each
five-inch layer uniformly compacted to conform with the
accepted cross section and grades.
(b) Construction of base.
[1] One-half (1/2) to one-fourth (1/4) inch of choker dust shall
be spread over entire cartway. The base is to be six-inch
screened limestone or slag, conforming to State
Department of Highways specifications, placed by truck.
Number 4A stone is to be used, and no sandstone or gravel
is authorized. The base is to be placed in one six-inch
course and rolled with a three-wheel minimum ten-ton
roller. The base is to be shaped to the desired cross section
and all excessive loose material removed. Greater base
may be required where circumstances necessitate. After
the coarse aggregate has been thoroughly choked and set
by the rolling above described, choker, stone in an amount
that will completely fill the voids shall be applied gradually
§ 119-5 ECONOMY CODE § 119-5
119:166
over the surface, and rolling shall be continued while the
choker stone is being spread so that the jarring effect of
the roller will cause the small stone to settle into the voids
of the coarse aggregate. The surface will then be swept.
[2] The base is to be approved by the Borough Council or the
Borough Engineer before placing the wearing course.
Weight slips shall be shown to the Borough Council or
Borough Engineer to show the amount of stone used.
(c) Construction of wearing course. The entire cartway shall be
covered with a tack coat of MC-1 asphalt or with its equivalent
approximately thirty-five hundredths (0.35) gallon per square
yard. The wearing course shall be constructed according to
Pennsylvania Department of Highways specifications for a CP 2
top, with RC 5 asphalt or its equivalent.
(d) Within 100 feet of an intersection, streets shall be at
approximately right or ninety-degree angles. A distance of at
least 150 feet shall be maintained between center lines of
offset intersection streets. Intersections of more than two
streets at one point are prohibited.
(e) A plan of the streets, showing grade and intersections, shall be
provided to the Borough with the application for a permit to
operate any area under Borough ordinance as a mobile home
park.
(f) The above standards may be of approved equal construction.
I. Off-street parking areas.
(1) Off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home parks
for the use of park occupants and guests.
(2) Required car parking spaces shall be located as to provide
convenient access to the mobile home, but shall not exceed a
distance of 200 feet from the mobile home that is intended to be
served and shall consist of 1 1/2 spaces for each mobile home.
J. Walks.
(1) All parks shall provide safe, convenient, all-season pedestrian
walkways of adequate width for intended use, durable and
convenient to maintain, between individual mobile homes, the park
streets and all community facilities provided for park residents.
Sudden and abrupt changes in alignment and gradient shall be
prohibited.
(2) Where pedestrian traffic is concentrated, and a common walkway
system is provided, such common walkway shall have a minimum
width of 3 1/2 feet.
§ 119-5 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-5
119:167
§ 119-6. Water.
(3) All mobile home lots shall be connected to common walks or to
streets or to driveways or parking spaces connecting to a paved
street. Such individual walks shall have a minimum width of 3 1/2
feet.
K. Construction of mobile home lots.
(1) Mobile home lots within the park shall have a gross area of 6,600
square feet, exclusive of a road right-of-way, and shall have a
minimum frontage of 60 feet and a minimum depth of 110 feet.
Such mobile home lots within the park shall have a minimum front
yard of 15 feet, a minimum rear yard of 15 feet and a minimum side
yard of 12 feet. All such mobile home lots within the park shall have
a minimum of two off-street parking spaces. [Amended 7-8-1971
by Ord. No. 137; 5-13-1975 by Ord. No. 168]
(2) Each mobile home lot shall be improved to provide an adequate
foundation for the placement of the mobile home and in such a
position as to allow a minimum of 10 feet between the mobile home
and the right-of-way of the park street which serves the lot.
(3) The area of the mobile home lot shall be improved to provide
adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile home and in
such a position to allow a minimum of 10 feet between the mobile
home and the street right-of-way.
A. An adequate supply of water shall be provided for mobile homes,
service buildings and other accessory facilities as required by this
chapter. Where a public water supply system of satisfactory quantity,
quality and pressure is available, connection shall be made thereto, and
its supply shall be used exclusively. Where a satisfactory public water is
not available, the development of a private water supply system shall be
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Health or other authority
having jurisdiction.
B. Water supply system.
(1) The water supply shall be capable of supplying a minimum of 150
gallons per day per mobile home.
(2) The well or suction line of the water supply system shall be located
and constructed in such a manner that neither underground nor
surface contamination will reach the water supply from any source.
(3) No well casings, pumps, pumping machinery or suction pipes shall
be placed in any pit, room or space extending below ground level
nor in any room or space above ground which is walled in or
otherwise enclosed, unless such rooms, whether above or below
ground, have free drainage by gravity to the surface of the ground.
§ 119-5 ECONOMY CODE § 119-6
119:168
§ 119-7. Sewage disposal.
(4) Water supply treatment, if necessary, shall be in accordance with
the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
C. All water storage reservoirs shall be covered, watertight and
constructed of impervious material. Overflows and vents of such
reservoirs shall be effectively screened. Manholes shall be constructed
with overlapping covers, so as to prevent the entrance of contaminated
material. Reservoir overflow pipes shall discharge through an
acceptable air gap.
D. Water piping system.
(1) All water piping, fixtures and other equipment shall be constructed
and maintained in accordance with state and local regulations.
(2) The water piping system shall not be connected with nonpotable
water or questionable water supplies and shall be protected
against the hazards of backflow or back-siphonage.
(3) The system shall be so designed and maintained so as to provide a
pressure of not less than 20 pounds per square inch under normal
operating conditions at service buildings and other locations
requiring potable water supply.
E. Riser pipes.
(1) Individual water riser pipes shall be located within the confined
area of the mobile home stand at a point where the water
connection will approximate a vertical position thereby ensuring
the shortest water connection possible and decreasing
susceptibility to water pipe freezing.
(2) The water riser pipe shall have a minimum inside diameter of onehalf
(1/2) inch and terminate at least four inches above the ground
surface. The water outlet shall be provided with a cap when a
mobile home does not occupy the lot.
(3) Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent freezing of service
lines, valves and riser pipe and to protect risers from heaving and
thawing actions of ground during freezing weather. Surface drains
shall be diverted from the location of the riser pipe.
(4) A shutoff valve below the frost line shall be provided near the water
riser pipe on each mobile home lot. Underground stop and waste
valves are prohibited unless their type of manufacture and the
method of installation are approved by the Borough Engineer.
A. Adequate system required.
(1) An adequate and safe sewerage treatment plant system shall be
provided in all parks for conveying and disposing of sewage from
§ 119-6 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-7
119:169
§ 119-8. Electricity.
mobile homes, service buildings and other accessory facilities.
Such system shall be designed, constructed and maintained in
accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Health and local
Borough regulations.
(2) No mobile home shall be served by a septic tank, cesspool or any
similar type of installation.
B. Individual sewer connections.
(1) Each mobile home lot shall be provided with at least a three-inch
diameter sewer riser pipe. The sewer riser pipe shall be so located
on each stand that the sewer connection to the mobile home drain
outlet will approximate a vertical position.
(2) The sewer connection shall have a nominal inside diameter of not
less than three inches, and the slope of any portion thereof shall be
at least one-fourth (1/4) inch per foot. All joints shall be watertight.
(3) All materials used for sewer connections shall be semirigid,
corrosive-resistant, nonabsorbent and durable. The inner surface
shall be smooth.
(4) Provisions shall be made for plugging the sewer riser pipe when a
mobile home does not occupy the site. Surface drainage shall be
diverted away from the riser pipe. The rim of the riser pipe shall
extend at least one-half (1/2) inch above ground.
C. All sewer lines shall be located in trenches of sufficient depth to be free
of breakage from traffic or other movements and shall be separated
from the park water supply system. All sewer lines shall be constructed
of approved materials of the Pennsylvania Department of Health and
shall have watertight joints.
A. Every park shall contain an electrical wiring system consisting of
wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances which shall be installed
and maintained in accordance with local electric power company
specifications. In the absence of local and state regulations, the
National Electrical Code shall govern such installations.
B. Main power lines shall be located underground when feasible. All direct
burial conductors or cable shall be buried at least 18 inches below the
ground surface and shall be insulated and specifically designed for the
purpose. Such conductors shall be located not less than one foot radial
distance from water, sewer, gas or communications lines.
C. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with an approved disconnect
device and overcurrent protective equipment. The minimum service per
outlet shall be 115/230) alternating current, 100 amperes.
§ 119-7 ECONOMY CODE § 119-8
119:170
§ 119-9. Washrooms; laundry facilities.
§ 119-10. Garbage disposal.
§ 119-11. Gas.
D. All exposed noncurrent-carrying metal parts of mobile homes and all
other equipment shall be grounded by means of an approved grounding
conductor run with branch circuit conductors or other approved
method of grounded metallic wiring. The neutral conductor shall not be
used as an equipment ground for mobile homes or other equipment.
A. No central toilet or washroom facilities shall be constructed in any
mobile home park, and each mobile home so parked therein shall be
equipped with toilet and washroom facilities, which shall be attached to
central sewage and water facilities as provided for each lot.
B. Central laundry facilities may be permitted, and such facilities shall be
maintained in clean condition free from accumulation of wastewater,
trash or any other noxious or offensive accumulation. Such facilities
may be shielded from other buildings by fence or vegetation or
sufficient height to bar view.
A. Weekly garbage collection shall be provided for in the mobile home
park by the park owner or operator.
B. The storage, collection and disposal of refuse in the mobile home park
shall be so conducted as to create no health hazards, rodent harborage,
insect breeding areas, accident or fire hazards or air pollution and shall
comply with the Pennsylvania Department of Health and Borough
regulations governing mobile homes parks and/or applicable to the
general community.
C. Grounds, buildings and structures shall be maintained free of insects
and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods and
other measures to control insects and rodents shall conform with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of Health regulations
governing mobile home parks and/or Borough regulations applicable to
the community in general.
A. Natural gas piping systems when installed in mobile home parks shall
be maintained in conformity with accepted engineering practices.
B. Each mobile home lot provided with piped gas shall have an approved
shutoff valve installed upstream of the gas outlet. The outlet shall be
equipped with an approved cap to prevent accidental discharge of gas
when the outlet is not in use.
C. Liquefied petroleum gas systems provided for mobile homes, service
buildings or other structures when installed shall be maintained in
conformity with the rules and regulations of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Department of Health, Borough of Economy
§ 119-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-11
119:171
§ 119-12. Fire prevention and safety.
or any other authority having jurisdiction and shall include the
following:
(1) Systems shall be provided with safety devices to relieve excessive
pressures and shall be arranged so that the discharge terminates at
a safe location.
(2) Systems shall have at least one accessible means for shutting off
gas. Such means shall be located outside the mobile home and shall
be maintained in effective operating condition.
(3) All liquefied petroleum gas piping outside of the mobile homes shall
be well supported and protected against mechanical injury.
Undiluted liquefied petroleum gas in liquid form shall not be
conveyed through piping equipment and systems in homes.
(4) Vessels of more than 12 and less than 60 United States gallons'
gross capacity may be installed on a mobile home lot and shall be
securely but not permanently fastened to prevent accidental
overturning.
(5) No liquefied petroleum gas vessel shall be stored or located inside
or beneath any storage cabinet, carport, mobile home or any other
structure.
D. All fuel oil supply systems provided for mobile homes, service buildings
and other structures shall be installed and maintained in conformity
with the rules and regulations of the authority having jurisdiction and
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Pennsylvania Department of
Health and the Borough of Economy.
E. All piping from outside fuel storage tanks or cylinders to mobile homes
shall be securely, but not permanently, fastened in place, shall have
shutoff valves located within five inches of storage tanks, shall be not
less than five feet from any mobile home exit and, where located in
areas adjacent to vehicle traffic, shall be protected against collision or
physical damage.
F. Any mobile home attached to an electrical and/or gas connection in any
mobile home park shall meet the specifications for manufacture of
mobile homes as set forth in United States Standards Institute
Standards for Mobile Homes, USA Standard A 119.1, 1969, NFPA No.
501B-1968, and subsequent modifications and amendments to such
standards.
A. The mobile home park area shall be subject to the rules and regulations
of Economy Borough pertaining to fire prevention and shall permit fire
prevention personnel and vehicles to enter onto the mobile home
premises in case of fire, and the residents of such mobile home parks
§ 119-11 ECONOMY CODE § 119-12
119:172
§ 119-13. Management.
Responsibilities of the management of the mobile home park shall be as
follows:
§ 119-14. Notice of violation.
shall obey lawful orders of any fireman or fire police or Borough
policeman in the performance of their duties.
B. Mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish and any
accumulation of flammable materials.
C. Portable fire extinguishers or a type approved by the fire prevention
authority or Borough Fire Inspector shall be kept in public service and
maintenance buildings under park control.
D. Fire hydrants shall be installed in accordance with the following
requirements where public water service is available:
(1) The water supply source shall permit the operation of a minimum of
two one-and-one-half-inch hose streams.
(2) Each of two nozzles, held four feet above the ground, shall deliver
at least 75 gallons per minute of water at a flowing pressure of at
least 30 pounds per square inch at the highest point of the park.
(3) Fire hydrants shall be located within 600 feet of any mobile home,
service building or other structure in the park.
A. The person to whom a license for a mobile home park is issued shall
operate the park in compliance with this chapter and the regulations of
the Pennsylvania Department of Health and shall provide adequate
supervision to maintain the park, its facilities and equipment in good
repair and in a clean sanitary condition.
B. The park management shall supervise the placement of each mobile
home on its mobile home lot, which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility connections.
C. The park management shall give the Health Officer, Fire Inspector,
Building Inspector or any person designated by the Borough Council
free access to all mobile home lots, service buildings and other
community service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
D. The management shall maintain a register containing the names of all
park occupants. Such register shall be available to any authorized
person inspecting the park.
E. The management shall notify the local Pennsylvania Department of
Health office immediately of any evidence of communicable diseases or
contagious diseases within the park.
§ 119-12 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-14
119:173
§ 119-15. Standards for single mobile homes.
A. Whenever, in the opinion of the Fire Inspector, Health Officer, Zoning
Officer, Building Inspector or any other person authorized by the
Borough to perform inspections for health and safety within the
Borough of Economy, it is determined that provisions of this chapter are
being violated within any mobile home park within the Borough or any
condition dangerous to health or safety or designed to endanger any
persons or property for any reason exists, which condition is a violation
of any Borough, state or county regulation, statute or ordinance; a
notice, in writing, shall be given to the owner or named person to whom
a permit to operate a mobile home park within the Borough has been
issued, setting forth the nature of the violation, which provision of local
ordinance is violated and a direction to the owner or permit holder to
correct the conditions within not less than five nor more than 30 days
from date of service of notice. Such notice shall be sent by certified mail
to the address listed in any license application, and failure of notice due
to inaccurate or incorrect address shall be the responsibility of the
owner or permit holder, and the procedure under this chapter for
enforcement shall not be prevented or delayed due to failure of notice
wherein this chapter is complied with in issuing such notice. Where, in
the opinion, of the Health Officer, Zoning Officer, Fire Inspector or
other official, such violative condition cannot be corrected within 30
days from date of notice, additional time may be granted to comply with
this chapter. Such additional extension of time may be accompanied by
requiring posting of bond in amount to be determined by the Borough,
with sufficient surety, to ensure such performance of corrective
measures.
B. Any person aggrieved by the provisions of this chapter may use such
remedies and appeals as are now provided by law.
A. No person shall occupy any mobile home in the Borough of Economy for
sleeping or living purposes except in a mobile home park issued a
permit under this chapter, unless such mobile home conforms to and
complies with all plumbing, electrical, sanitary and building ordinances
of the Borough applicable to conventional stationary dwellings;
provided, however, that, where single on-lot mobile home installation
complies with the following standards, the preceding standards will not
be applicable.
(1) No lot for erection of a single on-lot mobile home installation shall
contain less than 20,000 square feet unless there are available for
use on such lot public water and public sewer service and the
installation of the mobile home is attached thereto.
(2) Said lot shall have a minimum frontage width of 100 feet.
(3) Where a mobile home is attached to public water and public sewer
service, the minimum lot size shall be 10,000 square feet.
§ 119-14 ECONOMY CODE § 119-15
119:174
§ 119-16. Removal of mobile homes.
No mobile home, whether a single on-lot installation or mobile home park
installation, shall be removed from the Borough of Economy without first
obtaining a permit from the local Tax Collector charged with the collection
of Borough real estate taxes. Such a permit for removal will be issued upon
payment of a fee of $2 and payment of all Borough real estate taxes.
§ 119-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be required to pay a
penalty for the use of Economy Borough, in a sum of not more than $300,
together with costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, shall
be imprisoned in the county jail for a period of not more than 90 days. Each
day of violation shall constitute a separate offense.
(4) Any single on-lot mobile home installed shall have a minimum of
700 square feet of living space.
(5) Any single on-lot mobile home shall meet the specifications for
manufacture of mobile homes as set forth in United States
Standards Institute Standards for Mobile Homes, USA Standard A
119.1, 1969, NFPA No. 501B-1968, and subsequent modifications
and amendments to such standards.
(6) Any single on-lot mobile home shall be installed as to conform with
all front yard, side yard and rear yard setback lines applicable to
immobile housing in the district or zone, if any, where installed.
Otherwise, the mobile home shall be installed 35 feet from all
property lines.
(7) The building permit standards and requirements applicable in the
Borough shall apply for any single on-lot mobile home in
accordance with this section.
(8) The single on-lot mobile home shall be installed upon and securely
fastened to a frost-free foundation or footer, and in no event shall it
be erected on jacks, loose blocks or other temporary materials.
(9) An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected
around the base of the mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide
sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the
structure.
B. No single on-lot mobile home shall be installed for occupancy and
sleeping purposes or attached to any private sewer or water system
except in compliance with this chapter.
§ 119-15 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 119-18
119:175
§ 119-18. Construal of provisions.
It is the express intention of Economy Borough that this chapter be read
in conjunction with all other ordinances of this Borough; and, where there
is conflict in provisions thereof, such interpretation shall be given to all
ordinances read in conjunction as to produce a reasonable result consistent
with the intention of the Borough Council in enacting such ordinance.
Where there is conflict between provisions of separate ordinances, the most
stringent standard shall be the one applied. In the event that any section,
subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or penalty of this chapter should be
declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining
portions of the chapter, and the provisions hereof are hereby declared to be
severable.
Chapter 124
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code Enforcement Officer — See Ch. 9.
Dogs — See Ch. 75.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 97.
§ 119-18 ECONOMY CODE § 119-18
119:176
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 124-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — Unreasonable conduct or use of land which in the judgment
of a reasonable person in naturally productive of injury to health or a threat
to public safety or of material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or
hurt.
§ 124-1 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-1
119:177

ARTICLE II
Brush, Grass and Weeds
§ 124-2. Legislative declaration.
The accumulation of weeds, tall grasses or other vegetation is declared to
be a nuisance.
§ 124-3. Certain growths or accumulations prejudicial to public
health prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, being the owner or occupant of premises
situate within the Borough of Economy shall permit the growth or
accumulation of weeds, tall grasses or other vegetation on such premises to
an average height in excess of six inches within 50 feet of the nearest point
of the main dwelling house or garage, or in excess of 12 inches on vacant
premises, to such an extent or in such a manner as shall in the judgment of
the Code Enforcement Officer be prejudicial to the public health.
§ 124-4. Certain growths or accumulations constituting fire hazards
or traffic hazards prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation, being the owner or occupant of premises in
Economy Borough shall permit the growth or accumulation of weeds, tall
grasses or other objectionable vegetation on such premises to an average
height in excess of six inches or any part thereof to such an extent or in such
manner as shall, in the judgment of the Chief of Police of Economy Borough,
constitute a fire hazard, or endanger the safety of persons and property or
be a traffic hazard.
§ 124-5. Notice to owner or occupant by Code Enforcement Officer.
Whenever the Code Enforcement Officer shall, in his discretion, consider
said growth or accumulation of weeds, tall grasses or other objectionable
vegetation on any premises as aforesaid to be actionable, as aforesaid,
he may declare the same to be a nuisance and shall notify the owner or
occupant of said premises to remedy such condition within five days from
the date of service of such notice. The service of such notice shall be made
upon the owner or occupant of said premises either by delivering the same
to such owner or occupant personally or by delivering same to and leaving it
with an adult person in charge of such premises or, in case no such person is
found upon said premises, by affixing same in a conspicuous position upon
said premises. Failure of the owner or occupant to receive the notice shall
not be a defense to prosecution hereunder if the Code Enforcement Officer
files an affidavit at the time of prosecution attesting to his compliance with
service requirements.
§ 124-6. Notice to owner or occupant by Chief of Police.
A. Whenever the Chief of Police shall, in his discretion, consider such
growth or accumulation of weeds, tall grasses or other objectionable
§ 124-2 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-6
119:179
§ 124-7. Failure to abate nuisance.
In the event that the owner or occupant shall refuse or neglect to abate
such nuisance within a period of five days as required by such notice, the
Code Enforcement Officer or the Chief of Police, as the case may be, may
direct the removal of such conditions and may collect all expenses of such
removal from the owner or occupant of said premises, such amount to be
collectible as municipal claims are now collected by law. This remedy shall
be in addition to any other penalty that might be provided herein.
vegetation on any premises as aforesaid to be actionable, as aforesaid,
he may declare the same to be a fire hazard or endangering the safety
of persons and property and shall notify the owner or occupant of said
premises to remedy such condition within five days from the date of
service of such notice. The service of such notice shall be made upon
the owner or occupant of said premises either by delivering the same to
such owner or occupant personally or by delivering same to and leaving
it with an adult person in charge of such premises or, in case no such
person is found upon said premises, by affixing same in a conspicuous
position upon said premises.
B. Failure of the owner or occupant to receive the notice shall not be a
defense to prosecution hereunder if the Chief of Police files an affidavit
at the time of prosecution attesting to his compliance with service
requirements.
§ 124-6 ECONOMY CODE § 124-7
119:180
ARTICLE III
Airtight Containers
§ 124-8. Legislative declaration.
Airtight containers are declared to be a nuisance.
§ 124-9. Removal of doors, hinges, lids and latches required.
No person shall abandon, discard, store or keep in any place accessible to
children or permit to remain under his control, whether as owner, lessee
or manager of any premises in Economy Borough, any refrigerator, icebox,
freezer cabinet or similar airtight container of a capacity of 1 1/2 cubic
feet or more, which is no longer used for refrigeration or other intended
purposes, without removing the attached doors, hinges, lids and latches.
§ 124-8 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-9
119:181

ARTICLE IV
Litter
§ 124-10. Legislative declaration.
Litter is declared to be a nuisance.
§ 124-11. Title.
This Article shall be known and may be cited as the "Economy Borough Anti-
Litter Ordinance."
§ 124-12. Definitions and word usage.
For the purposes of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words used in the plural number include the singular number and
words used in the singular number include the plural number. The word
"shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Economy.
GARBAGE — Putrescible animal and vegetable wastes resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
LITTER — "Garbage," "refuse" and "rubbish," as defined herein, and all
other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited,
tends to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare.
PARK — A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any
other public area in the Borough, owned or used by the Borough and
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
PRIVATE PREMISES — Any dwelling, house, building or other structure,
designed or used either wholly or in part for private residential purposes,
whether inhabited or temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant,
and shall include any yard, grounds, walk, driveway, porch, steps, vestibule
or mailbox belonging or appurtenant to such dwelling, house, building or
other structure.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any and all streets, sidewalks, boulevards, alleys or other
public ways and any and all public parks, squares, spaces, grounds and
buildings.
REFUSE — All putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body
wastes) including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals,
abandoned automobiles and solid market and industrial wastes.
RUBBISH — Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible
and noncombustible wastes, such as paper, wrappings, cigarettes,
§ 124-10 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-12
119:183
cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery
and similar materials.
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is
or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 124-13. Litter in public places.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in or upon any street, sidewalk,or
other public place within the Borough except in public receptacles, in
private receptacles for collection or in official Borough dumps.
§ 124-14. Placement of litter in receptacles.
Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in private receptacles shall do
so in such manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the
elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private
property.
§ 124-15. Sweeping litter into gutters prohibited.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Borough the accumulation of litter from any building or
lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or
occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of
litter.
§ 124-16. Owners and occupants of businesses to keep sidewalks
free of litter.
No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or
deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the Borough the
accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private
sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business with
the Borough shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free
of litter.
§ 124-17. Litter thrown from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter upon any street or other public place within the Borough or upon
private property.
§ 124-18. Litter from trucks.
No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the Borough
unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load,
contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or
other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck
within the Borough, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in
§ 124-12 ECONOMY CODE § 124-18
119:184
any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or
foreign matter of any kind.
§ 124-19. Litter in parks.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the Borough
except in public receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be
prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of
the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles
are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the
person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as
provided herein.
§ 124-20. Litter in bodies of water.
No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream
or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the Borough.
§ 124-21. Litter on occupied private property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property
within the Borough whether owned by such person or not, except that
the owner or person in control of private property may maintain private
receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from
being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or
other public place or upon any private property.
§ 124-22. Owner of private property to maintain premises free of
litter.
The owner or person in control of any private property shall at all times
maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, that this section
shall not prohibit the storage of litter in private receptacles for collection.
§ 124-23. Litter on vacant property.
No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private
property within the Borough whether owned by such person or not.
§ 124-24. Notice to owner of vacant property; failure to comply.
A. Notice to remove. The Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized
and empowered to notify the owner of any open or vacant private
property within the Borough or the agent of such owner to properly
dispose of litter located on such owner's property which is dangerous to
public health, safety or welfare. Such notice shall be by registered mail,
addressed to said owner at the address listed on the Borough records or
by affixing same in a conspicuous position on said premises.
B. Action upon noncompliance. Upon the failure, neglect or refusal of any
owner or agent so notified, to properly dispose of litter dangerous to the
§ 124-18 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-24
119:185
public health, safety or welfare within 10 days after receipt of written
notice provided for in Subsection A above, or within 10 days after
the posting of the premises as herein provided, the Code Enforcement
Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to pay for the disposing of
such litter or to order its disposal by the Borough.
C. Whenever the Borough has effected the removal of such dangerous
litter or has paid for its removal, the cost thereof may be collected from
the owner as municipal claims are now collected by law. This remedy
shall be in addition to any other penalty that may be provided herein.
[Amended 8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 296]
D. (Reserved)44
44.Editor's Note: Former Subsection D, regarding recorded statements, was repealed
8-8-1989 by Ord. No. 296.
§ 124-24 ECONOMY CODE § 124-24
119:186
ARTICLE V
Dogs and Cats
§ 124-25. Unlawful to permit dogs and cats to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any dogs or cats licensed or unlicensed,
to permit such dogs or cats to run at large unaccompanied by the owner or
keeper.
§ 124-26. Limit on number of dogs and cats on premises.
No owner or occupant of property shall keep or house more than three dogs
or three cats on the premises at any given time. There shall be excepted
from this requirement litters of dogs or cats kept on the premises for a
period not in excess of six months from the time of birth as well as those
premises for which a kennel license has been obtained.
§ 124-27. Seizure of dogs not bearing license tag.
It shall be the duty of every police officer to seize any dog which does not
bear a proper license tag and which is found running at large and turn such
dog over to the Dog Law Enforcement Officer.
§ 124-28. Seizure of dogs bearing license tag.
Any dog or dogs bearing a proper license tag and seized by a police officer
of the Borough shall be detained, properly kept and fed, and immediate
notice, either personal or by registered mail, shall be given to the person
in whose name the license was procured, or his agent, to claim such dog
within 10 days. The owner of a dog so detained shall pay $5 a day to cover
expenses incurred by reason of its detention before the dog is returned.
§ 124-29. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
Any dog or dogs not claimed in accordance with the provisions of this
Article shall be disposed of in accordance with the Acts of Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in such case made and provided.
§ 124-30. Intent.
It is the intent that this Article shall be supplemental to any laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania herebefore or hereafter adopted covering
dogs within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Should any of the
provisions of this Article be contrary to the provision of any Act of Assembly,
it is the intent that the Act of Assembly shall control.
§ 124-31. Entry into agreements or contracts authorized.
The proper officers of the Borough are authorized to enter into such
agreements or contracts with any individual, individuals or corporations as
may be reasonably necessary to implement the provisions of this Article
§ 124-25 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-31
119:187
in regard, to the care and custody of such dogs detained by the Borough
pursuant to the provisions of this Article and to provide for the reasonable
compensation of such person, persons or corporations for such services.
§ 124-31 ECONOMY CODE § 124-31
119:188
ARTICLE VI
Junked Vehicles
[Added 11-10-2009 by Ord. No. 422]
§ 124-32. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
JUNKED VEHICLES OR PARTS THEREOF —
§ 124-33. Unlawful to store or maintain junked vehicles or parts
thereof.
It shall be unlawful to store or maintain junked vehicles or parts thereof, as
defined herein, on public or private property within the Borough.
Any vehicle that is required to be registered by the Pennsylvania Motor
Vehicle Code,45 or any part of such vehicle, including tires, which:
Is in such a state due to lack of maintenance or repair as to be
incapable of being moved under its own power; or
(1)
(2) Is in a dismantled or partially dismantled state; or
Is without either a current license plate or current inspection
sticker for longer than 30 days; and
(3)
Is stored outside a completely enclosed building for longer than 30
days; and
(4)
(5) Has not been moved or used for more than 30 consecutive days.
A.
Excluded from this definition is any vehicle without a current license
plate or current inspection sticker, or parts thereof, that is being
maintained on personal property for the purpose of restoring a vehicle
to meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation for an antique or classic vehicle registration, provided
the vehicle and/or parts are stored within a completely enclosed
building or are maintained under a weatherproof cover that is tightly
secured against the elements; or any vehicle, or parts thereof, which
are stored in a licensed junkyard; or any vehicle awaiting repair in
a vehicle repair garage that is maintained as a legal use under the
provisions of the Borough Zoning Ordinance; or any vehicle that is
maintained solely for use on a farm as defined and regulated by the
Borough Zoning Ordinance.46
B.
45.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
46.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 124-32 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-34
119:189
§ 124-34. Notice to owner; failure to comply.
When a junked vehicle or any part thereof, as defined herein, is stored
or maintained outside a completely enclosed building on property in the
Borough for longer than 30 days, the Borough shall send by certified mail,
return receipt requested, or hand delivered, to the registered owner of
the junked vehicle, or part thereof, or, if the registered owner cannot be
identified, to the owner or tenant of the property on which such vehicle or
vehicle part is located or found. Said notice shall state that the vehicle or
part or parts must be moved and relocated, inspected or a current license
plate displayed thereon within 14 days of such notice or that the vehicle
or parts thereof shall be deemed to be a junked vehicle or parts thereof
under the terms of this chapter. Failure to comply shall result in the penalty
provisions of § 124-35 of this chapter.
§ 124-34 ECONOMY CODE § 124-34
119:190
ARTICLE VII
Violations and Penalties
§ 124-35. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provisions of this chapter shall forfeit and pay a
fine after summary conviction therefor according to the procedure in other
cases of summary conviction in an amount of not less than $100 and not
in excess of $300 for the first offense as to each and every provision of the
ordinance violated by him and in an amount of not less than $300 for each
subsequent offense and in the event of default of payment of such fine, such
person shall be liable to imprisonment for not more than one day for each
$10 of unpaid penalty or fine. Each day after written notice that the person
is in violation of this chapter shall be deemed to constitute a separate and
new violation.
§ 124-35 MOBILE HOME PARKS § 124-35
119:191
Chapter 128
OBSCENE MATTER
§ 128-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
KNOWLEDGE or KNOWLEDGE OF SUCH NUISANCE — Having knowledge
of the contents and character of the patently offensive sexual conduct or
other content which appears in the motion-picture film, publication or live
theater production, or knowledge of the acts of obscenity, assignation or
prostitution which occur in any place.
LIVE THEATER PRODUCTION — Any dramatic, musical or comedic
production performed in the presence of a live audience.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating the superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment, accomplished by hand or by
the use of any instrument.
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any building or structure or portion thereof, located
within the Borough, which is open to members of the general public, with
or without the payment of a fee, at which massage services are offered.
MATTER — A motion-picture film, live theater production, publication or all
three.
MODEL STUDIO —
"Model studio" shall mean:
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing
figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being
observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted
for persons who pay a fee or other consideration or compensation
or a gratuity for the right or opportunity so to depict the figure
model or for admission to or for permission to remain upon or as a
condition for remaining upon the place; or
(1)
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing
or providing or procuring, for a fee or other consideration or
compensation or gratuity, figure models who pose in the nude to
be observed or viewed by any person or to be sketched, painted,
drawn, sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted.
(2)
A.
Exception. The words "model studio" do not include:
Any studio which is operated by any state college or junior college,
public or private school or any governmental agency wherein the
person, firm, association, partnership or corporation so operating
(1)
B.
§ 124-35 ECONOMY CODE § 128-1
128:192
MOTION-PICTURE FILM — Includes any:
NUDE — Includes:
OBSCENE MATTER — Any matter which:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, firm, association, corporation or
other legal entity.
PLACE — Includes, but is not limited to, any building, structure or space,
or any separate part or portion thereof, whether permanent or not, or the
ground itself.
PUBLICATION — Includes any book, magazine, article, pamphlet, writing,
printing, illustration, picture, sound recording or a motion-picture film
has met the requirements established by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for the issuance or conferring of, and is in fact
authorized thereunder to issue and confer, a diploma or honorary
diploma; or
Any place where there is conducted the business of furnishing,
providing or procuring figure models solely for any studio
described in Subsection B(l) of this definition.
(2)
A. Film or plate negative.
B. Film or plate positive.
C. Film designed to be projected on a screen for exhibition.
Films, glass slides or transparencies, either in negative or positive
form, designed for exhibition by projection on a screen.
D.
Videotape or any other medium used to electronically reproduce images
on a screen.
E.
A. Completely without clothing; or
With the human male or female genitals, pubic area or buttocks with
less than a full opaque covering or the showing of the female breast
with less than a fully opaque covering of any portion thereof below the
top of the nipple or the covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid
state.
B.
The average adult person, applying contemporary community
standards, would find, when considered as a whole, appeals to the
prurient interest;
A.
Depicts or describes patently offensive representations or descriptions
of ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated; or
masturbation, excretory functions or exhibition of the genitals or
genital area; and
B.
Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, educational
or scientific value.
C.
§ 128-1 OBSCENE MATTER § 128-1
128:193
which is displayed in an area open to the public, offered for sale or exhibited
in a coin-operated machine.
SALE — A passing of title or right of possession from a seller to a buyer for
valuable consideration, and shall include, but is not limited to, any lease or
rental arrangement or other transaction wherein or whereby any valuable
consideration is received for the use of, or transfer of possession of, obscene
matter.
§ 128-2. Obscene films, live theater productions and publications.
§ 128-3. Massage parlors and model studios used for obscenity.
§ 128-4. Presumption of knowledge after summons.
A. Any and every place in the Borough where obscene motion-picture films
or live theater productions are publicly exhibited or possessed for the
purpose of such exhibition and any and every place in the Borough
where obscene publications are publicly disseminated or sold or
possessed for the purpose of such dissemination is a public nuisance.
B. Any and every obscene motion-picture film or live theater production
which is publicly exhibited and any and every obscene publication
which is publicly displayed, disseminated or sold or possessed for such
purpose is a public nuisance per se.
C. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and complaint to
abate a nuisance, all moneys paid thereafter as admission price to such
exhibitions or productions or purchase price of such publications are
also declared to be a public nuisance, as personal property used in
conducting and maintaining a declared public nuisance.
A. Every massage parlor or model studio, which, as a regular course of
business, is used for the purposes of obscenity, assignation or
prostitution, and every such massage parlor or model studio in or upon
which acts of obscenity, assignation or prostitution are held or occur is
a public nuisance, which shall be enjoined, abated and prevented.
B. From and after service on the place or its manager or acting manager
or person then in charge of such place of a true and correct copy of this
chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and complaint to
abate a nuisance, all moneys or other valuable consideration paid for
services rendered to customers are also declared to be a public
nuisance, as personal property used in conducting and maintaining a
declared public nuisance.
A. Upon and after receiving notice through service of a true and correct
copy of this chapter and a true and correct copy of the summons and
complaint to abate a nuisance or notice by the Borough Solicitor of the
character of the obscene film, production, publication or place, any and
§ 128-1 ECONOMY CODE § 128-4
128:194
§ 128-5. Maintenance of actions; bonds.
§ 128-6. Remedies.
every person who shall own, legally or equitably, lease, maintain,
manage, conduct or operate a place in the Borough which is declared to
be a public nuisance as set forth and stated in § 128-2 or 128-3 of this
chapter is deemed to be a person who has knowledge of such nuisance
for the purpose of this chapter and may, thereafter, be responsible for
its maintenance and liable therefor.
B. The places and matters declared to be public nuisances under § 128-2
or 128-3 shall be abated as provided for herein.
A. The Borough Solicitor or any citizen of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania resident within the Borough may maintain an action of an
equitable nature in the name of the Borough upon the relation of such
Borough Solicitor or citizen to abate a nuisance.
B. No bond shall be required of the Borough Solicitor. If such action is
instituted by a private citizen, a bond shall be required in the amount of
not less than $500 to secure to the defendants the proximate damages
which may be sustained, including attorney's fees, if any court finds
that there were no reasonable grounds for said action.
C. The Borough Solicitor shall have the right to present arguments and
authorities on behalf of either party.
A. Money damages may be recovered:
(1) For compensation for loss or harm suffered to person or property
by the Borough or private citizen flowing from such nuisance; and
(2) As exemplary or punitive damages for the sake of example or to
punish the offender, where it is shown that the offender has been
guilty of malice. "Malice" means an intent to do a wrongful act, that
is, an intent to maintain, permit or allow a nuisance to exist.
B. Injunctions.
(1) Preliminary and permanent injunctions may be issued to prevent
the further maintenance of a nuisance and to prevent the further
sale or exhibition of obscene motion-picture films, live theater
productions and publications. The procedures for obtaining such
injunctions shall be governed by the Rules of Civil Procedure,
preserving the right of trial by jury upon the application for
permanent injunction.
(2) Upon the application for preliminary injunction the court shall set
the matter for a hearing no earlier than two days and no later than
five days from the date of service of the summons and complaint.
§ 128-4 OBSCENE MATTER § 128-6
128:195
§ 128-7. Cost of abatement.
(3) Upon the trial on the merits of the permanent injunction, if the
court finds a place to be a nuisance, the court may issue an order
closing the place to all uses and purposes for the period of one year.
If the offenders or persons owning, in control of or in charge of
such place certify that the nuisance has been abated and that the
films, productions or publications found to be obscene shall not be
exhibited, sold or otherwise disseminated and, at the discretion of
the court, post a bond in an amount not to exceed the value of the
personal property possessed or contained at such place for the
maintenance of the nuisance, the court may release such person or
persons from the closure order. The release shall remain in effect
for one year or until the nuisance is found to exist at the place
before the expiration of one year. The bond shall be deposited with
the court prior to the release of any closure order and shall be
returned to the person posting said bond, without interest at the
expiration of one year, provided that the nuisance is not maintained
or reestablished within that year.
A. If the existence of the nuisance is established on the trial, a judgment
shall be entered which shall permanently enjoin the defendants, and
any other person with notice or knowledge of the action and judgment,
from maintaining the nuisance at said place and the defendants from
maintaining such nuisance elsewhere; and the entire expenses of such
abatement action shall be recovered by the plaintiff as part of his costs.
B. The cost of abatement shall include the following:
(1) Investigative costs.
(2) Court costs.
(3) Reasonable attorney's fees arising out of the preparation for and
trial of the case and appeals therefrom and other costs allowed on
appeal.
(4) Printing costs of trial and appellate briefs and all other papers filed
in such proceeding.
C. Such cost of abatement may be made a special assessment against the
place or the parcel of land upon which such place is located. Upon its
determination in a civil action, such shall, by separate legal proceeding,
be made a lien against such property and a personal obligation against
any person and shall be collected at the same time and in the same
manner as ordinary municipal taxes are collected and shall be subject
to the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in the case of
delinquency as provided for ordinary municipal taxes. All laws
applicable to the levy, collection and enforcement of municipal taxes
shall be applicable to such special assessment.
§ 128-6 ECONOMY CODE § 128-7
128:196
Chapter 132
PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hunting and sporting associations — See Ch.
102.
§ 132-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Economy Borough
Park Ordinance."
§ 132-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PARK — Any playground, recreation center or any other area within the
Borough of Economy, owned, used or operated by the Borough of Economy,
devoted to active or passive recreation.
PERSON — Any person, firm, group, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
§ 132-3. Damage to property.
It shall be unlawful for any person in any park to willfully mark, deface,
disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any buildings, tables,
benches, fireplaces, railings, paving, waterline or other public utility, or
parts thereof, signs, notices or placards, whether temporary or permanent,
monuments, stakes, posts or other boundary markers or other structures or
equipment, facilities or appurtenances, whether real or personal.
§ 132-4. Sanitation; littering; discarding of wastes.
No person shall throw, discharge or otherwise place or cause to be placed in
the waters of any fountain, pond, lake, stream, bay or other body of water in
or adjacent to any park or in tributaries, streams, sewers or drains flowing
into such waters any substance, matter or thing, liquid or solid, which will
D. Upon judgment for the plaintiff in legal proceedings brought pursuant
to this chapter, an accounting shall be made by such defendant or
defendants of all moneys or valuable consideration received by them
which have been declared to be a public nuisance under § 128-2 or
128-3 of this chapter. Such moneys or their equivalent and any valuable
consideration received shall be forfeited to the general fund of the
Borough or to the Borough as property of the Borough if any valuable
consideration received is not money.
§ 128-7 PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS § 132-4
132:197
or may result in the pollution of said waters; nor shall any person bring in
or dump, deposit or leave any bottles, broken glass, ashes, paper, boxes,
cans, dirt, rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse
or trash shall be placed in any waters or in a particular area of said park
or shall be left on the grounds thereof, but it shall be placed in proper
receptacles where these are provided. Where receptacles are not provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
or persons responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
§ 132-5. Alcoholic beverages.
It shall be unlawful for any person to carry, possess or drink any alcoholic
beverage or liquor in any park, with the exception of the pavilion behind the
Municipal Building, by permit only.
§ 132-6. Hours.
Parks shall be open to the public every day of the year between sunrise and
sunset. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than authorized Borough
personnel, to occupy or be present in a park during any hours in which said
park is not open to the public.
§ 132-7. Permit required.
Permits shall be required for the use of parks, during any time the park
is closed, by any group of five or more persons wishing to use a park for
recreation or social purposes.
§ 132-8. Fee.
The fee for a permit shall be set from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. Such fee shall be paid to the Borough at the time of
submission of the application for such permit.
§ 132-9. Application for permit; contents.
Any person desiring to secure a permit for use of a park shall complete and
submit to the Borough Secretary an application at least 10 days prior to
the date on which the applicant desires to use the park. Such application
shall be in such form as the Borough may establish and shall contain the
following information:
A. The name, address and telephone number of the applicant(s).
B. The name, address and telephone number(s) of all persons who will be
using the park.
C. The date and time of the requested use.
D. The purpose of the requested use.
§ 132-4 ECONOMY CODE § 132-10
132:198
§ 132-10. Issuance of permit.
The Borough Secretary shall receive the application and accept the
required filing fee and, if upon review of the application the same is in
compliance with the requirements of this chapter and any regulations
promulgated hereunder, shall issue the permit. The Secretary shall number
the applications and permits in chronological order.
§ 132-11. Nontransferability of permit.
No permit issued hereunder shall be transferable by the permittee to any
other person, nor shall the day or time of the requested use be changed
without cancellation of the permit and issuance of a new permit upon
application and payment of the required fee.
§ 132-12. Enforcement; compliance with rules and regulations.
§ 132-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provisions of this chapter shall be liable,
upon conviction thereof, to a fine of not more than $300 plus costs of
prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days, and further provided that each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 135
(RESERVED)
Chapter 140
RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dumps and dumping — See Ch. 78. Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 97.
§ 140-1. Title.
The short title of this chapter shall be the "Economy Borough Recycling
Ordinance," and the same may be cited in that manner.
A. This chapter shall be enforced by the Economy Borough Police
Department.
B. A person to whom a permit has been issued shall be bound by all park
rules and regulations and all applicable ordinances as though the same
were inserted in said permits.
§ 132-10 (RESERVED) § 140-2
135:199
§ 140-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food and beverage containers consisting of
ferrous sides and bottom and an aluminum top.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENTS — Those properties used primarily for
commercial or industrial purposes.
CORRUGATED PAPER — That material consisting of two or more pieces
of kraft liner separated by corrugated (fluted) liner board. Excluded are
materials without a corrugated interliner and those materials with a
corrugated liner made from rice or other nonwood-based materials.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — The collection by the municipality or its
authorized agent(s) of recyclable materials placed at the curbside or other
designated location.
FERROUS CANS — Empty steel or tin food or beverage containers.
GLASS CONTAINERS — Bottles and jars made of clear, green or brown
glass. Expressly excluded are noncontainer glass, plate glass, blue glass and
porcelain or ceramic products.
HIGH-GRADE OFFICE PAPER — That paper collected from commercial,
institutional and municipal establishments that was discarded from
xerographic copiers, from nonthermal computer printers, from general
office use forms, memos and correspondence and from print shops and
other commercial printing processes. Material sorting and classification
grades will be specified in the regulations specific to this chapter. Expressly
excluded are papers with self carbons, carbon paper, envelopes and all
other grades of papers not meeting specifications in the regulations.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or serve
groups of people, e.g., hospitals, schools, nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues and similar, material, but not
including grass clippings.
MAGAZINES AND PERIODICALS — Printed matter containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals.
Expressly excluded, however, are all other paper products of any nature
whatsoever.
NEWSPAPERS — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newsprint"
and distributed at fixed intervals, having printed thereon news and
opinions, containing advertisements and other matters of public interest.
Expressly excluded, however, are "newspapers" which have been soiled.
PERSON(S) — Owners, lessees and occupants of residences or commercial
or institutional establishments.
§ 140-2 ECONOMY CODE § 140-2
140:200
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers.
Due to the large variety of types of plastics, the recycling regulations shall
stipulate the specific types of plastic which may be recycled.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Those materials specified by the municipality
to be recycled. The list of materials shall be specified in the recycling
regulations resulting from this chapter and may be revised from time to
time as deemed necessary by the municipality.
RESIDENCE — Any occupied single- or multifamily dwelling from which a
municipal or private hauler collects solid waste.
SOLID WASTE — All refuse (garbage and rubbish) and other discarded solid
material normally collected by a municipal or private hauler.
YARD WASTE — Prunings, grass clippings, weeds, leaves and garden waste.
§ 140-3. Program established.
There is hereby established by the Borough of Economy, hereinafter
referred to as the "municipality," a program that mandates that recyclable
materials shall be kept separate from solid waste by all persons within the
municipality.
§ 140-4. Separation; placement.
Recyclable materials shall be placed at the curb (or in areas designated by
the municipality), separate from solid waste, for collection at such times and
dates as may be hereinafter established by regulations.
§ 140-5. Unauthorized collection.
It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person(s) unauthorized by
the municipality to collect or pick up or cause to be collected or picked
up any such recyclable material. Each such collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
§ 140-6. Enforcement and administration.
The municipality is authorized and directed to enforce this chapter. The
same is hereby authorized and directed to establish and promulgate
reasonable regulations as to the manner, days and times for the collection
of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof and any other
matters required to implement this chapter. The municipality may change,
modify, repeal or amend any portion of said rules and regulations at any
time.
§ 140-7. Violations and penalties.
Any action by any person, firm, corporation or other entity which violates or
does not comply with any provision of this chapter or any regulation thereof
shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $100 upon a first conviction and
§ 140-2 RECYCLING § 140-7
140:201
$300 upon a second or subsequent conviction. The above fines shall not
be applicable to a conviction for § 140-5 hereof which shall be punishable
by a fine not to exceed $500. No enforcement of §§ 140-3 and 140-4 of
this chapter shall be made until three months from the effective date of
regulations authorized to be promulgated hereunder.
§ 140-8. Authorized collection agents.
The municipality may enter into agreements with public or private agencies
or firms to authorize them to collect all or part of the recyclable materials
from curbside or elsewhere as designated by the municipality.
§ 140-9. Alternative collection.
Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals or
organizations authorized by the municipality in its recycling regulations.
These materials must either be delivered to the individual's or
organization's site or they may be placed at the curb for collection by
said individual or organization on days not indicated as recyclable material
collection days by the municipality. Said individuals or organizations may
not collect recyclable materials on or immediately preceding (within 24
hours) a regularly scheduled curbside collection day.
Chapter 143
SEPTIC HOLDING TANKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 145.
§ 143-1. Authority to regulate.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to undertake
within the Borough the control and methods of temporary septic holding
tanks and the associated collection, transportation and disposal of sewage.
All rules and regulations adopted by the Borough shall conform with the
provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Borough and all applicable
laws, rules and regulations of administrative agencies of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 143-2. Eligible applicants.
Owners of real estate within the Phase II service area may apply to the
Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer to install and utilize a temporary
septic holding tank until sanitary sewer service is available.
§ 140-7 ECONOMY CODE § 143-3
143:202
§ 143-3. Definition.
For purposes of this chapter, a "temporary septic holding tank" means a
watertight receptacle which receives and retains sewage conveyed by a
water carrying system and is designed and constructed to facilitate the
ultimate disposal of the sewage at another site.
§ 143-4. Permit requirements.
§ 143-5. Removal.
Within 30 days after a notice to tap is received from the Economy Borough
Municipal Authority, the temporary septic holding tank must be removed
and connection must be made to the sanitary sewer line at the real estate
owner's expense.
§ 143-6. Connection to sanitary sewer.
The connection to the sanitary sewer line must be made by a real estate
owner who obtains permission to use a temporary holding tank, regardless
of the distance to the sanitary sewer line and by any means that are
necessary.
§ 143-7. Permit issuance.
The Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer and Building Inspector are
authorized to issue necessary permits for construction in accordance with
this and all other Borough ordinances, codes and regulations.
§ 143-8. Collection, transportation and disposal of sewage from
tanks.
A. In order to apply for a temporary septic holding tank permit the real
estate owner must first:
(1) Apply for an on-lot sewage treatment and disposal system permit.
(2) Follow the instructions given with the application and have the
soils tested for suitability for on-lot sewage disposal. This includes
a successful deep pit excavation and a successful percolation test.
B. If the above tests are successful, the tested area must be physically
delineated and the real estate owner must agree not to build or place
anything on the site that would hinder or preclude the construction of
an on-lot system.
C. The permit for a temporary septic holding tank will be issued following
the completion of A(1), (2) and (3) above as part of the original permit
application.
A. The collection and transportation of all sewage from temporary septic
holding tanks shall be done solely by a properly bonded and approved
§ 143-3 SEPTIC HOLDING TANKS § 143-8
143:203
§ 143-9. Maintenance; inspection; bond.
All real estate owners utilizing a temporary septic holding tank shall:
§ 143-10. Nuisances.
If a temporary septic holding tank is deemed to be a nuisance or hazard at
any time prior to connection to the sanitary sewer system, it may be ordered
removed at the real estate owner's expense, unless the nuisance or hazard
is immediately remedied.
§ 143-11. Duration of permit.
Temporary septic holding tank permits are valid for up to two years or
until the permittee is required to connect to the sanitary sewer system,
whichever comes first. If for any reason sanitary sewers are not available
to the property within the two-year permit period, Economy Borough will
notify all real estate owners utilizing temporary septic holding tanks. All
notified real estate owners will have 60 days to obtain a system design for
the tested area and submit the same to the Sewage Enforcement Officer
for review; obtain the permit for the on-lot sewage treatment and disposal
sewage hauling agency, and the disposal thereof shall be made only
at such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of
Environmental Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer shall receive a copy of the
signed sewage-hauling contract between the real estate owner and the
hauling company along with proof of bonding within seven days of the
contract being signed.
C. The Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer shall receive, review and
retain pumping receipts from permitted temporary septic holding tanks
within seven days of the tanks being pumped.
A. Maintain the temporary septic holding tank in conformance with this
and any other applicable ordinance of the Borough, the provisions of
any applicable law and the rules and regulations of the Borough Council
and any administrative agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit the Borough or its agents to inspect the temporary septic
holding tank.
C. Deposit with the Borough a bond, issued by a bonding company that is
authorized to do business in Pennsylvania, or establish an escrow
account, in the amount of $5,000 per holding tank. The purpose of the
bond is to insure proper installation, maintenance, disposal and
removal of said temporary septic holding tank and sewage. The bond
shall remain in effect while the temporary septic holding tank is in use
and shall contain a provision that the Borough shall be notified in
writing via certified mail from the bonding company of the termination
of said bond at least 30 days prior to the expiration/termination date.
§ 143-8 ECONOMY CODE § 143-11
143:204
system; and complete the installation and successful inspection of such
system. This permit will be issued as part of the original permit application.
§ 143-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 143-8 or § 143-9 shall, upon
conviction thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine
of not more than $500, and in default of said fine and costs to undergo
imprisonment for a period not in excess of 30 days.
Chapter 145
SEWERS
§ 143-11 SEWERS § 143-12
145:205

ARTICLE I
Condition for Sale of Property
[Adopted 6-8-1976 as Ord. No. 184]
§ 145-1. System or permit required as condition of sale of property.
[Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329]
No person, association, firm, partnership or corporation shall henceforth
sell to any purchaser any piece, parcel, tract or lot of land situate in the
Borough of Economy not served by a public or on-site sewage system
without providing, in writing, that said sale is contingent upon the real
property to be conveyed meeting the requirements necessary for the
issuance of a permit for the installation on said land of an on-site sewage
treatment system as prescribed by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,
Act No. 208, as amended,47 unless a public sewer is available for connection
thereto.
§ 145-2. Failure of property to meet requirements.
In the event that the real property in question fails to meet the necessary
requirements aforesaid for the issuance by a certified Sewage Enforcement
Officer of a permit for an on-site sewage treatment system, the purchaser
shall have the right and option to rescind said sale or agreement of sale,
where applicable; have same rendered null and void; and be entitled to the
return of all moneys paid to the seller towards the purchase of said real
property.
§ 145-3. Purchaser's right to have property tested.
If the seller gives the purchaser the aforementioned notice in writing, the
purchaser shall, within 90 days from the date of said notice, have the
property tested to determine whether the property meets the requirements
necessary for the issuance of a permit for an on-site treatment sewage
system. If the purchaser fails to take this action within a ninety-day period,
he shall lose his right to rescind the sale or agreement of sale and shall
not be entitled to the return of any moneys paid to the seller towards the
purchase of said real property.
§ 145-4. Failure to have property tested.
In the event that the seller fails to give the purchaser the aforementioned
required written notice, and the purchaser fails to have the property tested
within one year from the date of sale or agreement of sale, the purchaser
shall lose his right to rescind the sale or agreement of sale and shall not
be entitled to the return of any moneys paid towards the purchase of said
property.
47.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 145-1 SEWERS § 145-5
145:207
§ 145-5. Seller's option to have property tested.
The seller shall have the option of having the property tested and a permit
issued to the purchaser; and if said property meets the soil and percolation
requirements, the seller shall be relieved from any further obligation
hereunder to the purchaser.
§ 145-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, association, firm, partnership or corporation violating any
provision or regulation of this Article shall, upon conviction thereof before
any District Justice, be fined a sum not more than $300 and, upon any
default of payment of such fine, may be committed to the Beaver County Jail
for a period not exceeding 90 days.
§ 145-5 ECONOMY CODE § 145-6
145:208
ARTICLE II
Individual Sewage Disposal Systems
[Adopted 12-11-1979 as Ord. No. 213]
§ 145-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this Article, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section:
INDIVIDUAL SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM — A sewage disposal system,
other than a public or community system, which receives either human
excreta or liquid waste, or both, from one or more premises. Included within
the scope of this definition are septic tank soil absorption systems, privies
and chemical-type toilets and such other types as may be prescribed in
regulations.
PERMIT — A written permit issued by the Sewage Enforcement Officer
permitting the construction of an individual sewage disposal system under
this Article.
PERSON — Any institution, public or private corporation, individual,
partnership or other entity.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The legally designated authority of
the Borough of Economy or his authorized representative.
§ 145-8. Standards.
The following standards shall apply for the installation, alteration, repair or
extension of individual sewage disposal systems in the Borough of Economy:
§ 145-9. Permits.
A. General.
(1) The provisions of Act. No. 208 of the General Assembly of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, being generally known as the
"Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act,"48 are incorporated as though
the same were set forth at length herein.
(2) No raw sewage, septic tank effluent or seepage from a soil
absorption system shall be discharged to the surface of the ground
or ground surface water. [Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No.
329]49
48.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
49.Editor's Note: Former Subsections A(3), (4) and (5), which dealt with disposal systems in
areas subject to flooding, areas with a high groundwater table or areas with limestone
formations, and which dealt with driving bulldozers over such systems after installation;
and former Subsection B, Sewer construction; Subsection C, Septic tanks; and Subsection
D, Subsurface disposal field, all of which immediately followed this subsection, were
repealed 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329.
§ 145-7 SEWERS § 145-9
145:209
§ 145-10. Inspections.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, alter or extend
individual sewage disposal systems within the Borough of Economy
unless he holds a valid permit issued by the Sewage Enforcement
Officer in the name of such person for the specific construction,
alteration or extension proposed.
B. All applications for permits shall be made through the Borough office.
[Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329]
C. The Sewage Enforcement Officer may refuse to grant a permit for the
construction of an individual sewage disposal system where public or
community sewage systems are reasonably available.
D. Applications for permits shall be in the form provided, shall be signed
by the applicant and shall be complete. [Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord.
No. 329]
(1) (Reserved)
(2) (Reserved)
(3) (Reserved)
(4) The applicant shall provide such further information as may be
required by the Sewage Enforcement Officer to substantiate that
the proposed construction, alteration or extension complies with
regulations promulgated herein.
E. A complete plan for the purpose of obtaining a permit to be issued by
the Sewage Enforcement Officer shall include:
(1) The number, location and size of all sewage disposal facilities to be
constructed, altered or extended.
(2) The location of water supplies, water supply piping, existing
sewage disposal facilities, buildings or dwellings and adjacent lot
lines.
(3) Plans of the proposed sewage disposal facilities to be constructed,
altered or extended.
F. Any person whose application for a permit under this Article has been
denied may request and shall be granted a hearing of the matter before
the Sewage Enforcement Officer within 30 days after receipt of the
request.
G. Upon submitting the application, the applicant shall be given an
information sheet which shall explain the process and requirements.
[Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329]
A. The Sewage Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
make such inspections and conduct such investigations as are
§ 145-9 ECONOMY CODE § 145-10
145:210
necessary to determine satisfactory compliance with this Article and
regulations promulgated hereunder. Requests for investigations must
be in writing and signed by the requesting party. The Sewage
Enforcement Officer shall not divulge the name(s) of any persons
requesting an investigation. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 299]
B. It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a property to give the
Sewage Enforcement Officer free access to the property at reasonable
times for the purpose of making such inspections as are necessary to
determine compliance with the requirements of this Article and
regulations promulgated hereunder.
C. Fees. [Amended 12-28-1989 by Ord. No. 299; 8-26-1992 by Ord.
No. 329]
(1) The fee to be paid to the Borough upon application pertaining to
issuance of a permit shall be as follows:
(a) Application: $110, broken down as follows:
[1] Site investigation: $20.
[2] Soils profile: $16.
[3] Percolation test (the applicant digging holes and providing
water): $16.
[4] Issuance of permit: $38.
[5] Final inspection: $20.
(2) Where a portable toilet is installed, the inspection fee shall be $5
per quarter, except for nonprofit organizations, for which no fee
shall be charged.
(3) Where an individual sewage system is repaired, altered or
extended, the above fee schedule shall apply.
(4) For inspections and investigations provided in § 145-10A, the
Borough shall pay to the Sewage Enforcement Officer for the
inspection or investigation a fee as established from time to time by
agreement between the Borough and Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(5) The fees noted above apply to single-family dwelling units. Any
multi-unit would be multiples of the fee.
(6) Each applicant shall submit with the application the total sum
necessary to cover the above items. Reimbursement of any unused
amount will be made to the applicant.
D. The work described and authorized in any permit shall be completed
within two years from the date of issuance; and if not completed in that
time, a new permit will be required. A fee of $40 will be charged, plus a
§ 145-10 SEWERS § 145-10
145:211
§ 145-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who violates any provision of this Article, or any provision of
any regulation adopted by the political subdivision pursuant to authority
granted by this Article, shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of
not more than $300, together with cost of prosecution, and, in default
of payment of said fine, be imprisoned in the Beaver County Jail for a
period not exceeding 90 days for each offense. Each day's failure to comply
constitutes a separate violation.50
fee for any test performed which is required to reissue an expired or
valid permit. [Amended 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329]
50.Editor's Note: Former Appendix A, Information Sheet for the Applicant, which immediately
followed this section, was repealed 8-26-1992 by Ord. No. 329.
§ 145-10 ECONOMY CODE § 145-11
145:212
ARTICLE III
Sewer Use
[Adopted 2-12-1980 as Ord. No. 219]
§ 145-12. Definitions; word usage.
§ 145-13. Use of public sewer required. [Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord.
No. 350; 4-9-1997 by Ord. No. 360]
All owners of improved property, upon which there is erected a structure
or trailer or mobile home intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings in the Borough of Economy, where
there is a sanitary sewer owned or constructed by the Economy Borough
Municipal Authority, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, abutting on or adjoining
that portion of any road, street, land or alley or other public thoroughfare
and located within 250 feet from any portion of that structure, are hereby
required to connect such structures as are erected on said property to
such sanitary sewer for the purpose of discharging all household waste
liquids and other matter customarily directed into a sanitary sewer system.
Said connection shall be at the owner's cost, shall be made by running
a lateral sewer from the main sanitary sewer to said structure and shall
be in full accord with all regulations and requirements of the Borough
of Economy and the Economy Borough Municipal Authority; and the tap
into the sanitary sewer system shall not be covered until written and
dated authorization to do so is issued by the Economy Borough Municipal
Authority. The owner(s) shall be required to pay a tapping fee and a monthly
service charge as shall be determined by the Economy Borough Municipal
Authority.
§ 145-14. Prohibited discharges.
Oils, grease, tar, gasoline or other liquids that are not of the usual
household nature, including stormwater or drainage due to rain or snow,
shall not be emptied into or permitted to enter the sanitary sewer system.
Violation thereof shall subject the owners to penalties as set forth herein
under § 145-21.
A. As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough of Economy
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or
periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings.[Added
8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 350]
PERSON — Any natural person, association, partnership, firm or
corporation.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
§ 145-12 SEWERS § 145-15
145:213
§ 145-15. Independent connections.
Every such property shall be connected separately and independently with
the sewer through the house connection branch directly opposite the
building or nearest in a downstream direction. Grouping of buildings upon
one house sewer shall not be permitted, except with special permission
granted by the Borough Council.
§ 145-16. Failure to make required connection. [Amended 8-8-1995
by Ord. No. 350; 4-8-1997 by Ord. No. 360]
Within six months after written notification is received from the Economy
Borough Municipal Authority, the owner(s) of said structures on any
improved property located within 250 feet from an Economy Borough
Municipal Authority owned or constructed sanitary sewer shall connect to
said sanitary sewer. If the owner(s) shall fail to make connection within
the aforesaid period, the Economy Borough Municipal Authority may make
the connection and collect the cost thereof from the owner(s) by filing a
municipal claim or action of assumpsit, as provided by law. Any owner(s)
required to connect with the sanitary sewer shall pay the required tapping
fee when the application to tap is made. The application to tap shall be made
at the office of the Economy Borough Municipal Authority. Except as may
otherwise be provided herein, no tap shall be made until the tapping fee is
paid in full.
§ 145-17. Period during which tapping fee may be paid; lien.
[Amended 8-8-1995 by Ord. No. 350]
Any person required to connect with said sanitary sewer shall be given
notice of a six-month period during which the required tapping fee may
be paid. Following said period, a lien shall be filed against the premises in
question in the amount of any unpaid balance.
§ 145-18. Connection of outdated receptacles prohibited.
No privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or similar outdated receptacle for
human excrement shall at any time be connected with the sanitary sewer
system.
§ 145-19. Abandonment of outdated receptacles.
No privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or similar outdated receptacle for
human excrement shall hereafter be used upon any premises from which
connection with the sanitary sewer system shall have been made. Any
steel vault or tank shall, within 45 days after connection with a sewer, be
abandoned, cleansed and filled under such direction and supervision as may
be required by Sewage Enforcement Officer.
§ 145-15 ECONOMY CODE § 145-20
145:214
§ 145-20. Cleansing and filling of abandoned receptacles.
Any privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other receptacle abandoned
pursuant to this Article, which at any future time shall constitute a nuisance
or, in the judgment of the Sewage Enforcement Officer, constitutes a hazard,
shall be cleansed and filled within 30 days of the notice to do so by the
Sewage Enforcement Officer and, upon failure of the property owner to
comply with such notice, shall be cleansed and filled by Borough Council at
the expense of the owner of such property.
§ 145-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who shall violate or fail to conform to any of the provisions of
this Article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 90 days, provided that each
day's continuance of violation, after notice thereof by Borough Council,
shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 145-22. Enforcement.
The enforcement of the terms and provisions of this Article shall be vested
in the manager of the Municipal Authority.
§ 145-20 SEWERS § 145-22
145:215

ARTICLE IV
Temporary Septic Holding Tanks
[Adopted 6-13-1995 as Ord. No. 347]
§ 145-23. Application for use in certain areas authorized.
Individuals owning real estate within the Phase I Service Area Construction
Project may apply to the Borough's Sewage Enforcement Officer to utilize a
temporary septic holding tank until sanitary sewer service is available.
§ 145-24. Definitions.
As used in this Article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
TEMPORARY SEPTIC HOLDING TANK — A watertight receptacle which
receives and retains sewage conveyed by a water carrying system and is
designed and constructed to facilitate the ultimate disposal of the sewage
at another site.
§ 145-25. Connection to sewer line and removal of tank required.
§ 145-26. Enforcement; issuance of permits; adoption of additional
rules and regulations.
§ 145-27. Conformity with other laws.
All such rules and regulations adopted by the Borough shall be in
conformity with the provisions herein, all other ordinances of the Borough
A. Within 30 days after a notice to tap is received from the Economy
Borough Municipal Authority, the temporary holding tank must be
removed and connection made to the sewer line at the property owner's
expense.
B. The connection to the sewer line must be made for those who obtain
permission to use a temporary holding tank(s) regardless of the
distance to the line and by any means that are necessary.
A. The Sewage Enforcement Officer and Building Inspector are authorized
to issue necessary permits for residential construction in accordance
with this chapter and all other Borough codes.
B. The Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to
undertake within the Borough the control and methods of temporary
holding tanks and the associated collection, transportation and disposal
of sewage.
C. The Borough Council is hereby authorized and empowered to accept
such rules and regulations concerning temporary septic holding tanks
and the associated sewage which it may deem necessary from time to
time to effect the purposes herein.
§ 145-23 SEWERS § 145-27
145:217
and all applicable laws and applicable rules and regulations of
administrative agencies of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 145-28. Collection and transportation of sewage from holding
tanks.
The collection and transportation of all sewage from any improved property
utilizing a temporary holding tank shall be done solely by a properly bonded
and approved hauling agency, and the disposal thereof shall be made only at
such site or sites as may be approved by the Department of Environmental
Protection of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 145-29. Responsibility of property owner; bond required.
The owner of an improved property utilizing a temporary septic holding
tank(s) shall:
§ 145-30. Nuisances or hazards.
If a temporary septic holding tank is deemed to be a nuisance or hazard
at any time prior to connection to the sanitary sewer system, it may be
ordered removed at the owners expense, unless the nuisance or hazard is
immediately remedied.
A. The Sewage Enforcement Officer will receive, review and retain
pumping receipts from permitted temporary septic holding tanks.
B. The Sewage Enforcement Officer shall receive a copy of the signed
hauling contract between the property owner and the hauling agency
with proof of bonding.
A. Maintain the holding tank(s) in conformance with this chapter or any
ordinance of the Borough, the provisions of any applicable law and the
rules and regulations of the Borough Council and any administrative
agency of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Permit only the Borough or its agents to inspect the temporary septic
holding tank(s).
C. Permit only a properly bonded and approved hauling agency to collect,
transport and dispose of the contents therein.
D. Deposit with the Borough a bond, issued by a bonding company which is
authorized to do business in Pennsylvania, in the amount of $5,000 per
holding tank. The purpose of the bond is to insure proper installation,
maintenance, disposal and removal of said holding tank(s) and sewage.
The bond shall be for a period of one year and shall contain a provision
that the Borough shall be notified in writing, certified mail, by the
bonding company of the termination of said bond at least 30 days prior
to the expiration/termination date.
§ 145-27 ECONOMY CODE § 145-31
145:218
§ 145-31. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of § 145-29 shall, upon conviction
thereof by summary proceedings, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $500 and, in default of said fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment
for a period not in excess of 30 days.
§ 145-31 SEWERS § 145-31
145:219
Chapter 147
SIGNS
§ 147-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
POLITICAL SIGN — Any sign urging the election or defeat of any candidate
seeking any political office or urging the passage or defeat of any ballot
measure, but does not mean or include any billboard owned or maintained
by a commercial firm or advertising company.
§ 147-2. Political signs.
Political signs shall be permitted in all zoning districts, subject to the
following provisions:
§ 147-3. Violations and penalties.
A. The display area of such signs shall not exceed 20 square feet.
B. Political signs shall not be erected more than 14 days before the
election and must be removed no later than five days after the election.
The candidate(s) advertised on such signs shall be responsible for
removal of the signs.
C. Such signs shall not be placed on public property and shall not be
placed on private property without the permission of the owner or
occupant thereof.
D. No sign shall be located or constructed so as to obstruct or interfere
with any traffic control signal, sign, device or intersection sight
triangle.
E. Any signs not removed in accordance with these provision may be
removed by the Borough without prior notice.
F. The Borough shall be entitled to receive the sum of $5 for every political
sign it removes to cover the cost and expense of said removal. The
candidate(s) advertised on such signs shall be liable for the costs and
expense of removal.
A. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall, upon conviction thereof, for each and every violation, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than three hundred ($300.) dollars
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of any such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for a period not exceeding 90 days.
B. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter constitute a separate
offense.
§ 145-31 ECONOMY CODE § 147-3
147:220
Chapter 149
SMOKE DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarm systems — See Ch. 43. Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
§ 149-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ALARM SIGNAL — An audible signal indicating a fire condition.
MULTIPLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A dwelling designed for or occupied
exclusively as a residence for two or more families, with separate
housekeeping and cooking facilities for each family.
SEPARATE SLEEPING AREA — Bedrooms or sleeping areas of a dwelling
unit separated by use areas other than bedrooms, such as a kitchen or a
living room, or bedrooms or sleeping areas located on separate floors in a
structure containing two or more stories.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — A building designed for or occupied
exclusively as a residence for only one family.
SMOKE DETECTOR — A device which detects visible or invisible particles
of combustion.
§ 149-2. Installation of smoke detector required.
A. From and after the passage and effective date of this chapter, every
owner of a single-family dwelling and every owner of a multiple-family
dwelling shall install and maintain such smoke detectors as hereinafter
provided.
B. From and after the passage and effective date of this chapter, all new
single-family dwellings and multiple-family dwellings constructed in the
Borough of Economy shall have such smoke detectors installed as
herein provided, prior to occupancy. All presently existing multiplefamily
dwellings situate within the Borough of Economy shall have such
smoke detectors installed as herein provided. [Amended 2-10-1981
by Ord. No. 229]
C. From and after the passage and effective date of this chapter, any
construction, reconstruction, alteration to living quarters or addition to
the living quarters of any single-family or multiple-family dwelling of
such scope, magnitude or type so as to require a building permit
authorizing such work shall cause the provisions of this chapter to take
effect and become applicable.
§ 147-3 SMOKE DETECTORS § 149-3
149:221
§ 149-3. Performance standards.
§ 149-4. Placement.
§ 149-5. Right of inspection.
A. Each smoke detector shall be capable of detecting abnormal quantities
of smoke that may occur in the dwelling and shall properly operate in
the normal environmental conditions of the dwelling.
B. No smoke detector shall be installed unless the unit bears the label of
Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., or other similarly nationally
recognized testing and approval laboratory which maintains a periodic
follow-up review of the labeled devices to ensure compliance with the
original approval.
C. Each detector shall cause the operation of an alarm which shall be
clearly audible in all bedroom areas over background noise levels with
all intervening doors closed. The audibility level must be met with all
usual night-operated household equipment, such as air conditioners
and humidifiers, in operation.
A. Detector(s) shall be installed to protect each separate sleeping area in
any dwelling occupied by a single-family or in any mobile home
occupied by a single-family at a location between the bedrooms and
other use areas.
B. Detector(s) shall be installed to protect inhabitants of each dwelling
unit in a multiple-family dwelling at a location between the bedrooms
and other use areas in the dwelling unit itself.
C. The detector(s) shall be mounted in the ceiling and at the central point
between walls of the hallway or stairway, as the case may be.
D. A smoke detector installed at the head of stairs shall be located as to
ensure that smoke rising in that stairwell cannot be prevented from
reaching the detector by an intervening obstruction.
E. The Fire Marshal, or other designee of the Fire Marshal, shall be
available for advice and to aid the property owners in the proper
installation of the above-mentioned detector(s).
A. The Fire Marshal shall have the right to inspect the installation of
detector(s) required by this chapter in all new construction of singlefamily
dwellings and in all instances of construction, reconstruction,
alteration or addition to the living quarters of single-family dwellings of
such scope, magnitude or type so as to require a building permit
authorizing such work. Prior to any such inspection, at least 24 hours'
prior notice, in writing, shall be delivered personally to the property
owner and/or tenant advising of the date and time of the proposed
inspection.
§ 149-3 ECONOMY CODE § 149-5
149:222
§ 149-6. Notice of violation.
§ 149-7. Enforcement.
§ 149-8. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 151
SOLICITING AND CANVASSING
§ 151-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to canvass or to solicit contributions or
funds from the general public with the Borough for any religious, charitable,
patriotic, political, philanthropic, public interest or community service
purpose without first applying for and obtaining a solicitation permit.
§ 151-2. Application for permit.
At least 30 days before the date canvassing or soliciting is to begin,
applicants for a soliciting permit under this chapter must file with the Police
B. The Fire Marshal shall have the right to inspect the installation of
detectors required by this chapter in all existing and newly constructed
multiple-family dwellings. Prior to any such inspection at least 24 hours'
prior notice, in writing, shall be delivered personally to the property
owner and/or tenant, advising of the date and time of the proposed
inspection.
A. If, after such inspection, it is determined that the detectors were not
installed according to the terms of this chapter, the owner of a singlefamily
dwelling shall have 30 days from the date of such determination
to properly comply with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to so
comply after the expiration of 30 days shall be deemed a violation of the
chapter.
B. In multiple-family dwellings, a determination that the detector(s) were
not installed according to the terms of this chapter shall be deemed to
be an immediate violation of this chapter.
A. The Fire Marshal of Economy Borough shall enforce the terms and
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any person,violating the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be guilty of a summary offense and be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment to undergo a term of confinement of not more than
90 days. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
B. Each day's continuing violation shall be deemed to be a separate and
distinct offense.
§ 149-5 SOLICITING AND CANVASSING § 151-2
151:223
Department an application in writing on a form or forms to be furnished by
the Police Department which shall provide the following information:
§ 151-3. Duration of permit.
A soliciting permit issued by the Police Department shall be valid for the
period of intended solicitation as specified in the applicant's application but
in no event for more than one year.
§ 151-4. Where prohibited.
§ 151-5. Fee.
Every applicant for a permit under § 151-2 of this chapter shall pay a
processing fee of $10 plus $10 for each person desiring to solicit as
provided herein.
§ 151-6. Hours.
Hours of soliciting shall be limited to 9:00 a.m. to 9:00 p.m., Monday
through Saturday.
A. The name of the person, organization or institution, its aim and
purpose.
B. Local and national address and phone numbers.
C. Names and home addresses of each corporate officer (if applicable),
together with a complete list of names and home addresses of any
board of directors.
D. Dates of intended solicitation.
E. Names of person authorized to solicit, their home addresses, phone
numbers, social security numbers, driver's license number and state
automobile registration information and a photograph.
A. Any resident of the Borough may prominently display a sign or sticker
on their residence or premises reading "No Soliciting," and, in that
case, it shall be unlawful for any person to solicit at any home or
residence where a "No Soliciting" sign or sticker is displayed.
B. All persons seeking to solicit pursuant to this chapter shall be required
to sign a statement on a form furnished by the Police Department
indicating that they understand and agree to comply with the
requirements of this section.
C. Any person violating the provisions of this section shall be subject to
arrest and prosecution in accordance with the criminal statutes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 151-2 ECONOMY CODE § 151-7
151:224
§ 151-7. Display of permit.
Solicitors are required to exhibit their permit at the request of any citizen
or police officer.
§ 151-8. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of any police officer of the Borough to require any person
seen soliciting and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed to
produce his solicitor's permit and to enforce the provisions of this chapter
against any person found to be violating the same.
§ 151-9. Expiration of permit.
All annual permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire
on the 31st day of December in the year when issued. Other than annual
permits shall expire on the date specified in the permit.
§ 151-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not to exceed $300 or a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 days, or both.
§ 151-11. Repealer.
Chapter 135 of the Code of the Borough of Economy, titled "Peddling and
Soliciting," is hereby repealed entirely.
Chapter 153
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 29.
§ 153-1. Use of devices authorized.
The Police Department of the Borough of Economy is hereby authorized
to monitor, control and enforce established speed restrictions and limits
on streets and highways located within the boundaries of the Borough of
Economy and to determine the speed of vehicles traveling said streets and
highways by use of the Excessive Speed Preventor (ESP) or such other
electrical speed-timing devices or any other speed-monitoring devices now
or as may be hereinafter authorized by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation and/or statute for use by local authorities.
§ 151-7 SPEED-TIMING DEVICES § 153-2
153:225
§ 153-2. Officers to be properly trained.
The police officers using the devices authorized for use in § 153-1
hereinabove shall be properly trained in the use and operation of said
devices and certified to use and operate said devices in accordance with
the regulations of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation and as
provided by law.
Chapter 155
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
§ 153-2 ECONOMY CODE § 153-2
155:226
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 155-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Economy Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 155-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
A. Stormwater runoff from lands modified by human activities threatens
public health and safety by causing decreased infiltration of rainwater
and increased runoff flows and velocities, which overtax the carrying
capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, and greatly increases
the cost to the public to manage stormwater.
B. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns, accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and streambanks thereby elevating sedimentation),
destroying aquatic habitat and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy metals
and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted through loss
of recharge.
C. A program of stormwater management, including reasonable regulation
of land development and redevelopment causing loss of natural
infiltration, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare, and the
protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of the
commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
D. Stormwater can be an important water resource by providing
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
municipality.
§ 155-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-3
155:227
§ 155-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the municipality and its watershed by minimizing the harms and maximizing
the benefits described in § 155-2 of this chapter, through provisions
designed to:
§ 155-4. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
stormwater impacts by the authority of the Municipalities Planning Code.51
§ 155-5. Applicability.
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities that cause the problems.
B. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning and management.
C. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems as much as
possible.
D. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, which requires
a minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.
E. Focus on infiltration of stormwater, to maintain groundwater recharge,
to prevent degradation of surface water and groundwater quality and to
otherwise protect water resources.
F. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
G. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 235 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water quality in special
protection streams.
H. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
I. Provide for proper operations and maintenance of all permanent
stormwater management BMP's that are implemented in the
municipality.
J. Provide a mechanism to identify controls necessary to meet the NPDES
permit requirements.
K. Implement an illegal discharge detection and elimination program to
address nonstormwater discharges into the municipality's separate
storm sewer system.
51.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 155-3 ECONOMY CODE § 155-5
155:228
§ 155-6. Repealer.
Any other ordinance provision(s) or regulation of the municipality
inconsistent with any of the provisions of this chapter is hereby repealed to
the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 155-7. Severability.
In the event that any section or provision of this chapter is declared invalid
by a court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter.
§ 155-8. Compatibility with other requirements.
A. This chapter applies to any regulated earth disturbance activities
within the municipality and all stormwater runoff entering into the
municipality's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of the municipality.
B. Earth disturbance activities and associated stormwater management
controls are also regulated under existing state law and implementing
regulations. This chapter shall operate in coordination with those
parallel requirements; the requirements of this chapter shall be no less
restrictive in meeting the purposes of this chapter than state law.
A. Approvals issued and actions taken under this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to secure required permits or
approvals for activities regulated by any other code, law, regulation or
ordinance. To the extent that this chapter imposes more rigorous or
stringent requirements for stormwater management, the specific
requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
B. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to affect any of the
municipality's requirements regarding stormwater matters which do
not conflict with the provisions of this chapter, such as local stormwater
management design criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection
system design and details, outlet structure design, etc.). Conflicting
provisions in other municipal ordinances or regulations shall be
construed to retain the requirements of this chapter addressing state
water quality requirements.
§ 155-5 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-8
155:229

ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 155-9. Word usage and definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
D. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activities and the natural
processes, at a rate greater than would occur because of the natural
process alone.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer or other person who has filed an
application for approval to engage in any regulated earth disturbance
activity at a project site in the municipality.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) —
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Beaver County Conservation
District.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
DEVELOPER — A person that seeks to undertake any regulated earth
disturbance activities at a project site in the municipality.
DEVELOPMENT — See "earth disturbance activity." The term includes
redevelopment.
Activities, facilities, designs, measures or procedures used to
manage stormwater impacts from regulated earth disturbance
activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to promote
groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes of this
chapter.
(1)
BMP's include but are not limited to infiltration, filter strips, lowimpact
design, bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed
swales, forested buffers, and filters and detention basins.
(2)
§ 155-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-9
155:231
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land where any earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road
maintenance, building construction and the moving, depositing,
stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth materials.
EROSION — The process by which the surface of the land, including
channels, is worn away by water, wind, or chemical action.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN — A plan for a project
site which identifies BMP's to minimize accelerated erosion and
sedimentation.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the infiltration of
water into the ground. Impervious surface includes, but is not limited
to, any roof, parking or driveway areas, and any new streets and
sidewalks. Any surface areas designed to initially be gravel or crushed
stone shall be assumed to be impervious surfaces.
MUNICIPALITY — Economy Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System, the federal
government's system for issuance of permits under the Clean Water
Act, which is delegated to DEP in Pennsylvania.
OUTFALL — Point source as described in 40 CFR § 122.2 at the point
where the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface
waters of the commonwealth.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights
and duties.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated earth
disturbance activities in the municipality are planned, conducted or
maintained.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been disturbed or developed.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Earth disturbance
activity of one acre or more with a point source discharge to surface
waters or the municipality's storm sewer system, or five acres or more
§ 155-9 ECONOMY CODE § 155-9
155:232
regardless of the planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on
any portion of, part, or during any stage of a larger common plan of
development. This only includes road maintenance activities involving
25 acres or more of earth disturbance.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road cross section, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches and other similar activities.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations, protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96), including:
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation
reaching the ground surface.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other
bodies or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this
commonwealth.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a designated use, such
as cold-water fishery or potable water supply, which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained under
state regulations.
(1)
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
(2)
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes
in habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result
of changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to
protect the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the
waterway to prevent these impacts.
(3)
§ 155-9 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-9
155:233
WATERSHED — Region or area drained by a river, watercourse or other
body of water, whether natural or artificial.
§ 155-9 ECONOMY CODE § 155-9
155:234
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management for Water Quality
§ 155-10. General requirements for stormwater management.
§ 155-11. Permit requirements by other government entities.
The following permit requirements may apply to certain regulated earth
disturbance activities, and must be met prior to commencement of
regulated earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
be designed, implemented, operated and maintained to meet the
purposes of this chapter, through these two elements:
(1) Erosion and sediment control during the earth disturbance
activities (e.g., during construction), and
(2) Water quality protection measures after completion of earth
disturbance activities (e.g., after construction), including
operations and maintenance.
B. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until the requirements of this chapter are met.
C. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth disturbance
activities shall be addressed as required by § 155-12.
D. Postconstruction water quality protection shall be addressed as
required by § 155-13. Operations and maintenance of permanent
stormwater BMP's shall be addressed as required by Article IV.
E. All best management practices (BMPs) used to meet the requirements
of this chapter shall conform to the state water quality requirements
and any more stringent requirements as determined by the
municipality.
F. Techniques described in Appendix A (Low-Impact Development)52 of
this chapter are encouraged, because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.
A. All regulated earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainage ways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 105.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
52.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-11
155:235
§ 155-12. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.
§ 155-13. Water quality requirements after regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way, or require access from a state highway, shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PENNDOT).
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities.
B. DEP has regulations that require an erosion and sediment control plan
for any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25
Pa. Code § 102.4(b).
C. In addition, under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92, a DEP NPDES construction
activities permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or County
Conservation District must be provided to the municipality. The
issuance of a NPDES construction permit [or permit coverage under the
state-wide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies the requirements of
§ 155-12A.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any required
permit, as required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project
site at all times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with state water quality requirements after
construction is complete.
B. The BMP's must be designed, implemented and maintained to meet
state water quality requirements and any other more stringent
requirements as determined by the municipality.
C. To control postconstruction stormwater impacts from regulated earth
disturbance activities, state water quality requirements can be met by
BMPs, including site design, which provide for replication of
preconstruction stormwater infiltration and runoff conditions, so that
postconstruction stormwater discharges do not degrade the physical,
§ 155-11 ECONOMY CODE § 155-13
155:236
chemical or biological characteristics of the receiving waters. As
described in the DEP Comprehensive Stormwater Management Policy
(392-0300-002, September 28, 2002), this may be achieved by the
following:
(1) Infiltration: replication of preconstruction stormwater infiltration
conditions.
(2) Treatment: use of water quality treatment BMP's to ensure filtering
out of the chemical and physical pollutants from the stormwater
runoff.
(3) Stream bank and streambed protection: management of volume
and rate of postconstruction stormwater discharges to prevent
physical degradation of receiving waters (e.g., from scouring).
D. DEP has regulations that require municipalities to ensure design,
implementation and maintenance of best management practices
(BMPs) that control runoff from new development and redevelopment
after regulated earth disturbance activities are complete. These
requirements include the need to implement postconstruction
stormwater BMP's with assurance of long-term operations and
maintenance of those BMP's.
E. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriated DEP regional office must be provided
to the municipality. The issuance of an NPDES construction permit [or
permit coverage under the statewide general permit (PAG-2)] satisfies
the requirements of § 155-13A.
F. BMP operations and maintenance requirements are described in Article
IV of this chapter.
§ 155-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-13
155:237

ARTICLE IV
Storm Water BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 155-14. General requirements.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the municipality shall
commence until approval by the municipality of a BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g.,
postconstruction) stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and
maintained.
B. The following items shall be included in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan:
(1) Map(s) of the project area, in a form that meets the requirements
for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of Beaver
County, and shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch x thirty-six-inch
or thirty-inch x forty-two-inch sheets. The content of the maps(s)
shall include, but not be limited to:
(a) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs;
(b) The location of the project site relative to highways, municipal
boundaries or other identifiable landmarks;
(c) Existing and final contours at intervals of two feet, or others as
appropriate;
(d) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within
the project site area;
(e) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, and areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved;
(f) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary
sewers, and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of the
project site;
(g) Proposed final changes to the land surface and vegetative
cover, including the type and amount of impervious area that
would be added;
(h) Proposed final structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings;
and
(i) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
BMPs that would provide ingress to and egress from a public
right-of-way.
§ 155-14 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-14
155:239
§ 155-15. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of BMPs.
§ 155-16. Municipality review of BMP operations and maintenance
plan.
(2) A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be
operated and maintained, and the identity of the person(s)
responsible for operations and maintenance.
(3) The name of the project site, the name and address of the owner of
the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing the
plan.
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that can be altered or removed only
after approval by the municipality.
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater BMPs may also
be dedicated to and maintained by the municipality.
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership, or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The municipality shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The municipality reserves
the right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance
responsibility for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The municipality shall review the BMP operations and maintenance
plan for consistency with the purposes and requirements of this chapter
and any permits issued by DEP.
B. The municipality shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The municipality may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs
and an explanation of any discrepancies with the operations and
maintenance plan.
D. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
§ 155-14 ECONOMY CODE § 155-16
155:240
§ 155-17. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.
§ 155-18. Stormwater management easements.
§ 155-19. Recording of approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan and related agreements.
§ 155-20. Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan, unless an
exception is granted in writing by the municipality.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the municipality covering all stormwater BMPs that are
to be privately owned. The agreement shall be substantially the same as
the agreement in Appendix B53 of this chapter.
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory operation and maintenance of
all permanent stormwater BMPs. The agreement shall be subject to the
review and approval of the municipality.
A. Stormwater management easements are required for all areas used for
off-site stormwater control, unless a waiver is granted by the Municipal
Engineer.
B. Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or
preservation of stormwater runoff conveyance, infiltration, and
detention areas and other BMPs, by persons other than the property
owner. The purpose of the easement shall be specified in any agreement
under § 155-17.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent BMPs will be placed,
constructed or implemented, as described in the BMP operations and
maintenance plan, shall record the following documents in the Office of
the Recorder of Deeds for Beaver County, within 15 days of approval of
the BMP operations plan by the municipality:
(1) The operations and maintenance plan, or a summary thereof;
(2) Operations and maintenance agreements under § 155-17; and
(3) Easements under § 155-18.
B. The municipality may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
53.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 155-16 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-20
155:241
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the municipality for dedication,
the municipality may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to
pay a specified amount to the Municipal Stormwater BMP Operation
and Maintenance Fund, to help defray costs of operations and
maintenance activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the municipality, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operations and
maintenance for 10 years, as determined by the municipality.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g.,
ballfield, lake), the municipality may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 155-20 ECONOMY CODE § 155-20
155:242
ARTICLE V
Inspections and Right of Entry
§ 155-21. Inspections.
§ 155-22. Right of entry.
A. DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation Districts) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
municipality or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
municipality or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the municipality may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals until the
deficiencies are corrected.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within the municipality to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
municipality ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes
of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the municipality shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the municipality such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMP.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the municipality access to a BMP is a
violation of this Article.
§ 155-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-22
155:243

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 155-23. General.
The municipality may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the municipality.
The applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 155-24. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter may cover:
A. Administrative/clerical costs.
B. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Municipal Engineer.
C. The site inspections including, but not limited to, preconstruction
meetings, inspections during construction of stormwater BMPs, and
final inspection upon completion of the stormwater BMPs.
D. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any provisions of
this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper completion of
stipulated remedial actions.
§ 155-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-24
155:245

ARTICLE VII
Prohibitions
§ 155-25. Prohibited discharges.
A. No person in the municipality shall allow, or cause to allow, stormwater
discharges into the municipality's separate storm sewer system which
are not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in
Subsection B below, and discharges allowed under a state or federal
permit.
B. Discharges which may be allowed, based on a finding by the
municipality that the discharge(s) do not significantly contribute to
pollution to surface waters of the commonwealth, are:
(1) Discharges from fire fighting activities.
(2) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(3) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(4) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(5) Lawn watering.
(6) Irrigation drainage.
(7) Pavement washwaters.
(8) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(9) Air-conditioning condensate in which leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(10)Water from individual residential car washing.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Springs and uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from crawl space pumps.
C. In the event that the municipality determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution waters of
the commonwealth, or is so notified by DEP, the municipality will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the municipality under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the
municipality, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.
§ 155-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-25
155:247
§ 155-26. Prohibited connections.
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 155-25B
above:
§ 155-27. Roof drains.
§ 155-28. Alteration of BMPs.
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater, and wash water, to enter the separate storm sewer system,
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks; and
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records, and approved by the
municipality.
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in § 155-27B.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the municipality.
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, unless it is part of an approved maintenance program,
without the written approval of the municipality.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement, which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
municipality.
§ 155-25 ECONOMY CODE § 155-28
155:248
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 155-29. Public nuisance.
§ 155-30. Enforcement generally.
§ 155-31. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Whenever the municipality finds that a person has violated a prohibition
or failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the municipality may
order compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such
notice may require without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges;
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices, or operations;
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected
property;
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs;
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs; and
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violations(s). Said notice
may further advise that, if applicable, should the violator fail to take the
required action within the established deadline, the work will be done
by the municipality or designee and the expense thereof shall be
charged to the violator.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the municipality from
pursuing any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the municipality may be suspended or revoked by the municipality for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit;
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter; or
§ 155-29 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 155-31
155:249
§ 155-32. Violations and penalties.
§ 155-33. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the municipality or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the relevant judicial
or administrative body according to law within the time period allowed.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the municipality
when:
(1) The Municipal Engineer or designee has inspected and approved
the corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance; and/or
(2) The Municipality is satisfied that the violation of the Ordinance,
law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the municipality
cannot be reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under
the procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be subject to a fine of not more
than $300 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or imprisonment of
not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the violation continues
shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
§ 155-31 ECONOMY CODE § 155-33
155:250
Chapter 157
STOVES, FUEL-BURNING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 88.
§ 157-1. Permit required; applications.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for
any persons to install a solid-fuel-burning appliance in the Borough of
Economy without first having obtained a permit therefor from the
officer charged with the enforcement of this chapter.
B. No permit shall issue for a solid-fuel-burning appliance located in any
structure in the Borough of Economy unless the applicant therefor has
first submitted a detailed plan to the Building Inspector of the Borough
of Economy containing the following information:
(1) The fuel-burning appliance manufacturer, model number and age.
(2) The type of fire box (steel, cast iron or otherwise).
(3) Whether the fire box is lined with fire brick, sand or otherwise.
(4) Whether the fuel-burning appliance is free of cracks, broken parts
or repairs by welding.
(5) The type of floor surface the stove is to be located on.
(6) Whether the stove has an automatic draft regulator or built-in
damper.
(7) Whether a damper is to be located in the chimney connector.
(8) Measurements of proposed distances of the following:
(a) Distance from the chimney connector to the nearest
combustible material.
(b) Distance from the side and back of the appliance to the nearest
combustible material.
(c) Distance from the front of a woodburning appliance to the
nearest combustible material.
(d) Height of legs on which fuel-burning appliance sits.
§ 155-33 STOVES, FUEL-BURNING § 157-2
157:251
§ 157-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIMNEY CONNECTOR — The metal conduit extending from the chimney
flue inlet to the fuel-burning-appliance smoke outlet.
CIRCULATING STOVE — A solid-fuel-burning appliance containing two
layers of metal surrounding the fire, containing space between the two
layers of metal for heating and circulating air.
COMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Material made of or surfaced with wood,
compressed paper, plant fibers, plastics or other material that will ignite
and burn, whether flameproof or not, whether plastered or unplastered.
COOKSTOVE OR RANGE — A radiant stove used primarily for cooking.
DAMPER — A metal baffle plate in the chimney connector adjustable to shut
off the flow of smoke.
NONCOMBUSTIBLE MATERIAL — Material which will not ignite and burn,
such materials consisting entirely of steel, brick, iron, concrete, tile, slate,
asbestos, glass or plaster or combinations thereof.
RADIANT STOVE — A solid-fuel-burning appliance containing a single layer
of metal enclosing the fire, e.g., a Franklin stove.
SOLID-FUEL-BURNING APPLIANCE — Any device burning wood, coal or
by-products thereof for the purposes of cooking, heating or heating water.
SUPPLEMENTAL HEATING DEVICE — A circulating stove built into
ductwork for heating by convection or forced air.
§ 157-3. Chimneys.
A. General.
(1) The termination of the chimney must be at least three feet above
the highest point where it passes through the roofline and two feet
higher than any point within 10 feet.
(2) No solid-fuel-burning appliance shall be connected to any chimney
unless it is a lined masonry chimney or a Class A Underwriters'
Laboratories, Inc., approved all fuel chimney.
(3) The cross-sectional area of the chimney flue shall be no less than
the smoke output vent on the solid-fuel-burning appliance.
(4) No water-heating coils or obstructions of any kind shall be located
in the chimney flue.
(5) No chimney servicing a solid-fuel-burning appliance shall serve any
other appliance, solid-fuel burning or otherwise.
B. Masonry chimney requirements.
§ 157-2 ECONOMY CODE § 157-3
157:252
§ 157-4. Chimney connectors.
(1) Any masonry chimney used for a solid-fuel-burning appliance shall
be well constructed, freestanding from the building frame and free
of cracks, gaps and deteriorating mortar.
(2) The foundation of a masonry chimney shall extend below the frost
line.
(3) A masonry chimney shall contain a clean-out door at the base
thereof.
(4) A masonry chimney shall be lined with fireproof clay with a
minimum thickness of five-eighths (5/8) inch.
(5) Any existing flue inlets in a masonry chimney other than that used
to service the proposed solid-fuel-burning appliance must be sealed
shut with masonry material.
(6) The masonry chimney shall contain a minimum thickness of eight
inches of masonry material at the point where it penetrates the
roofline.
(7) An existing masonry chimney without a fireproof-clay liner shall be
lined with fireproof clay or with a galvanized-pipe liner.
C. Prefabricated metal chimneys.
(1) Prefabricated metal chimneys shall be installed so as to maintain a
minimum clearance of two inches at all points from all combustible
materials.
(2) Any joints in a prefabricated metal chimney exposed above the
roofline must be reinforced with locking bands.
(3) Any prefabricated metal chimney extending more than five feet
above the highest point where it penetrates the roofline must be
adequately braced.
A. The diameter of the chimney connector shall be at least as large as the
smoke outlet on the fuel-burning appliance.
B. Chimney connectors shall be constructed of twenty-four-gauge metal at
a minimum.
C. The chimney connector shall be installed so that the crimped end points
down.
D. The chimney connector shall be fastened at each joint with three sheetmetal
screws. The length of the chimney connector shall be no more
than 75% of the vertical chimney height above the flue inlet.
E. The chimney connector shall contain no more than two ninety-degree
bends.
§ 157-3 STOVES, FUEL-BURNING § 157-4
157:253
§ 157-5. Installation requirements.
F. Any horizontal runs of chimney connectors shall have a minimum of
one-half-inch rise for each foot of length, the highest point being the
terminus at the chimney inlet.
G. A metal ventilating thimble must be used to pass a chimney connector
through a combustible wall, the diameter thereof being at least 12
inches larger than the chimney connector.
H. No chimney connector shall be installed so as to pass through ceilings
or closets.
A. No solid-fuel-burning appliance shall be located so as to block a fire
exit.
B. The minimum clearances between combustible materials and the solidfuel-
burning appliance shall be as set forth in Tables 1 and 2
hereinafter.54
C. When protective coverings are utilized to fulfill the minimum distance
requirements in Table 2, the protective coverings installed must extend
over all areas of walls and ceilings to the minimum clearances shown in
Table 2.
D. The floor underneath and immediately surrounding the solid-fuelburning
appliance shall be of noncombustible material or comply with
the following minimums:
(1) Where a solid-fuel-burning appliance is at least 18 inches above the
floor line, a combustible floor shall be covered with twenty-fourgauge
metal, brick, fireproof tile or three-eighths-inch asbestos
millboard.
(2) Where the clearance between the bottom of the fuel-burning
appliance and the combustible floor is less than 18 inches but more
than six inches, the floor shall be covered with brick, fireproof tile
or twenty-four-gauge sheet metal on top of three-eighths-inch
asbestos millboard.
(3) Where the distance from the bottom of the fuel-burning appliance
to a combustible floor is less than six inches, the combustible floor
shall be covered with a minimum of four inches of hollow masonry
with twenty-four-gauge sheet metal.
E. The clearance between any solid-fuel-burning appliance or appurtenant
parts and furniture, carpeting, drapes, paper products or other highly
combustible materials shall be a minimum of four feet.
F. Ashes from a solid-fuel-burning appliance shall be stored in a metal
container with a tight-fitting lid.
54.Editor's Note: Said tables are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-4 ECONOMY CODE § 157-5
157:254
Chapter 160
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
G. Any solid-fuel-burning appliance to be installed in a mobile home must
be approved and clearly marked "approved" by an accredited testing
laboratory recognized as such by the National Fire Protection
Association. [Added 11-15-1980 by Ord. No. 226]
§ 157-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 157-5
160:255

ARTICLE I
Driveways
[Adopted 3-9-1976 as Ord. No. 179]
§ 160-1. Legislative findings.
The Borough of Economy finds that it is in the public interest to regulate the
design, location and construction of access driveways in such a manner so
as to facilitate the safe and unobstructed movement of vehicular traffic on
Borough highways.
§ 160-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in these regulations shall, for
the purpose of these regulations, have the following meanings, respectively,
except in those instances where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning:
ACCESS — Any means for passage of vehicles between property abutting on
a Borough highway and the Borough highway. It shall be deemed to include
only that part of the driveway that lies within the established right-of-way
limits of the Borough highway. It will also include such drainage structures
as may be necessary for the proper construction and maintenance thereof.
BOROUGH HIGHWAY — All road and streets taken over by the Borough of
Economy as Borough highways under provisions of any act of the Council.
PAVEMENT EDGE — The edge of the main traveled portion of any street or
highway, exclusive of shoulder or berm.
PERMANENT-TYPE CONSTRUCTION — Plain or reinforced concrete,
bituminous concrete or macadam of required thickness.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, copartnership, association or
corporation.
PROPERTY LINE CLEARANCE — The distance measured along the
pavement edge or curb between the property frontage boundary line and
the near edge of the driveway.
RURAL AREA — An area where roadways have been built to typical rural
highway standards without sidewalks and curbs.
SHOULDER LINE — The intersection of the shoulder slope with the side
slope or ditch slope.
SIDEWALKS — A permanent hard-paved walkway, continuous for a
reasonable distance and an integral part of the highway department, solely
for use of pedestrians.
URBAN AREA — An area where the roadways have been built to typical city
street standards, including sidewalks and curbs.
VEHICLE — Any device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a public highway.
§ 160-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-3
160:257
§ 160-3. Applicability; permit required; applications; fees.
§ 160-4. Location, design and construction.
§ 160-5. Sight distance.
A. These regulations shall apply to all access driveways that enter
Borough highways.
B. Any person desiring to construct or lay out such driveway shall make
application to the department office having jurisdiction over the
highway to be intersected for approval of the location, design and mode
of construction of such driveway, and for permission to proceed.
Application forms will be available at Borough offices to any applicant
upon request. The construction or layout of a proposed driveway will
not be started prior to receipt of a written permit approving the
location, design and mode of construction thereof, signed by either the
Borough Engineer, Road Department Foreman or the authorized
representative of the Department of Roads and containing such
reasonable terms and conditions as the Department may deem
necessary to impose. The fee for said permit and inspection shall be set
by the Borough Council.
A. All driveways shall be located, designed and constructed in such a
manner as not to interfere or be inconsistent with the design,
maintenance and drainage of the Borough highway.
B. Access driveways should be located in such manner that they will not
cause the following:
(1) Interference with the traveling public;
(2) A hazard to the free movement of normal highway traffic; or
(3) Areas of undue traffic congestion on the highway.
C. Access driveways should not be located at locations that would
interfere with the placement and proper functioning of highway signs,
signals, detectors, lighting or other devices that affect traffic control.
D. Where highway curbs exist, driveway approaches shall be installed one
and one-half (1 1/2) inches above the adjacent highway or gutter grade
to maintain the proper drainage.
A. Access driveways shall be located at a point of optimum sight distance
along the highway within the property frontage limits. The profile of the
driveway and the grading of the right-of-way area shall provide a
maximum sight distance so that the operator of a vehicle departing
from such a driveway will have optimum visibility in either direction
along the highway.
§ 160-3 ECONOMY CODE § 160-5
160:258
§ 160-6. Slope of access driveway.
§ 160-7. Maintenance.
All driveways, adjacent areas and areas between such driveways, including
channelization, paving, drainage, etc., installed by the permittee shall be
maintained by the property owner in such a manner as not to interfere or
be inconsistent with the design, maintenance and drainage of the Borough
highway or the safe and convenient passage of traffic upon the Borough
highway. The term "adjacent area" shall apply only to that area within the
permittee's property or property line extended.
§ 160-8. Inspections.
B. Where adequate sight distances cannot be attained, the location of the
driveway will be at the discretion of the authorized Borough
representative.
A. All driveways shall be constructed in such a manner as not to impair
drainage within the highway right-of-way, alter the stability of the
roadway subgrade or materially change the drainage of adjacent areas.
Where open shoulders or berms exist, the grade of a paved access
driveway(s) shall slope away from the highway pavement at the same
rate as the existing shoulder (unless advised to the contrary by the
authorized Borough representative) for the prevailing width of the
shoulder. The gradient of a driveway beyond this point (within the
highway right-of-way) shall be not less than 1/2 inch per foot.
B. Driveway ramps may extend from the face of the curb up to the outer
edge of the sidewalk area in those cases where a planted area occurs
between multiple driveways. The rate of slope for such driveway ramps
preferably should not exceed one inch per foot. Where conditions are
such that the slope of one inch per foot is not obtainable, the sidewalk
area of the driveway may be lowered sufficiently to obtain the allowable
ramp slope, and the sidewalk may be warped up to meet the normal
sidewalk grade, at a rate of slope not to exceed 3/8 inch per foot.
C. Where a drainage ditch or swale exists, adequate pipe shall be installed
under the driveway, by the permittee, in accordance with Borough
specifications. Minimum diameter of such drainage pipe shall be 15
inches unless otherwise specified by the authorized Borough
representative. Under no circumstances shall the diameter of such
drainage pipe be less than 12 inches.
A. Work authorized by a highway occupancy permit for construction of an
access driveway shall be performed at such time and in such a manner
as to conform to all requirements and standards specified therein. Such
work will be inspected by a representative of the Borough of Economy
immediately upon receipt of the completion notice from the permittee
or at date of expiration of the permit, which shall be one year from date
of issue.
§ 160-5 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-8
160:259
§ 160-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person violating any provision or regulation of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding
$300 and, upon any default of payment of such fine, may be committed to
imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist by such person after notice in
writing shall have been served upon him by the authorized representative
of the Borough shall constitute an additional, separate offense.
B. If an inspection of the work discloses that it is not being or has not been
properly performed, the permittee will be notified, in writing, by the
Borough of Economy to take immediate steps, at his own expense,
toward placing the work in such condition as to conform to said
requirements and standards. Proper distribution of the completion
report to be made immediately following the inspection.
§ 160-8 ECONOMY CODE § 160-9
160:260
ARTICLE II
Sidewalks
[Adopted 6-13-1978 as Ord. No. 204]
§ 160-10. Responsibility of owner.
The owner of every property fronting upon or alongside of any of the streets
in the Borough of Economy is hereby required to maintain and keep in a
state of repair all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside such property, so
that the sidewalk is in safe and usable condition.
§ 160-11. Construction.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Economy shall, on 20 days'
notice from the Borough Council, construct or reconstruct a sidewalk,
which shall conform to all applicable requirements of this Article, in front of
or alongside of such property.
§ 160-12. Repair.
Every owner of property in the Borough of Economy shall, on five days'
notice from the Borough Council, repair the sidewalk, in the manner
stipulated in such notice, in front of or alongside such property.
§ 160-13. Written notices.
The notices referred to in §§ 160-11 and 160-12 of this Article may be
written or printed or partly written and partly printed.
§ 160-14. Construction materials.
All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired of concrete
only, according to specifications determined from time to time by the
Borough Engineer, provided that a bituminous surface, meeting
specifications determined by the Borough Engineer, may be applied as a
protective coating only where an entire block of concrete does not have
to be replaced, but where a block of concrete has to be replaced, such
replacement shall be with concrete only, provided further that, where the
existing sidewalk is of brick and at least 2/3 of such sidewalk is in good
repair, such sidewalk may be repaired with brick.
§ 160-15. Grading.
All sidewalks shall be constructed, reconstructed and repaired and the
grading therefor done upon the line and grade obtained by the property
owner from the Borough Engineer and not otherwise. Upon notice, as
provided in §§ 160-11 and 160-12 of this Article, as the case may be, such
work of construction or repairs shall be done by the owner or owners of
such property.
§ 160-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-16
160:261
§ 160-16. Responsibility of Engineer.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of the Borough Engineer to determine,
in the case of any individual property, whether or not the sidewalk shall
be reconstructed or repaired and, if so, the specific part or parts thereof
to be reconstructed or repaired. The Engineer may at any time during
the course of the work of constructing, reconstructing or repairing any
sidewalk visit the site of such work to ascertain whether such work is
being done according to requirements, and he or one of his assistants shall
visit any such site for such purpose whenever requested by the property
owner. Within two days after completion of the work of construction,
reconstruction or repair of any sidewalk, it shall be the duty of the owner
of the property where such work was done to notify the Borough Engineer
of that fact, so that he may inspect such sidewalk to determine whether the
grade thereof has been observed and followed.
§ 160-17. Owners repairing sidewalks upon own initiative.
Any property owner, upon his own initiative and without notice from any
Borough authority, may, construct, reconstruct or repair a sidewalk in front
of or along his property, provided that such owner shall first make
application to the Borough Engineer, and it shall conform to the
requirements of this Article as to line and grade and as to material used,
and that he shall also notify the Borough Engineer as required by § 160-16
of this Article, in two days after completion of the work.
§ 160-18. Construction and repair by Borough; collection of costs.
Upon the neglect of any property owner to comply with any of the
requirements provided in the preceding sections of this Article, the Borough
may, after notice, cause the construction, reconstruction or repair to be
done at the cost of such owner and may collect the cost thereof and
10% additional, together with all charges and expenses, from such owner
and may file a municipal claim therefor to collect the same by action in
assumpsit.
§ 160-19. Service of notice.
All such notices shall be served upon the owner of the premises to which
the notice refers, if such owner is a resident of the Borough. If the owner is
not a resident, then the notice may be served upon the agent or tenant of
the owner or upon the occupant of such premises. If the owner has no agent
or tenant or if there is no occupier of such premises, then service shall be
by notice posted upon the premises.
§ 160-16 ECONOMY CODE § 160-19
160:262
ARTICLE III
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 6-13-1978 as Ord. No. 205]
§ 160-20. Responsibility of owner or tenant.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
any of the streets in the Borough of Economy is hereby required to remove
or cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or alongside
such property, all snow or ice thereon fallen or formed, within eight hours
after the same shall have ceased to fall or to form, provided that snow or ice
that has ceased to fall or to be formed after 6:00 p.m. of any evening may
be removed at any time before 10:00 a.m. of the next morning, provided
further that the owner of a property shall be responsible for conforming
to the requirements of this section where such property is occupied by
such owner or is unoccupied; the tenant or occupier thereof, where such
property is occupied by such tenant or occupier only; and the owner thereof,
where the property is a multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property,
occupied by more than one tenant occupier.
§ 160-21. Removal of snow or ice by Borough; collection of costs.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant as aforesaid shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of § 160-20 of this
Article within the time limit prescribed therein, the Borough authorities
may proceed immediately to clear all snow and/or ice from the sidewalk of
such delinquents and to collect the expenses thereof, with any additional
amount allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case
may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under
§ 160-22 of this Article.
§ 160-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove any snow or ice from
any sidewalk as required by § 160-20 of this Article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days, provided that such fine and costs
of prosecution may be in addition to any expenses and additional amounts
authorized by law, imposed as provided in § 160-21 of this Article.
§ 160-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-22
160:263

ARTICLE IV
Excavations
[Adopted 12-11-1979 as Ord. No. 217]
§ 160-23. Definitions; word usage.
§ 160-24. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful except in cases of emergency for any person to make
any opening or excavation of any kind in or under any street without first
securing a permit from the Borough for each separate undertaking. Any
person making application for a permit shall agree to the terms of this
Article, as hereinafter provided.
§ 160-25. Conditions.
It shall be the duty of the applicant to comply with the following express
conditions and provisions before a permit shall be granted:
A. The following words, when used in this Article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
APPLICANT — Any "person," as defined below, who makes application
for a permit.
EMERGENCY — Any unforeseen circumstance which calls for
immediate action.
PERMITTEE — Any "person," as defined below, who has been issued a
permit and has agreed to fulfill the terms of this Article.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
utility, authority or corporation.
STREET — Any public right-of-way, street, avenue, road, square, alley,
highway or other public place located in the Borough of Economy and
established for the use of vehicles.
B. In this Article, the singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. A written application, on the official form provided for this purpose by
the Borough, shall be filed for each and every opening and signed by the
responsible person.
B. The applicant shall set forth the purpose of such opening.
C. The applicant shall establish the date or dates during which such
opening is to be permitted, including date and time when temporary
and/or final resurfacing is to be performed.
D. The applicant shall take out and maintain public liability and property
damage insurance in an amount sufficient to indemnify and save
§ 160-23 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-25
160:265
§ 160-26. Permit required for each opening; notification of police in
emergency.
The applicant shall secure a permit for each and every street opening. In
cases of emergency, the Police Department shall be notified, and a permit
shall be secured on the first official workday thereafter.
§ 160-27. Calculation of deposit.
The Borough, upon receipt of the properly completed application, shall
compute the amount of money to be deposited by the applicant with the
Borough of Economy to reimburse said Borough for any cost of work and
materials furnished for the backfilling or refilling of the opening or
excavation and the restoring of the surface or replacing the pavement over
any such opening or excavation, together with any expenditure for labor
or material subsequently necessitated in the maintenance, repairing or
resurfacing of any such opening in the street for a period of one year from
date of completion, so as to leave any such street in as good a condition
as it was before such excavation or opening. The amount calculated for the
deposit shall include the estimated cost of inspection and any other cost
that may be directly charged to the opening or excavation of the street.
§ 160-28. Specifications and procedures.
harmless the Borough of Economy from all liability for damages or
injury done to persons and property which may be incurred by reason
of such opening or any failure to properly protect, maintain, barricade,
light, backfill and/or otherwise properly effect the same. The insurance
shall not be in an amount less than $25,000 for injury to persons and
$10,000 for injury to property. The Borough shall set the amount of
insurance in accordance with the size of the opening.
E. The applicant shall deliver to the Borough a deposit or bond in the
amount set by the Borough. This amount shall be calculated according
to § 160-27 of this Article. It shall never be less than $100.
F. Whenever any public utility or municipal authority maintaining
underground facilities shall contemplate more than one street opening
or excavation, it may post a bond to cover all work. The insurance
requirements of Subsection D shall be waived upon receipt of notice of
self-insurance by any public utility or municipal authority. In any case,
the bond shall be approved by the Borough Council. [Amended
2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
A. The permittee shall take every necessary and reasonable precaution to
keep the street in a safe and passable condition both day and night by
guards, barriers, lights and other devices.
B. No opening in any street shall extend beyond the center line of the
street before being refilled and the surface of the street restored to a
condition safe and convenient for travel.
§ 160-25 ECONOMY CODE § 160-28
160:266
§ 160-29. Acceptance of work; refund of deposit. [Amended
2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
After one year, the permanent restoration of the opened or excavated street
shall be inspected by the Borough or other authorized employee of the
Borough, who, if restoration shall be satisfactory and up to the Borough
specification, shall certify that such work is accepted by the Borough. Upon
certification of acceptance of the work, the permittee shall be refunded his
deposit less all costs incurred by the Borough.
C. No more than 250 feet measured longitudinally shall be opened in any
street at any one time.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without express approval of the Borough
and permission therefor endorsed on the permit.
E. Excavated or other material shall be placed or stored on the side of the
operation farthest from the pavement, unless otherwise designated by
the Borough and in such manner that there will be no interference with
the flow of water and/or traffic.
F. Where a pipe drain, pipe culvert or other structure or facility is
encountered, it shall be replaced, restored, strengthened or protected
by the permittee.
G. All openings and excavations shall be backfilled promptly with suitable
materials and thoroughly compacted in layers according to Borough
specifications and as the Borough Engineer shall direct.
H. Temporary surfacing shall be maintained, for a period of at least two
weeks, free of depressions. After that length of time and as soon as
conditions permit, the temporary surfacing is to be removed and
replaced with surfacing similar to and harmonizing with that destroyed.
It shall be accomplished under the direction of the Borough Engineer or
other authorized agent of the Borough and in conformity with Borough
specifications. When weather conditions permit and when approved by
the Borough, the permittee may place the permanent surface
immediately following the refilling operations.
I. All restored surfaces must be at least 12 inches wider on each side than
the excavated trench and shall be restored in strict accordance with the
applicable surface replacement details and/or specifications and
directions of the Borough Engineer.
J. In no case shall any opening or excavation made by a permittee be
considered in the charge or care of the Borough or of any officer or
person employed by the Borough, and no officer or employee of the
Borough is authorized in any way to take or assume any responsibility
over any such opening or excavation, except in the exercise of police
power where and when it is necessary to protect life and property.
§ 160-28 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-30
160:267
§ 160-30. Inspections.
The Borough Engineer or any other authorized employee of the Borough
shall have the right to observe and inspect all work done under a street
opening permit and shall see that all terms and conditions of this Article are
enforced and shall have the power and is hereby directed to prosecute every
person violating any of the provisions contained herein. Such inspection
shall be done at the sole expense of the permittee and shall be deducted
from the deposit.
§ 160-31. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Article shall, upon
conviction thereof before the District Justice, pay a fine of not more than
$300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default thereof of payment of such
fine and costs of prosecution, shall be imprisoned for not more than 90
days. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
§ 160-32. Permit fee schedule.
The permit fee for street openings shall be $25 for three square yards or
less, plus $1 for each additional square yard thereafter. The permit fee for
sidewalk openings shall be $5 for each 10 linear feet or less, plus $0.50 for
each additional linear foot thereafter.
§ 160-30 ECONOMY CODE § 160-32
160:268
Chapter 163
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commissioner — See Ch. 25.
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 58.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 119.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 160-32 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 160-32
160:269

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 163-1. Authority.
The laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania empower local governments
to regulate the subdivision of land. The authority for this function has been
established by the General Assembly under the provisions of Act 247, the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.55
§ 163-2. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance of the Borough of Economy, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania."
§ 163-3. Purpose.
This chapter has been developed to require basic minimum standards for
the development of land, including the subdivision thereof into separate
lots, and establishes rules and regulations, definitions, application
procedures and permits by which the standards may be carried out. These
requirements are designed to provide for:
A. The coordinated development of land throughout the Borough.
B. Assurance that new subdivisions will be developed consistent with the
maintenance of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
C. Necessary public facilities in an amount and size commensurate with
the needs of the area to be subdivided and the uses to which the land
will be devoted.
D. Assistance in identification of hazards from flooding, landslides,
subsidence or other dangers by requirements that land subject to such
dangers will be made safe for its proposed use or be set aside for uses
that will not precipitate dangerous conditions.
E. Protection of the soil, water and other natural environmental resources
of the area from the effects of uncontrolled development practices.
F. The coordination of continuing community growth with respect to
overall development considerations, such as sewage disposal, water
supply, drainage facilities, traffic circulation systems, emergency
accessways, retention of open spaces and related factors.
G. The equitable administration of all subdivision and development
proposals throughout the municipality.
55.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 163-1 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-3
160:271

ARTICLE II
Compliance and Application
§ 163-4. Subject properties.
No subdivision or land development of any lot, tract or parcel of land shall
be effected and no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other
facilities and public utilities in connection therewith shall be constructed,
opened or dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of
occupants of buildings abutting thereon except in strict conformance with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 163-5. Plan approval required.
No lot in a subdivision shall be sold, no permit to erect any building upon
land in a subdivision shall be issued and no building shall be erected
in a subdivision unless and until a subdivision plan has been approved
and recorded and until the improvements required by the governing body
in connection therewith have either been constructed or guaranteed as
hereinafter provided.
§ 163-4 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-5
160:273

ARTICLE III
Definitions and Word Usage
§ 163-6. Word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted or defined as follows:
§ 163-7. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless otherwise specifically stated. Words not defined herein
shall be observed and applied according to their generally accepted
dictionary definitions.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure located on the
same lot with the principal use or structure, that is subordinate and
incidental to the principal structure or use of the property and that may
occupy a separate structure and/or area on or in the ground, including, but
not limited to storage sheds or other storage structures, off-street parking,
signs, off-street loading, gazebos, children's playhouses, greenhouses for
personal use, garages, swimming pools, detached decks, fences and similar
structures.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
ALLEY — A minor right-of-way providing secondary vehicular access to the
side or rear of two or more properties.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Any application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to
the start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
ARTERIAL STREET — See "street, arterial."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
A. Words used in the present tense shall include the future.
B. Words used in the singular number shall include the plural.
C. Words used in the plural number shall include the singular.
D. The word "person" includes a corporation as well as an individual or an
association of individuals.
E. The words "shall" and "will" are always mandatory.
F. The word "may" is permissive.
§ 163-6 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:275
BLOCK — An area bounded by streets, utility, railroad, public facility or
other rights-of-way or easements or other definite barriers.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — Borough Council of the Borough of Economy,
Beaver County, Pennsylvania.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
BOROUGH ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed by Borough Council to
serve as the engineer for the Borough.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
BUILDING LINE — The line of that face of the building nearest the front
line of the lot at the street right-of-way line.
BUILDING or STRUCTURE — An independent and detached structure
having a roof supported by columns or walls or resting on its own
foundation, including but not limited to principal structures, mobile homes,
garages, greenhouses and other accessory buildings.
CARTWAY (not right-of-way) — That portion of the total street right-ofway
surfaced or otherwise prepared or meant for vehicular use. Width is
determined from face of curb to face of curb or from one edge of driving
surface to the other edge of driving surface.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections, defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the center lines of streets. (See Illustration in
Appendix B.)56[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
COMMISSION, PLANNING — The Economy Borough Planning Commission
as duly appointed by the local governing body.
COMMON PRIVATE DRIVEWAY — See "driveway, common private."[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Borough that
guides physical development of the Borough and that consists of maps,
charts and textual matter in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.57[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
CONDOMINIUM — A development where each dwelling unit or structure is
individually owned and the owner of each dwelling unit or structure has an
undivided interest in the common areas and facilities of the structures and
surrounding grounds.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
56.Editor's Note: Appendix B is located at the end of this chapter.
57.Editor’s Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:276
CONSOLIDATION — The combination of two or more lots, tracts or parcels
of land for the purpose of a land development. For purposes of this chapter,
a consolidation shall be considered a subdivision.[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS — A document entitled "Construction
Standards of the Borough of Economy" prepared by the Borough Engineer,
adopted and amended from time to time by resolution of Borough Council
upon recommendation of the Borough Engineer, copies of which are on
file in the office of the Borough Secretary or his/her authorized designee
and are available for sale to residents or other interested parties.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
COUNTY — County of Beaver, Pennsylvania.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
COUNTY PLANNING COMMISSION — Beaver County Planning
Commission.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
COVENANT — An obligation defined by law or agreement, the violation of
which can be restrained by court action; these are usually stated in the
deed. Private "covenants" are not legally enforceable by the Borough.
CUL-DE-SAC — A street open to traffic and pedestrian access, with one end
permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
DEVELOPER — Any person, individual, firm, partnership, association,
corporation, estate trust or any other group acting as a unit who or which
makes or causes to be made a subdivision of land or a land development.
DRIVEWAY, COMMON PRIVATE — A vehicular access route serving two or
more residential lots or parcels or two or more businesses on a single lot
which provides access to a public street.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
DRIVEWAY, INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE — A vehicular access route serving only
one parcel or lot which provides access to a public street, but which
does not provide access to any other lot or parcel under separate
ownership.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms that are used as living quarters
for one family and that have permanent facilities for sleeping, cooking and
eating, as well as sanitary facilities.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A residential building designed exclusively
for occupancy by three or more families living independently of each other
and containing three or more separate dwelling units, including triplexes,
fourplexes, townhouses and garden apartments.[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A residential building containing one
dwelling unit that is the only principal structure on the lot, surrounded on
all sides by open space.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:277
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A residential building designed exclusively
for occupancy by two families living independently of each other, and
containing two dwelling units, each with a separate entrance directly to
the outside, including double houses, duplexes and carriage homes.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
EASEMENT — A grant by a property owner for the use of land, which is
given to persons, corporations or the public for purposes such as access,
utility placement or similar activities.
FAMILY[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434] —
An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or foster child care, including domestic servants or gratuitous
guests, thereof; or a group of not more than three unrelated persons
living together without supervision in a dwelling unit, or not more
than eight persons living together in a group living arrangement with
supervision, provided that the group living arrangement meets all of
the following criteria:
It provides nonrouting support services, including supervision,
personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation,
to persons who need such assistance in order to use and enjoy a
dwelling or to avoid being placed within an institution, because of
physical disability, old age, mental retardation, or other handicap
or disability as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act58 or
the Americans with Disabilities Act;59
(1)
It provides for the joint occupancy of a dwelling unit where the
residents maintain a common household and practice, on a
permanent or long-term basis, a joint economic, social and cultural
life.
(2)
(3) It does not involve the housing of persons on a transient basis;
It does not involve the housing or treatment of persons accepted
for residence in the group living arrangement on the basis of their
status as criminal offenders, juvenile offenders or delinquents, or
who would otherwise qualify for residence by virtue of having
been found by any governmental tribunal, court or agency to be
a danger to society or are on release or under the jurisdiction of
the criminal justice system, a government bureau of corrections or
similar institution.
(4)
A.
Family shall not include persons living together in a group care facility,
personal care boarding home or transitional dwelling, as defined in
the Borough Zoning Ordinance,60 or any other supervised group living
arrangement for persons not protected by the Fair Housing Act or for
B.
58.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 3601 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
60.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:278
FEE — The required charge, payable to the Borough, established from
time to time by Resolution of Borough Council, collected to defray the
costs of processing an application, reviewing an application or inspecting
the installation of public improvements pursuant to this chapter.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
FINAL APPLICATION — The written and graphic materials specified by this
chapter to be submitted to the Borough in order to obtain final approval of a
proposed subdivision or land development plan.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
FINAL PLAT — The map or plan of a proposed subdivision or land
development containing all the information required by this chapter and
any subdivision regulations or other requirements adopted by the County of
Beaver for final plat approval and in a form acceptable for recording in the
office of the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
FLAG LOT — A lot that does not have the minimum required lot width at
the public or private street frontage and which has a strip of land that is
narrower than the minimum required for width, which strip serves as an
access corridor to the buildable area of the lot which meets the lot width
requirement at the building line and which is located behind another lot
that fronts on a public street. The layout of a flag lot is such that the access
corridor appears to be the "flagpole" and the wider buildable area behind
the existing lot is the "flag." (See Illustration in Appendix A.61)[Added
4-8-2003 by Ord. No. 386]
FLOODPLAIN — A flat or low land area subject to inundation from a stream,
river or watercourse and/or any area subject to the rapid accumulation of
surface waters from any source.
FRONT BUILDING LINE — A line parallel to or concentric with the front lot
line, the minimum measurement of which is the front yard depth required
by the Borough Zoning Ordinance.62[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
GOVERNING BODY — The duly elected Borough Council of the Borough of
Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
GROSS ACREAGE — The entire land area of a tract, as distinguished from
net acreage.
HALF STREET — A strip of land equal to or less than 1/2 of the required
rights-of-way reserved or proposed for street purposes along the property
line. "Half streets" are prohibited except to complete another "half street".
any persons who constitute a direct threat to others or their physical
property.
61.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:279
IMPROVEMENTS — Those physical changes to the land necessary to
produce usable and desirable lots from raw acreage, including but not
limited to grading, paving, curbs, gutters, storm sewers and drains,
improvements to existing watercourses, sidewalks, crosswalks, street signs,
monuments, water supply facilities, sewage disposal facilities and
stormwater control facilities.
IMPROVEMENTS, PRIVATE — All roads, streets, walkways, gutters,
stormwater management facilities, curbs, sewers and other facilities to be
owned, maintained or operated by a private entity such as an individual,
corporation or homeowners' association for which plans and specifications
must comply with the construction standards of the Borough.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
IMPROVEMENTS, PUBLIC — All grading, paving, curbs, streets, walkways,
gutters, stormwater management facilities, water distribution facilities,
sanitary sewerage collection facilities and other facilities to be dedicated
to or maintained by the Borough for which plans and specifications must
comply with the construction standards of the Borough.[Added 4-10-2012
by Ord. No. 434]
INDIVIDUAL PRIVATE DRIVEWAY — See "driveway, individual
private."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
INSPECTOR — The Borough Engineer or any other authorized
representative assigned by Borough Council to make any or all necessary
inspections of the work performed and materials furnished by the developer
or the contractors selected to install the improvements required by this
chapter.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
INTERIOR LOT — See "lot, interior."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan which encompasses a proposed land
development, which, in addition to a plat of subdivision, if required, includes
all covenants relating to the use of the land; the proposed use, location
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively; or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots, regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:280
and bulk of buildings and other structures; the intensity of use or density
of development; public improvements; private improvements; and common
open space. The land development plan shall include all of the written and
graphic information required by this chapter.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
LANDSLIDE-PRONE AREA — An area characterized by unstable slopes and
land surfaces whose history, geology, soil, bedrock structure and climate
indicate a potential for landslides as identified by the United States
Geological Survey or the Borough Engineer.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase, whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition; a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner; or other persons having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOCAL STREET — See "street, local."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LOT — A tract or parcel of land designated for the conveyance or transfer
of ownership, improvement or sale, whether immediate or future.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines, excluding the area within a
street right-of-way.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the intersection of, and fronting on, two or more
street rights-of-way.[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE — A lot that has access to a public right-ofway
from both the front yard and backyard. "Double frontage lots" may
be permitted only as a variance due to unnecessary hardship or unique
physical circumstances that are not created by an appellant.
LOT, INTERIOR — A lot, other than a corner lot or a double frontage lot,
having frontage on only one street other than an alley.[Added 4-10-2012
by Ord. No. 434]
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot that individually, or as part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Beaver
County.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
LOT, REVERSE FRONTAGE — A lot abutting a public right-of-way along
both the front and rear yards, having access to only one of the public rightsof-
way.
LOT WIDTH — The total horizontal distance across the lot between the side
lot lines, measured at the building line.63
MAINTENANCE BOND — Surety, in a form acceptable to the Borough, in
the form of cash, a certified check, a letter of credit or corporate bond
63.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “master plan,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434.
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:281
from a surety company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and approved by the Borough Solicitor which guarantees
the repair or maintenance of the public improvements required by this
chapter for a specified period after their completion and acceptance by the
Borough.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
MAJOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, major."[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties in a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement which the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
MINOR SUBDIVISION — See "subdivision, minor."[Amended 4-10-2012
by Ord. No. 434]
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.[Amended 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designed and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes, as controlled by Chapter
119 of the Borough Code, Mobile Home Parks, governing mobile home
parks.[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
MODIFICATION — Relief granted by Borough Council, upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission and the Borough Engineer,
when an equal or better specification is available to meet the Borough
design or construction standards or, in a particular case, when by reason
of exceptional topographic or other physical conditions, strict compliance
with any requirement of this chapter would result in undue physical
hardship.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, multifamily."[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
NET ACREAGE — The total acreage of a development site minus the areas
utilized for accessways, on-grade utilities and facilities, lakes, ponds or
similar water surfaces and parking facilities.
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:282
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A sanitary sewage collection system in which
sewage is carried from an individual lot or dwelling unit by a system of pipes
to a central treatment and disposal plant, which may be publicly or privately
owned and operated.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — A potable water distribution system in which
water is carried to individual lots or dwelling units by a system of pipes from
a central water source, located beyond the limits of the lot being served,
which may be publicly or privately owned and operated.
ON-SITE SEWER SERVICE — A system of piping tanks, or other facilities
serving only a single lot and disposing of sewage in whole or in part into the
soil.
ON-SITE WATER SERVICE — A single system of piping, tanks or other
facilities serving only a single lot and obtaining the water either in whole
or in part from a primary source located within the limits of the lot being
served.
OPEN SPACE — An unoccupied and undeveloped space open to the sky.
PARCEL — See "lot."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PARKING SPACE — For purposes of this chapter, off-street parking and
loading areas shall be defined as follows:
PATIO — An outside surfaced courtyard or inner area having no roof.
PEDESTRIAN WALKWAY — An area, other than a sidewalk, reserved by
easement for pedestrian circulation across private property which is
improved with a dust-free, all-weather surface.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
PERFORMANCE GUARANTY — Surety, in a form acceptable to the
Borough, in the form of cash, a certified check, a letter of credit, a corporate
performance bond or a labor and material payment bond from a surety
company licensed to do business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and approved by the Borough Solicitor which guarantees the satisfactory
completion of the public and private improvements required by this
chapter.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PLAN, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plan, prepared by a
registered land surveyor for official recording as required by statute, to
delineate boundaries, define property rights, proposed streets and all other
improvements.
PLAN, PRELIMINARY — A tentative subdivision plan of an entire tract,
prepared by a registered professional engineer, land surveyor or landscape
architect, showing approximate street and lot layout as a basis for
consideration and review prior to preparation of a final plan.
An off-street parking space shall be a minimum dimension of nine feet
wide by 20 feet long.
A.
A required off-street loading space shall be a minimum dimension of 14
feet wide by 60 feet long.
B.
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:283
PLAT — A map or plan, either preliminary or final, indicating the
subdivision, replatting or consolidation of land or a land
development.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PRIVATE IMPROVEMENTS — See "improvements, private."[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PRIVATE STREET — See "street, private."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
PROFESSIONAL CONSULTANTS — Persons who provide expert or
professional advice, including, but not limited to, attorneys, certified public
accountants, engineers, geologists, land surveyors, landscape architects or
planners.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council, Planning Commission or Zoning Hearing Board intended
to inform and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance
with this chapter.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS — See "improvements, public."[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
July 3, 1986 (P. L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."64[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall be not
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
PUBLIC UTILITY — Includes gas, electric, telephone, sewerage, water and
communication cable services.
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
REPLATTING — See "resubdivision or replatting."[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
RESUBDIVISION or REPLATTING — The modification of a recorded
subdivision, in whole or in part, by a redesign of lots, size, area or street
layout. Such action requires subdivision approval.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved for use as a street, interior walk or other
public purpose and dedicated for public use; all must be recorded in the
County Recorder of Deeds office. For purposes of this chapter, public rightof-
way lines shall prevail over private parcel lines that are designated as
falling within the public "right-of-way." When a lot abuts a "right-of-way" of
a public thoroughfare, all applicable lot area and front, side and rear lot
requirements shall be computed from the public right-of-way line.
64.Editor’s Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:284
SETBACK — The minimum distance that a structure can be located from
a right-of-way or property line or another structure, thereby creating a
required open space on a lot.
SEWAGE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The designated official of the
Borough who issues and reviews on-site sewage permit applications and
conducts such investigations and inspections as are necessary to implement
the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, as amended, and the rules and
regulations thereunder.65
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
SIGHT DISTANCE — The maximum unobstructed vision along a street from
a vehicle located at a given point on a street.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — See" dwelling, single-family."[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
SLOPE — The degree of rise or descent of the land surface calculated by
dividing the number of feet of vertical rise or descent in elevation by the
number of feet of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT — A plan to control the increase and
concentration of runoff of stormwater caused by land development or
predeveloped conditions.66
STREET, ARTERIAL — A public street which serves large volumes of local
and through traffic and which collects and distributes traffic from collector
streets through the region.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
STREET, COLLECTOR — A public street which, in addition to giving access
to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and provides a route for carrying
considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and arterial
streets.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
STREET, LOCAL — A public street, other than an arterial or collector street,
designed to provide access to abutting lots and to discourage through
traffic.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
STREET MAINTENANCE — The procedure applied to new or existing
streets or streets under construction, including but not limited to
resurfacing, regrading, drainage improvement, pothole repair, dust
prevention practices and snow removal.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street, including the entire private right-of-way,
which is privately owned and maintained through private agreement and
which is intended for private use. A private street provides access to several
lots or parcels which do not have access to a public street and which require
access to a public street through the private street.[Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
65.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
66.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “street classifications,” which immediately
followed this definition, was repealed 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434.
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:285
SUBDIVIDER — The owner or authorized agent of the owner of the
subdivision.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the division by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBDIVISION, MAJOR — A subdivision containing four or more lots or a
subdivision of any number of lots that involves the construction or extension
of a public street or the construction or extension of any other public
improvements, including, but not limited to, storm sewers or sanitary
sewers.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
SUBDIVISION, MINOR — A subdivision, consolidation or replatting, as
defined herein, that creates no more than three lots, including the residual
lot or parcel, if any, both of which have frontage on an improved public
street, and not involving the construction or extension or creation of a
public street or any other public improvements, as defined herein, and
which does not adversely affect the future development of the remainder of
the parcel or any adjoining property.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
SURVEYOR — A registered, professional land survey or licensed as such by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
TOPOGRAPHIC MAP — A map showing ground elevations by contour lines
and the location of important natural, man-made and other features.67
TRAFFIC CIRCULATION MITIGATION ACTION PLAN — A plan prepared
as part of the traffic study required by this chapter that proposes
recommendations for moderating negative impacts and maximizing positive
impacts of the expected trip generation from a proposed
development.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
TRAFFIC STUDY — An analysis prepared, signed and sealed by a qualified
traffic engineer, in accordance with the technical requirements specified
in this chapter, calculating the expected trip generation from a proposed
development using the current manuals of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) for methodology and trip generation ratios and analyzing
the impact of the traffic generated by the proposed development on the
capacities and levels of service of all streets and intersections in the vicinity
of the site.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — See "dwelling, two family."[Added 4-10-2012
by Ord. No. 434]
USE — The purpose or activity for which the land or building is designed,
arranged or intended or for which it is occupied or maintained.68
67.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “unit, dwelling,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434. See now "dwelling unit."
§ 163-7 ECONOMY CODE § 163-7
160:286
WATERCOURSE — A stream, intermittent stream, river, creek, channel
or ditch, whether natural or man-made, which carries water.[Added
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between the side lot lines across the full
lot width from the front lot line to a line parallel to, or concentric with, the
front lot line known as the "front building line," the minimum horizontal
distance required by the Zoning Ordinance.69[Amended 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
YARD, REAR — A yard extending between the side lot lines parallel to the
rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance from the rear lot
line required by the Zoning Ordinance.70[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the required front building line to the
rear lot line parallel to the side lot line, the minimum horizontal distance
from the side lot line required by the Zoning Ordinance. 71[Amended
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
ZONING ORDINANCE — The Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Economy,
Ordinance No. 417, adopted March 25, 2008, as now or hereafter
amended.[Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
68.Editor’s Note: The former definition of “variance,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434.
69.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
71.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 163-7 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-7
160:287

ARTICLE IV
Preapplication Conference
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
§ 163-8. Preapplication activities.
§ 163-9. Effect of preapplication meeting.
A preapplication meeting shall not constitute formal filing of any application
for approval of a subdivision or land development, shall not bind the
Planning Commission to approve any concept presented in the
preapplication meeting and shall not protect the application from any
A. Conference with Borough Secretary. Prior to filing an application for
preliminary approval, the applicant may meet with the Borough
Secretary to obtain application forms and procedural guidelines and to
discuss application procedures and applicable ordinance requirements.
The Borough Secretary may invite other Borough or Authority
representatives to attend, if warranted.
B. Meeting with Planning Commission.
(1) In addition, prior to filing an application for preliminary approval,
the developer may appear before the Planning Commission for a
preapplication meeting to discuss the applicable regulations
governing the subdivision and/or development of the property and
the feasibility and timing of the application. The applicant shall
contact the Borough Secretary or his/her authorized designee at
least five calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission.
(2) The preapplication meeting with the Planning Commission is
voluntary, and no formal application or fee is required. This
opportunity is afforded to the developer to obtain information and
guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring
substantial expenses for plan preparation.
C. Suggested information sources. While no formal application is required
for a preapplication meeting, it is suggested that the applicant provide
one copy of readily available information with the request for a
preapplication meeting that shows the location of the property and any
special features such as streams, floodplains or other conditions that
may affect the development of the property. Readily available resources
that may be used include the deed for the property, a property survey,
the Tax Maps prepared by the Beaver County Assessor's Office, U.S.G.S.
Quadrangle Map showing natural features and topography, the
National Flood Insurance Administration (NFIA) Flood Hazard
Boundary Maps, Natural Resources Conservation Service Maps of Soil
Types, the United States Bureau of Mines Coal Mine Maps and Beaver
County Planning Commission Geographic Information System (GIS)
mapping.
§ 163-8 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-9
160:289
subsequent changes in ordinance provisions between the preapplication
meeting and the official date of filing of an application for preliminary
approval of a subdivision or land development under the terms of this
chapter which may affect the proposed development.
§ 163-9 ECONOMY CODE § 163-9
160:290
ARTICLE V
Preliminary Plans
§ 163-10. Procedure.
A. Following the (optional) preapplication conference, the applicant shall
submit an application for approval containing all the information
required by § 163-11 or § 163-13, whichever is applicable, to the
Borough Secretary at least 21 calendar days, but no sooner than 28
calendar days, prior to the regular monthly meeting of the Planning
Commission. Upon receipt, the Borough Secretary shall forward copies
to the Beaver County Planning Commission for a review and report,
subject to payment of the required review fee by the applicant. The
Borough shall not approve an application for preliminary approval until
the county review is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the
date the application was forwarded to the county. [Amended
4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 400]
B. Planning Commission review. The Borough Planning Commission shall
review the plan submitted, covering the requirements of this chapter
point by point, and shall consult with the Borough Engineer and other
officials as appropriate.
C. Planning Commission action. The Planning Commission shall notify the
subdivider of the scheduled meeting place, date, time and agenda if the
plan is to be reviewed at a later date. Within 30 days following the
review meeting, the Planning Commission shall submit a written report
to the governing body recommending approval, conditional approval or
disapproval, each with reasons for the action. If the Planning
Commission requests additional data or plan changes as conditions
precedent to approval, the subdivider may, in lieu of having a
disapproval or conditional approval sent to the governing body, request
another review meeting to provide the requested documentation. The
subdivider shall submit the request to the Planning Commission, in
writing, within five working days (Monday through Friday, holidays
excluded) of the initial review meeting and shall further agree, in
writing, to any extension of the original ninety-day review period.
D. Action of the governing body. The governing body shall act on the
preliminary plan and notify the subdivider within 90 days of the regular
meeting of the Planning Commission next following the date the
application is filed. The governing body shall state its approval,
conditional approval or disapproval, giving reasons for each, and shall
notify the subdivider by certified or by registered mail. If approved or
conditionally approved, the authorization to submit a final plan shall be
included with the notification.
E. Nature of approval. Approval of a preliminary plan shall not constitute
approval of a final plan, but rather an expression of approval of the
layout submitted on the preliminary plan as a guide to the preparation
of the final plan. (See § 163-12A.)
§ 163-10 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-11
160:291
§ 163-11. Plans and data.
All applications for preliminary plan approval submitted to the Borough
Planning Commission shall include, but not be limited to, the following
information:
A. The preliminary plan shall be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100
feet or greater detail.
B. Existing land uses shall be shown for the subject property and adjacent
land areas.
C. A location map shall be included which relates the development site to
contiguous areas of the community, highway systems and other
significant developments.
D. The plan shall show or be accompanied by the following;
(1) A draft of protective covenants, if any.
(2) A title, to include:
(a) The name by which the subdivision will be recorded.
(b) The location by municipality, county and state.
(c) The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
(d) The name and seal of the registered professional engineer,
land surveyor or landscape architect who prepared the plan.
(e) The North point, date and graphic scale.
(3) Existing easements and their location, width and distance.
(4) Contours, which shall be shown at vertical intervals of 20 feet.
Contour data of greater detail may be required for land areas with
slopes of 5% or less. Contour lines must extend a sufficient distance
on all sides of the property perimeter to determine adjacent
topographic influences.
(5) Datum to which contour elevations refer.
(6) Bench marks.
(7) Existing physical features, to include:
(a) Watercourses, culverts, bridges and drains.
(b) Buildings, sewers, water mains and fire hydrants, water wells
and septic facilities.
(c) Streets on or adjacent to the tract, including names, right-ofway
widths and cartway widths.
§ 163-11 ECONOMY CODE § 163-11
160:292
(d) Telephone conduit lines, electric power transmission lines,
petroleum product lines and other significant man-made
features.
(8) Proposed improvements, which shall include, in scale dimensions:
(a) The location, name and width of all proposed streets and paved
cartways.
(b) All rights-of-way and easements and the purposes for which
they are to be established.
(c) The lot lines of all parcels.
(d) Building lines.
(e) Reservations of ground for public or common use.
(f) A general drainage plan for stormwater, to include the
proposed flow of stormwater in relation to natural channels.
(g) A plan of the proposed water distribution system or a plan
showing the location of individual wells. In the case of public
water service, a letter from the applicable water authority shall
be submitted which states that the authority has available
capacity to serve the proposed development. [Amended
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
(h) A plan of the proposed sanitary sewerage system or a plan,
where required, showing the proposed location and type of onlot
sewage disposal facilities. This plan shall be in accordance
with the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537), as
amended.72
(i) The proposed land use of the improvements.
(j) The names and addresses of abutting property owners.
(k) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the
subdivider's entire holding, a sketch shall be submitted of the
prospective street layout of the remainder of the land.
E. The subdivider shall provide such additional information as may be
required by the Planning Commission or governing body to more fully
evaluate the proposed subdivision and its effect on adjacent property or
the Borough as a whole. Such information may include:
(1) Street profiles showing existing ground elevations and proposed
center-line street grades.
(2) The subsurface condition of the tract.
72.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 163-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-11
160:293
(3) Typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks.
(4) The sizes of water pipes and location of valves and fire hydrants.
(5) The location of manholes, invert elevations, grades and sizes of
sanitary sewers.
(6) If the proposed subdivision or a part thereof is located in a
designated floodplain, base flood elevation data shall be contained
in the plan.
(7) If the proposed subdivision is located in or within proximity to a
wetlands area, plans and measures for the protection of said area
shall be included as a part of the application for subdivision
approval.
(8) The size, location and use of structures on adjacent lands within 25
feet of the proposed subdivision shall be shown in all instances
where public rights-of-way or private accessways are contemplated
along or within 25 feet of the perimeter of the subdivision.
F. Geotechnical study. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
(1) On development sites where earthmoving activities will disturb five
acres or more, a geotechnical report by a qualified registered
professional engineer shall be submitted regarding soil and
subsurface conditions and the probable measures needed, if any, to
be considered in the design of the development and its
infrastructure, the location of structures and the design of
foundations.
(2) The Borough Engineer may recommend a waiver of this
requirement if, in his professional opinion, there is no history of
adverse subsurface conditions or where available soils information
or other geotechnical data do not indicate the potential for
landslides, subsidence or other subsurface hazards.
(3) When required, the geotechnical report shall contain the following
information:
(a) The following information shall be provided at a minimum. Any
site-specific issues identified by the applicant's geotechnical
engineer, not specifically listed below, shall be addressed in the
geotechnical study.
[1] Foundation bearing materials and associated settlement.
[2] Fill embankment base preparation, support, maximum
allowable slope, suitable borrow material and compaction
requirements.
[3] Maximum allowable slope and stability of cut slopes.
§ 163-11 ECONOMY CODE § 163-11
160:294
[4] Coal mining below the site, mine location and amount of
cover and measures to prevent mine subsidence, if
required.
[5] Presence and control of groundwater.
[6] Identification of potentially expansive carbonaceous
materials or slag to be encountered in excavations and
measures to prevent their detrimental effects.
[7] Delineation of on-site fill materials and their impact on site
development.
[8] All areas where public infrastructure is proposed.
(b) Geotechnical engineering reports shall be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(c) The Borough Engineer may require that the geotechnical
engineering report and site development drawings be
reviewed by a separate geotechnical engineering consultant
selected by the Borough. The applicant required to submit the
report shall be required to pay for the cost of the independent
professional consultant review.
G. Traffic study. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
(1) A traffic study shall be required for any subdivision or land
development which will generate, on the average, 75 or more
additional trips during the adjacent roadway's peak hours. The
Borough Engineer may require a traffic study for subdivisions or
land developments generating less than 75 vehicle trips during
peak hours in cases where known traffic deficiencies exist in the
area of the proposed development.
(2) Borough Council may waive the traffic study requirements where
the proposed development was incorporated as part of a previously
submitted traffic study.
(3) Prior to undertaking a traffic study, the applicant shall submit a
proposed scope of services to the Borough Engineer for review and
approval. The traffic study shall include the following, if
appropriate, as determined by the Borough Engineer and/or the
Borough's traffic consultant:
(a) A brief description of the proposed project in terms of land use
and magnitude.
(b) An inventory and analysis of existing roadway and traffic
conditions in the site environs, including:
[1] Roadway network and traffic control.
§ 163-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-11
160:295
[2] Existing traffic volumes in terms of peak hours and
average daily traffic (ADT).
[3] Planned roadway improvements by others.
[4] Intersection levels of service.
[5] Other measures of roadway adequacy, (i.e., lane widths;
traffic signal warrants; vehicle studies, etc.).
(c) Projected site-generated traffic volumes in terms of:
[1] Peak hours and ADT (by development phase, if required).
[2] Approach and departure distribution including method of
determination.
[3] Site traffic volumes on roadway.
(d) An analysis of future traffic conditions, including:
[1] Future design year, or years, with phasing, combined
traffic volumes (site traffic plus future roadway traffic).
[2] Intersection levels of service.
[3] A pavement analysis of roadways which are projected to
experience significant increases in ADT volumes off site.
[4] Other measures of roadway adequacy, (i.e., lane width;
traffic signal warrants; vehicle delay studies, etc.).
[5] When access is onto a state road, the analysis of future
conditions shall be consistent with Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation requirements.
(e) A description of future levels of service and their compliance
with standards for traffic capacity of streets, intersections and
driveways. New streets shall be designed for adequate traffic
capacity defined as follows. All reference to levels of services
(LOS) shall be as defined by the Highway Capacity Manual,
Special Report 209, published by the Transportation Research
Board.
[1] Traffic capacity LOS shall be based upon a future design
year which coincides with completion of the development.
[2] Unsignalized intersections or driveways which intersect
streets shall be designed for LOS C or better for each
traffic movement unless otherwise specified by the
Borough.
[3] Signalized intersections shall be designed for LOS C or
better. Existing intersections impacted by development
traffic shall maintain a minimum LOS D or, if future base
§ 163-11 ECONOMY CODE § 163-11
160:296
LOS E or F, then degeneration in delays shall be mitigated.
A future design year without the proposed development
shall be completed for comparison purposes.
[4] Streets shall be designed for a minimum LOS C.
(f) Description and analysis of the proposed access plan and site
plan, including:
[1] Access plan, including analysis of required sight distances
using Pennsylvania Department of Transportation criteria
and description of access roadway, location, geometric
conditions and traffic control.
[2] On-site circulation plan showing parking locations and
dimensions, loading access, circulation roadway,
pedestrian circulation and traffic control.
(g) A traffic circulation mitigation action plan that shall include:
[1] Project features relative to site access and on-site
circulation which could be modified to maximize positive
impact or minimize negative impact.
[2] Off-site improvement plan, depicting required roadway
and signal installation and signing improvements to meet
the minimum level of service requirements.
(h) Traffic calming.
[1] Streets in residential subdivisions or land developments
that are proposed to be dedicated to the Borough shall be
evaluated to determine the potential for speeding and
encouraging cut-through traffic from existing
neighborhoods. If such potential exists, the traffic
circulation mitigation action plan required by Subsection
G(3)(g) above, shall include one or more of the following
traffic calming measures:
[a] Speed humps or speed tables.
[b] Raised intersections.
[c] Textured pavements.
[d] Traffic islands or traffic circles.
[e] Roundabouts.
[f] Chicanes.
[g] Realigned intersections.
[h] Traffic diversions.
§ 163-11 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-11
160:297
[2] The traffic calming recommendations shall be prepared in
accordance with the Borough's traffic calming policies and
procedures adopted by Resolution 425 of Borough Council
on August 25, 2009. The requirement for a petition
outlined in the resolution shall apply only to existing
Borough streets that may intersect with proposed streets
or be located within the limits of the site of a proposed
subdivision or land development.
(i) Review. Based on the scope of work for review and
determination of the complexity of the development project,
the Borough may require the traffic study to be reviewed by a
traffic consultant selected by the Borough. In such case, the
applicant required to submit the traffic study shall be required
to pay for the cost of the consultant review. No permits for
construction or occupancy of a site shall be issued until said
consultant fees are paid.
§ 163-11 ECONOMY CODE § 163-11
160:298
ARTICLE VI
Final Plans
§ 163-12. Procedure.
A. Application. Approval of a preliminary plan shall be prerequisite to the
filing of a final plan with the Borough Planning Commission, except that
the requirement for a preliminary plan approval may be waived
following a preapplication conference (see Article IV), provided that the
subdivision plan complies with the definition for a minor subdivision or
that the subdivider does not contemplate further subdivision of the
parcel, submits a scale drawing of the entire parcel which delineates
the areas to be subdivided and complies with all requirements for final
plans and includes information required in § 163-11 of this chapter.
B. Review and approvals. The filing of final plans by the subdivider and
official reviews shall follow the same requirements and procedures as
the requirements for preliminary plans as cited in Article V, § 163-10A,
B and C of this chapter.
C. Action of the governing body. The governing body shall render its
decision on the final plan and communicate its decision to the
subdivider not later than 90 days following the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date of application filing.
(1) The decision of the governing body shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant by certified or registered mail at his
last known address not later than five days following the decision.
(2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed, the decision
shall specify the defects found in the application and describe the
requirements that have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the governing body to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
specified shall be deemed an approval of the application, unless the
applicant has agreed, in writing, to an extension of time or change
in the prescribed manner of presentation of communication of the
decision, in which case failure to meet the extended time or change
in manner of presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(4) From the time an application for approval of a preliminary or final
plan is duly filed as provided in this chapter and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall affect the decision on such application
adversely to the applicant, and the applicant shall be entitled to a
decision in accordance with the provisions of the governing
ordinances or plans as they stood at the time the application was
duly filed. However, if an application is properly and finally denied,
§ 163-12 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-12
160:299
§ 163-13. Plans and data.
All applications for final plan approval shall include, but not be limited to,
the following information and shall:
any subsequent application shall be subject to the intervening
change in government regulations. When an application for
approval of a plan has been approved or approved subject to
conditions acceptable to the applicant, no subsequent change or
amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied to affect adversely the right
of the applicant to commence and to complete any aspect of the
approved development in accordance with the terms of such
approval, within five years from such approval. Where final
approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the five-year period
shall be counted from the date of the preliminary approval. In
the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary approval,
the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of the
governing ordinances or plans as they stood at the time when the
application for such approval was duly filed.
(5) Before acting on any subdivision plan, the governing body may hold
a public hearing thereon, after the public notice, and may notify
surrounding property owners of such public hearing.
(6) The governing body shall not give its final approval to a final plan
until the County Planning Commission report is received or until
the expiration of 30 days from the date the final plan application
was forwarded to the county.
(7) The governing body shall not give its final approval to a final plan
prior to approval of required planning modules as specified by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
D. Nature of approval. Approval of a final plan shall not constitute
authorization to commence construction. Prior to construction start, all
necessary permits, approvals, agreements and sureties must be
secured by the developer.
E. Title certificate. No final plan shall be approved by the governing body
unless a certificate of title or other proof of a proprietary interest in the
land on the part of the subdivider is furnished.
A. Be drawn on Mylar or other comparable permanent and reproducible
material and shall be on sheets not larger than 24 inches by 36 inches,
including a border of 1/2 inch on all sides, except the binding edge
which shall be one inch. More than one sheet may be used for larger
tracts and must be of the same scale and indexed and provide space for
required certifications.
B. Be produced from a CAD file or be drawn with waterproof black ink,
and all records, data, entries and statements thereon shall be made
§ 163-12 ECONOMY CODE § 163-13
160:300
with the same type of ink or reproducible typing. [Amended
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
C. Be drawn to a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or such other scale
approved by the Planning Commission and shall be of sufficient size to
clearly show all notations, dimensions and entries. All dimensions shall
be shown in feet and decimals of a foot.
D. Contain a title block with the following;
(1) The name under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
(2) The date of the plan, a graphic scale and the location of the
subdivision.
(3) The name of the subdivision owner.
(4) The name and seal of the registered land surveyor preparing the
plan.
E. Be drawn according to the following;
(1) Streets and other ways by heavy solid lines.
(2) Perimeter property lines of subdivision by heavy dashed and two
dotted lines.
(3) Lot lines by medium solid lines.
(4) Restriction of building lines by medium dashed lines.
(5) Easements or other reserved areas by light dotted lines.
F. Show:
(1) Primary control points or bench marks approved by the Borough
Engineer or the description and ties to which all dimensions,
angles, bearings and similar data shall be referred, tract closures,
boundaries with bearings, distances, acreage and tax parcel
identification.
(2) The acreage of each lot or parcel.
(3) Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and
their purpose and other rights-of-way and property lines of lots and
other sites with accurate dimensions, bearings or deflection angles,
radii, arcs and central angles of all curves.
(4) The name and right-of-way width of each street or right-of-way.
(5) The location, dimensions and purpose of all easements.
(6) The number to identify each lot or site.
(7) The purpose for which sites other than residential are to be used.
§ 163-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-13
160:301
(8) The building setback line on all lots and sites.
(9) The location and description of survey monuments.
(10) The names of recorded owners or adjoining land and land uses.
(11) The certification of the registered surveyor, showing his name,
address, registration number and seal.
(12) The statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and
sites for public use.
(13) Protective covenants, if any, in form for recording.
(14) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required in the enforcement of this chapter.
(15) Certification blocks for the appropriate governing and planning
bodies.
(16) Clear sight triangles and sight distance in both directions at all
street intersections.
G. Be accompanied by the following additional information:
(1) Plan and profile sheets for all streets with horizontal and vertical
alignments and existing center-line profiles, along with the location
and size of storm sewer inlets and invert elevations.
(2) Typical cross sections of roadways and sidewalks.
(3) A plan showing the size of water pipes and location of valves and
fire hydrants.
(4) A plan showing the location of manholes, invert elevations, grades
and sizes of sanitary sewers.
(5) A final grading plan.
(6) A sedimentation and erosion control plan approved by the County
Conservation District under authority of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection Rules and Regulations,
Title 25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, if determined necessary by
the Planning Commission.
(7) Planning modules specified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(8) A plan for the placement of water, sewer, gas, electric, telephone
and cable television service lines, as applicable, pursuant to the
rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania Public Utilities
Commission.
(9) If the proposed subdivision is located in a designated floodplain,
base flood elevation data shall be contained on the plan.
§ 163-13 ECONOMY CODE § 163-13
160:302
(10) A complete drainage and stormwater drainage plan for the
subdivision, which includes all storm sewers and appurtenances,
along with the method of disposal of all stormwater collected and
the method of drainage for adjacent territory.
(11) If water is to be provided by means other than by private wells
owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, evidence shall be presented to the
governing body that the subdivision or development is to be
supplied by a certificated public utility, a bona fide cooperative
association of lot owners or by a municipal corporation, authority
or utility. A copy of a certificate of public convenience from the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an application for such
certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment or
agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate,
shall be acceptable evidence.
§ 163-13 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-13
160:303

ARTICLE VII
Minor Subdivision
§ 163-14. Procedure.
The governing body may waive the requirements of Articles V and VI for
minor subdivisions requiring no additional streets or street openings upon
application of the subdivider for waiver of said requirements. In the case
where a waiver is granted, an application for final plan approval shall be
filed, along with the plans and data required in § 163-15, and shall be
processed according to Article VI, § 163-12.
§ 163-15. Plans and data.
Plans approved for waiver under § 163-14 of this chapter shall include, but
not be limited to, the following information and shall:
A. Be drawn at a scale of one inch equals 100 feet or greater.
B. Be legibly drawn on Mylar or comparable permanent material not to
exceed twenty-four by thirty-six (24 x 36) inches.
C. Include a location map.
D. Show or be accompanied by the following:
(1) A description of covenants.
(2) A title, to include:
(a) The location by municipality, county and state.
(b) The names and addresses of the owner or owners.
(c) The name and seal of the registered surveyor who surveyed the
property and/or prepared the plan.
(d) The North point, date and graphic scale.
(3) The proposed use of the land.
(4) The lot lines, dimensions and land area of proposed lot.
(5) Existing alleys and proposed and existing streets and/or easements
adjacent to the tract.
(6) Available utilities, if public sewer and water, source and sewage
disposal system should be indicated.
(7) Planning modules specified by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection.
(8) The names of abutting property owners.
§ 163-14 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-15
160:305
§ 163-16. Consolidation or replatting. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
In the case of consolidation, as defined herein, of any number of lots or
resubdivision or replatting, as defined herein, involving no more than three
lots of record in plans previously approved by the Borough and recorded
in the office of the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds, the procedure for
approval shall be the procedure for combined preliminary and final approval
specified in § 163-14 for minor subdivisions.
(9) A statement by the owner dedicating streets, rights-of-way and
sites for public use.
(10) A sketch plan showing the remainder of the parcel from which the
subdivision is being made and the relationship of the site to
contiguous areas of the community, highway systems and other
significant development and conditions such as floodplains,
wetlands or other environmental conditions.
(11) Such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements or dedications as
may be required in the enforcement of this chapter.
(12) Any other data pertinent to the plan.
§ 163-15 ECONOMY CODE § 163-16
160:306
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
§ 163-17. Application of standards by Borough officials.
The following minimum subdivision principles, standards and requirements
will be applied by Borough officials in evaluating the plans for a proposed
subdivision.
§ 163-18. Land requirements.
§ 163-19. Street requirements.
A. Land shall be suited for the purpose for which it is to be subdivided.
B. Land subject to hazards to life, health and safety, such as strip-mined
land, quarry land, open ditches and land subject to flooding or
subsidence, shall not be subdivided for residential purposes. All such
hazards shall be identified and eliminated by the owner or developer,
and guaranties shall be provided to the Borough that adequate
safeguards against such hazards have been provided.
C. No land shall be subdivided in a manner that landlocks or compromises
the use or future development of contiguous or adjacent land areas.
A. Proposed streets shall be properly related to Borough, county and state
road and highway plans that have been prepared and officially adopted
and/or filed as prescribed by law.
B. Streets shall be logically related to the topography to achieve usable
lots and reasonable grades.
C. Internal subdivision streets shall be laid out to discourage unnecessary
through traffic, but provisions to coordinate adjacent area streets will
be generally required.
D. Where a subdivision plan abuts or contains an existing or proposed
arterial street, the governing body may require local access streets,
reverse frontage lots or such other treatment that will provide
protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of
intersections with arterial streets and separation of local and through
traffic.
E. New half or partial streets will not be permitted, except where essential
to reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other
requirements and standards of this chapter and where, in addition,
satisfactory assurances for dedication of the remaining part of the
street is secured.
F. Wherever a tract to be subdivided borders an existing half or partial
street, the other part of the street shall be plotted within such tract.
§ 163-17 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-19
160:307
G. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited except as stubs to permit future
street extensions or when designed as culs-de-sac. Permanent cul-desac
streets may be permitted when it is clear that through traffic at
such a street end is not essential to the existing or future street system
in that district or to the development of adjacent properties in the area.
(1) Such streets, where permitted, shall not exceed 1,000 feet,
including the turnaround at the closed end. The Planning
Commission may recommend a cul-de-sac longer than 1,000 feet if
it is determined by the Planning Commission that such additional
length improves the subdivision design, results in a better
relationship of the proposed development to the existing
topography and does not create any hardships for the subdivision's
residents or the Borough. Temporary dead-end street stubs shall
terminate with culs-de-sac if said street extensions are not made
within six months.
(2) The turnaround shall have an outside pavement radius of not less
than 40 feet and a right-of-way radius of not less than 50 feet.
(3) The minimum grade of the turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac
shall be 1%.
(4) The maximum grade of the turnaround portion of the cul-de-sac
shall be 5%.
(5) An easement area providing for snow removal and storage area
shall be created adjacent to the road right-of-way at the dead end of
each new street. The snow removal and storage area shall be
located in accordance with the typical detail drawings entitled
"Snow Removal and Storage Area" attached at the end of this
chapter. All snow removal and storage areas shall be shown on the
subdivision recording plan and the plan shall note that said areas
must be maintained free of any and all driveways and structures
including but not limited to mailboxes, streetlights, transformers,
fire hydrants, walks, fences, etc. [Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No.
406]
H. If lots resulting from original subdivision are large enough to permit
additional subdivision or if a portion of the tract is not subdivided,
adequate street rights-of-way shall be provided as necessary to allow
for future development activity.
I. Reserve strips restricting or controlling access to adjacent streets or
properties shall be prohibited.
J. Street grades.
(1) Center-line grades shall be not less than 2%.
(2) Center-line grades shall, wherever feasible, not exceed the
following:
§ 163-19 ECONOMY CODE § 163-19
160:308
(a) Minor street: 10%.
(b) Collector and major traffic street: 6%.
(3) Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade and shall be
designed in relation to the extent of the grade change.
(4) Where the grade of any street at the approach to an intersection
exceeds 7%, a leveling area shall be provided having not greater
than four-percent grades for a distance of 25 feet measured from
the nearest right-of-way line of the intersecting street.
K. Street width.
(1) Minimum street right-of-way and cartway widths shall be as
follows: for minor streets and marginal-access streets, a fifty-foot
right-of-way and twenty-four-foot paved cartway.
(2) Additional right-of-way and cartway width may be required by the
governing body for the following purposes:
(a) To promote public safety and convenience where anticipated
traffic flows warrant or where drainage easements should
reasonably parallel thoroughfares.
(b) To provide parking space in commercial districts and in areas
of high-density residential development.
(3) A short extension of existing streets with lesser right-of-way and/or
cartway widths than prescribed above may be permitted; provided,
however, that no section of a new right-of-way less than 50 feet in
width shall be permitted.
L. Street intersections.
(1) Multiple intersections involving the junction of more than two
streets shall be prohibited. Where this proves impossible, such
intersections shall be designed with extreme care for both
pedestrian and vehicular safety.
(2) Streets shall be laid out to intersect as nearly as possible at right
angles. No street shall intersect another at an angle of less than
60°.
(3) Streets entering opposite sides of another street shall be laid out
either directly opposite one another or with a minimum offset of
150 feet between their center lines.
(4) Minimum curb radii at street intersections shall be 15 feet for
intersections involving only minor streets, 25 feet for intersections
including other type streets or such greater radius as is suitable to
the specific intersection.
§ 163-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-19
160:309
(5) A clear sight triangle shall be maintained at all intersections within
an area formed by the intersecting street lines and a line joining
points on the street lines 75 feet from the corner.
(6) Intersections of local streets with collector and arterial streets
shall be kept to a minimum, consistent with topography and other
local conditions. All subdivision intersections of less than 150 feet
shall be avoided. To the fullest extent possible, intersections with
collector and arterial streets shall be located not less than 800 feet
apart, measured from center line to center line.
M. Alleys shall not be permitted in any subdivision.
N. Criteria for approving lots on private streets. A modification to
§ 163-20A(6) that requires all lots to abut by their full frontage on a
publicly dedicated street may be granted by Borough Council, upon
recommendation of the Planning Commission, provided all of the
following requirements are met: [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
(1) The proposed lot or lots shall have no other practical means of
access to a public street.
(2) No more than three lots may be created on an existing private
street, provided the private street is not extended.
(3) No more than three lots shall front on any proposed private street.
(4) A new private street shall not be approved when the proposed
street can provide future access to additional undeveloped land
beyond the limits of the proposed subdivision.
(5) A proposed private street shall terminate in a cul-de-sac that meets
Borough specifications for right-of-way and paving.
(6) If the original parcel from which the subdivision is created has its
principal vehicular access from the private street, it shall be
counted as a lot on the private street, even though it has legal
frontage on a public street.
(7) The minimum right-of-way width required for a new private street
shall be 50 feet.
(8) The minimum width of the cartway required for a private street
shall be 20 feet.
(9) The cartway and other design requirements for a private street
shall meet the Borough construction standards for a public street,
unless a modification to one or more of those requirements is
granted in accordance with § 163-54 of this chapter.
(10) A notation shall be placed on the plat for recording indicating that
the Borough has no maintenance responsibilities for the private
street.
§ 163-19 ECONOMY CODE § 163-19
160:310
(11) An agreement obligating the property owners of all lots abutting
the private street to maintain the private street shall be submitted
with the application and shall be recorded with the approved plat.
(12) The plat for recording shall contain a notation and the deeds for
each lot shall contain a reference to the executed and recorded
agreement obligating the property owners to maintain the private
street.
(13) The plat for recording and the deeds for each lot shall contain a
statement that any future request by the lot owners to have the
street accepted by the Borough as a public street shall be subject to
the owners assuming the total cost of improving the private street
to the current Borough construction standards for a public street.
(14) House numbers for dwellings located on private streets shall be
placed at the intersection of the private street and the public street
and shall be visible from the public street.
(15) The owners of the lots shall purchase street signs approved by the
Borough and shall pay for the cost of installation of the signs by the
Borough in the public right-of-way that indicate the name of the
street, that the street is private and that there is no outlet.
O. Standards for accepting private streets. Private streets in existence on
January 1, 2010, may be accepted by Borough Council for public
ownership and maintenance, including snow removal, provided all of
the following requirements are met: [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
43473]
(1) At least five or more lots shall front on and have their only access
from the private street.
(2) The private street shall have a minimum right-of-way of 24 feet.
(3) For private streets with a right-of-way between 24 feet and 33 feet,
the paved cartway shall be a minimum of 18 feet.
(4) For private streets with a right-of-way in excess of 33 feet but no
more than 40 feet, the paved cartway shall be a minimum of 22
feet.
(5) For private streets with a right-of-way in excess of 40 feet up to and
including 50 feet, the paved cartway shall be a minimum of 24 feet,
plus a two-foot asphalt wedge curb or approved equal on both sides
of the street.
(6) The private street shall terminate in a cul-de-sac. The cul-de-sac
shall have a minimum radius of 35 feet for paved cartways of 18 to
73.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections O
and P as Subsections P and Q, respectively.
§ 163-19 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-19
160:311
21 feet and shall have a minimum radius of 40 feet for paved
cartways of 22 feet to 24 feet.
(7) Aggregate base course specifications shall be equal to or exceed
borough construction standards for public streets.
(8) Any private street that does not meet Borough construction
standards for public streets shall be improved at the expense of the
landowners who have frontage on the private street prior to final
acceptance by the Borough.
(9) The Borough Engineer shall make the required inspections during
installation of the improvements. Inspections shall be subject to
payment of the inspection fees required by § 163-58C of this
chapter.
(10) Final acceptance by Borough Council shall be subject to the
procedure specified in § 163-47 of this chapter.
P. Streets proposed for commercial or industrial land development
purposes shall, if possible, be laid out to intersect directly with arterial
and collector streets. Insofar as possible, traffic circulation systems for
commercial and industrial subdivisions shall be designed in a manner to
eliminate or discourage traffic flow through residential areas.
Q. Driveways (site ingress and egress).
(1) Commercial and industrial ingress and egress (driveways) shall be
designed to provide optimum visibility and to minimize traffic
congestion in the vicinity of the development parcel. Traffic access
design shall conform to the following requirements:
(a) In addition to the information and data required by §§ 163-11
and 163-13 of this chapter, all applications for preliminary and
final plan approvals of subdivisions for commercial and
industrial land development shall contain a traffic circulation
plan showing;
[1] The locations and dimensions of vehicular ingress and
egress for each development parcel.
[2] The location and access provisions for parking and loading
for each development parcel.
[3] Available sight distances at all driveways.
(b) Defined ingress and egress points shall be required for all
commercial and industrial development parcels.
(2) All driveways shall be constructed so as not to interfere with
roadway drainage. Cross drains shall be constructed beneath the
driveway where required to provide adequate drainage.
§ 163-19 ECONOMY CODE § 163-20
160:312
§ 163-20. Subdivision requirements.
A. The following general provisions shall apply to all subdivisions of land:
(1) All lot area requirements and specified minimum yard and setback
designations shall be dimensioned from public rights-of-way, where
applicable. No lot area requirement or setback shall be computed
from within a public right-of-way.
(2) Flag lots shall not be permitted. [Added 4-8-2003 by Ord. No.
38674]
(3) The frontage width of lots abutting a cul-de-sac shall be determined
as the width at the building line. The side yard and setback
requirements will be calculated from the midpoint of the structure
along the average length of both sides and the rear of the structure.
(4) All lot lines shall be set perpendicular or radial to the center line of
the street whenever possible.
(5) Lots abutting local streets shall front on the streets that parallel the
long dimension of the block, if possible.
(6) All lots shall abut by their full frontage on a publicly dedicated
street. Lots abutting on a private street shall not be approved,
unless a modification is granted in accordance with § 163-54 and all
of the requirements of § 163-19N are met. [Amended 4-10-2012
by Ord. No. 434]
(7) No land shall be graded, cut or filled so as to create a slope
exceeding a vertical rise of one foot for each two feet of horizontal
distance between abutting lots, unless a retaining structure is
installed in accordance with specifications approved by the
Borough Engineer and the governing body.
(8) Setback requirements required by the Borough Zoning Ordinance75
shall be shown on the final plat for recording. [Amended
4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
B. Lots laid out for residential purposes shall be subdivided in accordance
with the provisions of the Borough Zoning Ordinance76 with respect to
lot area, lot width, setbacks, yard requirements and other applicable
requirements.
C. Nonresidential lots.
(1) Lot and tracts of land laid out for nonresidential purposes shall be
subdivided in accordance with the provisions of the Borough
74.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsection A(2) through (7) as (3)
through (8), respectively.
75.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 163-20 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-20
160:313
§ 163-21. Blocks.
§ 163-22. Easements.
Zoning Ordinance77 with respect to lot area, lot width, setbacks,
yard requirements and other applicable requirements.
(2) The location of areas designated for structures, internal site
accessways, off-street parking and loading areas and generalized
land use proposals shall be included as a part of all final plan
applications for nonresidential purposes.
(3) The Planning Commission may recommend and the governing body
may authorize block platting in place of lot platting for
nonresidential purposes to provide the developer maximum
flexibility, provided that no block shall be subdivided in such a way
that any subsequent lots would be smaller than the minimum size
authorized by this chapter.
(4) Where nonresidential lots adjoin lots in a residential zoning
classification, the buffer area required by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance78 shall be provided. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
A. Block length shall not ordinarily exceed 1,600 feet nor be less than 500
feet, depending on topography, adjacent road configurations and other
related criteria.
B. Blocks shall be at least two lots in depth except for reverse frontage
lots.
C. The depth to width ratio of usable lot length shall be at a maximum of
four to one (4:1), except where said requirement proves unreasonable
due to unique topographic conditions or unique parcel configuration
which would create inaccessible or derelict land areas.
A. Utility and public utility easements shall have a minimum width of 20
feet and be placed at the side or rear of lots if possible. When the
governing body determines that conditions are suitable for utilities and/
or public utilities, an easement reservation will be required.
B. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, there shall be
provided a drainage easement or right-of-way conforming substantially
to the line of such watercourse and of such width as will be adequate to
preserve natural drainage and provide sufficient width for maintenance
purposes, but not less than 20 feet. Where applicable, federal, state and
local flood maps and data shall be employed to determine the location
of easements or rights-of-way required by this chapter.
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
78.Editor’s Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 163-20 ECONOMY CODE § 163-22
160:314
§ 163-23. Sidewalks. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
Sidewalks and crosswalks shall be installed when required by § 163-34D
of this chapter. If required, sidewalks and crosswalks shall be constructed
in accordance with Borough construction standards. Anywhere a sidewalk
meets a curbed street, a curb ramp that complies with the requirements of
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) shall be provided.80
§ 163-24. Reserved areas.
Reserve strips surrounding property or areas reserved for any purpose that
shall make any area unprofitable for regular or special assessments or that
may revert to an untended nuisance area shall not be approved by the
governing body.
§ 163-25. Street names and numbering.
§ 163-26. Access to streets.
Subdividing land shall be done in a manner that will not bar adjacent
property owners from access to streets and ways of alignment nor otherwise
preclude the development of surrounding land areas.
§ 163-27. Open space areas.
C. On all culs-de-sac to be dedicated to the public, an easement for snow
removal and storage shall be recorded on one or more lots in
accordance with the specifications in Attachment 11 of this chapter.79
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
A. The subdivider may choose his street names, subject to the approval of
the governing body. No street, other than an extension, may be given
the name of an existing street in the Borough's postal service area.
B. Streets laid out opposite another street shall be given the same name or
number as the opposite street.
C. All house numbering systems shall be coordinated with the numbering
of existing development in the area and approved by the Planning
Commission and the governing body.
A. Provisions for proper improvement and maintenance of any open space
and recreation areas set aside as public space shall be guaranteed by
appropriate bonds or similar provisions satisfactory to the governing
body.
B. The governing body may, at its option, accept recreation and open
spaces from the developer through deeds of dedication conveying title
to the Borough.
79.Editor’s Note: Attachment 11 is located at the end of this chapter.
80.Editor’s Note: See 42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.
§ 163-22 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-28
160:315
§ 163-28. Vegetation.
A. Trees, shrubbery and similar vegetation shall not be established within
a road right-of-way.
B. A clear sight triangle, as defined by this chapter, shall be maintained
free of any obstructions at intersections so that there shall be a
minimum clear sight triangle measured along the center line from the
points of intersection in accordance with the requirements specified in
Appendix B.81 The clear sight triangle shall be shown on the final plat
for recording. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
81.Editor’s Note: Appendix B is located at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-28 ECONOMY CODE § 163-28
160:316
ARTICLE IX
Improvements
§ 163-29. Grading.
§ 163-30. Drainage.
§ 163-31. Curbs.
A. Streets shall be constructed to grades and cross sections as cited on,
and presented with, the plans and street profiles, in conformance with
Borough specifications. (See § 163-19J.)
B. Street shoulders shall be graded to the full width of the street right-ofway
(minimum 50 feet), in accordance with Borough construction
standards, and thoroughly compacted by rolling all shoulders.
C. The subgrade of a street shall be brought to the proper grade and
contour, and shall be rolled and cross-rolled. The subgrade shall also be
crowned at a grade of ¼ inch per foot from the street center line. All
soft spots shall be removed. These soft spots shall be compacted with a
suitable firm material, approved by the Borough Engineer, before the
placing of any aggregate base course material. [Amended 4-11-2006
by Ord. No. 406]
D. No base course shall be placed until the subgrade has been inspected
and approved by the Borough.
A. Four-inch perforated underdrain pipe with geotextile wrap shall be
installed as shown on the typical street cross section drawing at the end
of this chapter. Underdrain pipes shall be installed under the curbs on
both sides of new streets. [Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 406]
B. If during construction unknown adverse drainage conditions are
encountered by the developer, the Borough Engineer shall be notified
and such conditions shall be corrected at the direction of the Borough
Engineer.
C. Cross drains of a minimum fifteen-inch reinforced concrete pipe shall
be placed wherever necessary to transfer the water across the road in
the natural watercourse and at road intersections whenever needed.
D. When laying out plans to be submitted for approval by the Borough
Council, suitable easements shall be provided for drainage rights-ofway
in the natural watercourses or be provided for stormwater drains,
where necessary.
A. The requirements of curbs or curbs and gutters may vary in accordance
with the character of the area and density of development involved.
B. The type of curbs used, when specified by the developer or when
required by the governing body, are to be approved by and subject to
§ 163-29 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-31
160:317
§ 163-32. Street construction requirements.
§ 163-33. Street pavement specifications.
the Borough Engineer's approval before installation. At a minimum,
paving of cartway shall be at least 24 feet in width plus two-foot asphalt
wedge curbs or approved equal by the Borough Engineer.
A. All street construction, including subbase and wearing course, shall be
constructed in accordance with Borough specifications.
B. The Borough Council may specify an alternate pavement design where
the drainage of the subgrade, the size of the development and the
nature of the traffic warrants.
C. All construction work, including grading, drainage, base course and
surfacing, shall be performed by the developer or his representatives
under the direct supervision of the Borough Engineer or the Borough's
authorized representative, and all costs for said supervision shall be
paid by the developer prior to the final acceptance by the Borough.
D. The developer shall furnish record plans of all streets as actually
constructed for the files of the Economy Borough Council, the cost of
this to be paid by the developer.
E. Where new roads are to be constructed that will extend from existing
streets, such extension shall be made with keyways in the existing
pavement so as to make a smooth transition from existing to new
pavement. [Added 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 406]
A. Subbase and aggregate base course requirements shall be as follows:
[Amended 4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 406]
(1) Geotextile (Class 4) shall be placed on the subbase of all streets at
the locations identified by the Borough Engineer.
(2) The aggregate base course shall be constructed with eight inches
of compacted PennDOT No. 1 Limestone.
(3) A second aggregate base course shall then be constructed with two
inches of compacted PennDOT No. 2A Limestone.
(4) Aggregate base course shall be installed the full width of the
cartway and curbs plus six inches behind the back face of curb.
(5) All aggregates must be PennDOT approved.
B. A binder asphalt course shall then be applied of five inches of ID-2
bituminous binder course rolled in two lifts. [Amended 4-11-2006 by
Ord. No. 406]
§ 163-31 ECONOMY CODE § 163-33
160:318
§ 163-34. Sidewalks.
C. A wearing asphalt course of 1 1/2 inches shall then be applied following
the application of the FJ-1 scratch coat specified below. [Amended
4-11-2006 by Ord. No. 406]
D. Asphalt roads shall be prepared as described in this section, except that
after the asphalt binder is applied, the road shall be covered with an
FJ-1 scratch coat.
E. After 90% of the homes are constructed in all phases planned, if
construction is in phases, or two years has lapsed since application of
the FJ-1 coat, an asphalt wearing course as specified in Subsection C of
this section shall be applied. The term "constructed," as used above,
shall mean when the Borough Building Inspector has inspected and
approved the foundation and framing.
F. The Borough may assume only snow removal of the roads after the FJ-1
scratch coat has been applied.
G. After the asphalt wearing course has been applied and the roads
inspected by the Borough, the road, if desired by the developer and
constructed in accordance with this chapter and any other applicable
ordinance, law, rule or regulation, may be accepted by the Borough.
A. Sidewalks, when required by the governing body, shall be constructed
in conformity with Borough specifications as determined and approved
by the Borough Engineer or his authorized agent.
B. All phases of construction shall be in accordance with this chapter and
design standards established and approved by the Borough; the forms
shall be inspected prior to pouring, and finished walks shall be
inspected by the Borough Engineer or his authorized agent.
C. Pedestrian interior walks may be required where necessary to assist
circulation or provide access to community facilities. Such crosswalks
shall have a width of not less than 10 feet and a paved walk of not less
than four feet.
D. Requirements for sidewalks. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
(1) Sidewalks shall be required on both sides of the street in all
subdivisions containing 10 or more lots, unless a waiver or
modification of this requirement is recommended by the Planning
Commission and granted by Borough Council in accordance with
§ 163-54. In the case of a subdivision containing fewer than 10 lots
that is located on a street where sidewalks already exist, sidewalks
shall be required across the full frontage of each lot that fronts on
the street with existing sidewalks.
(2) Sidewalks may be required within the site of a nonresidential land
development if the Planning Commission determines that
§ 163-33 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-34
160:319
§ 163-35. Street signs. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
The developer shall install street name signs, approved by the Borough, at
all street intersections. The developer shall install traffic control signs in
such locations as specified on the approved subdivision or land development
plan. The cost of the street name and traffic control signs and posts shall be
assumed by the developer. Street signs shall be installed in accordance with
the Borough construction standards.
§ 163-36. Storm drainage facilities.
All storm drainage facilities shall be adequately designed for the anticipated
runoff when the area is fully developed, using criteria or other methods
approved by the Borough Engineer. Storm drainage facilities shall comply
with, but are not limited to, the following:
sidewalks are desirable to enhance pedestrian safety on the site
considering the location of building entrances with respect to
parking areas and traffic circulation on the site.
(3) Sidewalks shall be a minimum of four feet in width and shall be
constructed in accordance with Borough construction standards.
Maintenance responsibility shall be the obligation of the landowner
or shall be incorporated in homeowners’ association or
condominium documents, if such an association is proposed and/or
shall be recorded as a restriction within the deed for the property.
A. Stormwater management facilities shall be provided in subdivisions and
land developments in accordance with the requirements of Chapter 155
of the Borough Code, Stormwater Management, as now or hereafter
amended. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 43482]
B. Storm sewers shall be located in the street right-of-way or in designated
drainage easements.
C. All pipe culverts and related installations used in the construction of
storm sewers shall be in accordance with standards and specifications
of the Borough, county or state, as designated and approved by the
Borough Council and Engineer.
D. Manholes or inlets will generally be required at changes in alignment
and grade; however, curvature may be permitted if not in excess of
115% of the manufacturer's minimum recommended degree of
curvature.
E. At no time will roof drains or foundation drains be allowed to be
connected to a sanitary sewer system.
82.Editor’s Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections A
through K as Subsections B through L, respectively.
§ 163-34 ECONOMY CODE § 163-36
160:320
F. Any springs encountered during construction shall be piped and
connected to the storm sewer system or extended to a natural
watercourse, as may be approved by the Borough Engineer.
G. Concrete headwall and splash aprons shall be constructed at the outfall
of all storm sewers. Where watercourses are piped and filled, concrete
headwalls and splash aprons shall be constructed at both ends of the
pipe.
H. Whenever construction stops or concentrates the natural flow of
surface drainage in such a way as to affect adjoining properties, written
approval must be obtained from the adjoining property owners. Where
storm drainage is piped onto adjoining properties other than natural
watercourses, written permission, a release of damages and right-ofway
must be obtained from the adjoining property owners before the
storm sewers are taken over by the Borough. Approval of plans by the
Borough does not authorize or sanction drainage affecting adjoining
properties.
I. All bridges and culverts shall be designed to support expected loads
and to carry expected flows and shall meet the current specifications
and standards of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Transportation.
J. A complete drainage plan of the subdivision shall be submitted,
including all necessary storm sewers and appurtenances, the design of
which is based on a ten-year storm frequency, except in those areas
where, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer or Borough Council,
the likelihood of exceptional damage resulting from stormwater is such
that additional design criteria is required. The drainage plan shall show
the method of drainage of adjacent and contiguous territory and the
method of disposal of all stormwater collected. The drainage plan shall
be accompanied by design calculations.
K. The storm drainage system shall be provided as necessary to:
(1) Discharge stormwater runoff into common natural watercourses.
(2) Adequately drain all low points along streets.
(3) Intercept street stormwater runoff at intervals related to the extent
and grade of the area drained.
(4) Provide positive drainage away from sewage facilities.
(5) Handle existing off-site runoff through the subdivision.
(6) Ensure safe and proper disposal of stormwater where open
watercourses are planned, through adequate safety, erosion and
aesthetic measures.
L. Stormwater management shall meet all state, county and local
standards.
§ 163-36 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-37
160:321
§ 163-37. Monuments.
Monuments shall be placed at all block corners, angle points, points or
curves in streets and intermediate points as determined by the Borough
Engineer. Monuments shall be permanent reference monuments of a
precast concrete or a durable stone, thirty by six (30 x 6) inches, with 45°
beveled edges, and shall be set a minimum of two feet in depth.
§ 163-38. Trees.
Should the subdivider plan to provide trees, their proposed location,
spacing and species must be submitted for approval to the governing body.
§ 163-39. Recreational space.
§ 163-40. Preservation of natural conditions; erosion control.
A. Assessment fees specified for recreational purposes shall be paid to the
Borough at the time of filing the application and submission of plans for
a subdivision. Funds shall be put in escrow and used by the Borough for
public recreation purposes.
B. The Borough shall have the option of requiring the developer to set
aside ground for recreation purposes at a rate of one-hundredth (1/100)
acre for each single-family dwelling unit in subdivisions of 100 or more
units.
C. Parks and recreation facilities developed totally or in part with the
resources specified hereunder shall be established consistent with the
following criteria:
(1) Recreation facilities and areas shall be located in a manner to best
serve the municipality and the future inhabitants of the
development or subdivision.
(2) Recreation facilities and areas shall be located on land that is
topographically suitable for recreation, safe from traffic and other
safety hazards and readily accessible to the general public.
D. If the Borough Council and the Planning Commission determine that
such public parks or playgrounds are to be abandoned or deemed
unnecessary, then, by a joint written agreement of the Borough Council
and Planning Commission, the recreational areas so designated may be
sold. Moneys from such a transaction are to be put in escrow and held
for use in the development of new public parks or playgrounds, the
location of the same to be determined by the Borough Council upon the
advice of the Planning Commission and Recreational Committee.
A. In wooded areas or where other natural conditions exist in such a
manner that their presence adds to the desirability of a subdivision, the
governing body shall require that the subdivider preserve as much of
the original vegetation and natural conditions as is economically
§ 163-37 ECONOMY CODE § 163-40
160:322
§ 163-41. Water supply.
§ 163-42. Sanitary sewers.
feasible and require that a minimum of grading be done other than
the grading and excavating that is required in the construction of the
improvements, in accordance with the standards included herein.
B. All development and earthmoving activities subject to applicable law
under the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Title
25, Chapter 102, Erosion Control, shall be complied with:
(1) The developer shall notify the County Conservation District
immediately upon making application for building permit involving
an earthmoving activity that affects five or more acres of land.
(2) The Borough shall not issue a building permit for a development
until it has been determined that the earthmoving activities require
a permit, or verification that no permit is required, from the
Department of Environmental Protection, pursuant to Section
102.41 and 102.42, relating to permit requirements, of Title 25,
Chapter 102, Erosion Control.
C. In cases where the cross slope exceeds 10% as shown on the grading
plan, sod or seed shall be required to retain soil and prevent damage to
finished street or lot grades. In all cases where the developer removes
the sod, he shall, immediately upon completion of grading (weather
permitting), reseed such areas with common farm grass. In cases where
the home builder creates side terraces, they shall, immediately upon
completion of grading, be seeded with perennial rye grass or better.
A. If water is supplied from other than private wells on individual lots, the
developer shall verify that the water supply is from a public utility
having a certificate of public convenience from the PUC, a bona fide lot
owners' association or a municipal entity.
B. If public water is available or planned for the area, it shall be utilized
for every subdivision of 10 lots or more. Public water service is deemed
to be available where the distance from the access point of a main to the
beginning point of a distribution system for the plan is 800 feet or less.
C. The developer shall supply and install all materials associated with the
fire hydrant(s) as well as the fire hydrants themselves.
D. The materials and installation thereof shall comply with the
requirements set forth by the local water utility company and by the
municipality.
A. Sanitary sewer service is deemed to be available where the average
distance from a main to the beginning point of a collection system for
the development is 800 feet or less, unless the service is not
topographically feasible.
§ 163-40 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-42
160:323
B. If public sewers are available or definitely planned for the area, the
developer shall extend the main line to serve all lots in the subdivision.
This main line extension shall be designed and constructed according to
the specifications of the utility Authority that provides sanitary sewer
services.
C. Where municipal sewers are not available, the installation of a private
sanitary sewage treatment plant and other appurtenances shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection and the governing body.
(1) In areas of the Borough not presently served by public sewers but
in which they are to be installed within a reasonable time, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission based on studies of the area,
the Commission may require that capped sewer mains and house
connections be installed in all subdivisions of 20 lots or more in
addition to the required on-site facilities. The plans for the
installation of a sanitary sewer system shall be prepared for the
subdivision and approved by the engineer of the Municipal
Authority to which it will be connected and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. The engineer or
authorized representative of the Municipal Authority shall inspect
the sewer line before it is covered over. Upon completion of the
sanitary sewer installation, one copy of each of the plans for such
system as built shall be filed with the municipality and the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(2) In instances of severe conditions deemed unsuitable for on-site
septic systems, the Planning Commission may recommend that the
governing body require that the developer shall install adequate
sewage treatment facilities as approved by the Borough Engineer
and the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection. In
these cases, plans for such sewage treatment facilities instead of
on-site septic systems must be approved by the above-mentioned
Departments before final approval of the subdivision may be given.
D. Private sewage disposal systems on individual lots shall be laid out and
constructed in compliance with the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection regulations.
E. No building permit will be issued for any construction or subdivision
development until either an individual sanitary sewage disposal system,
a sanitary sewage treatment plant installation or connection to a
municipal sewerage system has been approved by the governing body
or authorized agent thereof and the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Act 537) as amended.83
83.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
§ 163-42 ECONOMY CODE § 163-42
160:324
§ 163-43. Streetlighting.
The developer shall install streetlights at all intersections shown on the
approved plans and at other locations within the subdivision as deemed
necessary by the Borough Council and Planning Commission. Such
streetlights shall conform to Duquesne Light specifications for
contemporary-type pole luminaries. Specific pole units shall include PE
Control No. 36363, Luminarie No. 36640, two-hundred-fifty-watt Mercury
Vapor Lamp No. 32877 and fourteen-foot pole No. 201202. Installation
details to be followed are described in Duquesne Light specifications VG8-1.
§ 163-44. Additional requirements.
F. No subdivision shall be approved for development by the governing
body until the developer provides certification that mutually acceptable
agreements have been reached between the developer and applicable
private or municipal utility Authorities relative to utility system
installations, maintenance, ownership of facilities, tap fees and other
related considerations.
A. No developer shall proceed with the construction of any utilities or
improvements or make connection to any existing Borough facility or
utility system without proper inspection by an authorized official or
representative thereof. Drawings and specifications shall be provided in
sufficient detail to show the form, construction and method of
installation of the following and shall accompany or otherwise be a part
of the subdivision plan:
(1) Streets, gutters and culverts.
(2) Storm sewers and surface drainage facilities.
(3) Water system.
(4) Sanitary sewers and septic tanks.
(5) Survey monuments.
B. No person shall dig or make any cuts or changes whatsoever in the
cartway, gutters or rights-of-way of any Borough, county or state road
without first obtaining required permits.
C. No person shall connect to any waterline or storm or sanitary sewer
without obtaining a permit and paying the proper connection charge.
D. Grade stakes shall be set and cut sheets prepared and a copy furnished
to the Borough Secretary and Engineer before any work is started.
E. The developer shall notify the Borough Engineer at least 24 hours prior
to his intention to proceed with the construction or installation of said
streets and improvements or any other work related to the
improvements.
§ 163-42 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-44
160:325
F. Inspection reports shall be prepared by an inspector authorized by the
governing body.
G. Upon completion of the required improvements, a plan and profile of
the improvements in the subdivision or land development as
constructed shall be filed with the Borough.
H. In all respects in which standards for required improvements are not
set forth herein or specified by the governing body hereunder, the
applicable state and municipal standard requirements shall govern.
§ 163-44 ECONOMY CODE § 163-44
160:326
ARTICLE X
Conditions of Acceptance
§ 163-45. Performance requirements.
Before approving any final subdivision plan, the governing body shall
require a written agreement and appropriate financial surety, as specified
in § 163-46 hereinbelow, that necessary grading, paving and street
improvements, sidewalks, streetlights, fire hydrants, water mains, storm
sewers and sanitary sewers, as may be required by the Borough, shall be
installed by the developer in strict accordance with the design standards
and specifications of the Borough within a specified time period.
§ 163-46. Performance guaranty.
The governing body shall ensure, through receipt of certificates of
compliance submitted and attested by the Borough Engineer, that the
required improvements have been installed according to the specifications
of the final plan or, alternately, require the posting of adequate surety to
cover the cost for such improvements. The governing body may also ensure,
through the posting of bonds or other surety acceptable to the Borough, the
maintenance of exiting public rights-of-way and road surfaces which are in
any manner utilized for transport or related purposes during development
and construction associated with subdivision development. The governing
body shall specify one of the following alternatives, or such other alternative
as may be acceptable, for guaranteeing compliance with the requirements
of this section. The decision of which alternative shall be required is that
of the governing body. Final approval of a plan may not be granted by the
Planning Commission or the governing body until the surety required is
fully provided. In any event, the required surety shall be secured along with
the written agreement prior to any construction or related activity.
A. Completion of improvements prior to final approval. Prior to final plan
approval, the developer shall complete, in a manner satisfactory to the
governing body and the Borough Engineer, all improvements required
in these regulations as specified in the final subdivision plan and as
approved by the governing body and shall dedicate the same to the
Borough in accordance with these regulations.
B. Guaranty of future performance.
(1) In lieu of requiring the completion of all improvements prior to final
plan approval, the Borough may, at its discretion, enter into a
contract with the developer whereby the developer shall guarantee
to complete all improvements required by this chapter or otherwise
specified by the governing body in a manner satisfactory to the
governing body.
(2) When requested by the developer in order to facilitate financing,
the governing body shall furnish the developer with a signed copy
of a resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon
§ 163-45 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-46
160:327
the developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final
plat or record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the
financial improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or
letter of contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be
revoked if the financial security agreement is not executed within
90 days, unless a written extension is granted by the governing
body; such extension shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall
be placed in writing at the request of the developer.
(3) To secure this contract, the developer shall provide, subject to the
approval of the governing body, one of the following guaranties:
(a) Surety bond. The developer shall obtain a security bond from a
surety bonding company authorized to do business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The bond shall be payable to
the Borough. The amount of financial security shall be equal to
110% of the cost of the required improvements as estimated by
the developer and approved by the Borough Engineer. The
duration of the bond shall be until such time as the
improvements are accepted by the Borough in accordance with
the requirements of this chapter.
(b) Escrow account.
[1] The developer shall deposit cash or other instrument
readily convertible into cash at face value, either with the
Borough or in escrow with a bank. The use of any
instrument other than cash and, in the case of an escrow
account, the bank with which the funds are to be deposited
shall be subject to the approval of the governing body. The
amount of financial security shall be equal to 110% of the
cost of the required improvements as estimated by the
developer and approved by the Borough Engineer.
[2] In case of an escrow account, the developer shall file with
the governing body an agreement between the financial
bank and himself, guaranteeing the following:
[a] That the funds of said escrow account shall be held in
trust until released by the governing body and may not
be used or pledged by the developer as security in any
other matter during the period.
[b] That in the case of a failure on the part of the
developer to complete said improvements, the bank
shall immediately make the funds in said account
available to the Borough for use in the completion of
those improvements.
(c) Property escrow.
§ 163-46 ECONOMY CODE § 163-46
160:328
[1] The developer shall offer as a guaranty land or other
property, including corporate stocks or bonds. The value of
any such property shall be at least equal to 110% of the
cost, as estimated by the developer and approved by the
Borough Engineer, of the installation of all contracted
improvements. Property value shall be determined by
means acceptable to the Borough and shall take into
account the likelihood of a decline in the value of said
property during the guaranty period. The governing body
shall retain the right to eject the use of any property when
it believes that the property will be unusually difficult to
sell or for other reasons such as will inhibit the Borough
from exchanging the property for a sufficient amount of
money to complete the required improvements.
[2] When property is offered as an improvement guaranty, the
developer shall:
[a] Execute an agreement with the trustee, when it is not
the governing body, instructing the trust to release the
property to the Borough in the case of default. The
agreement shall also state that the property may be
released only upon consent of the governing body. The
agreement shall be placed on file with the Borough
Secretary.
[b] File with the governing body an affidavit affirming
that the property to be used as a guaranty is free and
clear of any encumbrances or liens at the time it is to
be put in trust.
[c] Execute and file with the governing body an
agreement stating that the property to be placed in
trust as an improvement guaranty will not be used for
any other purpose or pledged as a security in any
other matter until it is released by the governing body.
(d) Extension of guaranties. If the developer requires more than
one year from the date of posting financial security to complete
the required improvements, the amount of security may be
increased to assure that financial security equals 110%. Any
additional security shall be posted by the developer in
accordance with this § 163-46.
C. Determining amount of financial security. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
(1) The amount of the financial security to be posted for the completion
of the required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of
completion estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for
completion by the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the
§ 163-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-46
160:329
amount of the financial security by comparing the actual cost of
the improvements which have been completed and the estimated
cost for the completion of the remaining improvements as of the
expiration of the 90th day after the original date scheduled for
completion or a rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to
said adjustment, the Borough may require the developer to post
additional security in order to assure that the financial security
equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be posted by the
developer in accordance with this Subsection C.
(2) The amount of financial security required shall be based on an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements
submitted by an applicant or developer and prepared by a
professional engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and certified by such engineer to be a fair and
reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept
such estimate for good cause shown.
(3) If the applicant or developer and the Borough are unable to agree
upon an estimate, then the estimate shall be recalculated and
recertified by another professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and chosen mutually by the
Borough and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified by
the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so
chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally
by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
D. Phased development. In the case where development is projected over
a period of years, Borough Council authorizes submission of final plats
by sections or stages of development subject to such requirements or
guarantees as to improvements in future sections or stages of
development as it finds essential for the protection of the finally
approved section of the development. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No.
434]
E. Facilities bonded by public utilities or municipal authorities. If water
mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with the apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section. [Added 4-10-2012 by
Ord. No. 434]
F. Partial release of security as work progresses. As the work of installing
the required improvements proceeds, the party posting the financial
security may request Borough Council to authorize release, from time
§ 163-46 ECONOMY CODE § 163-46
160:330
§ 163-47. Release from improvement bond.
to time, of such portions of the financial security necessary for payment
of the contractor or contractors performing the work. Any such
requests shall be in writing addressed to Borough Council. Borough
Council shall have 45 days from receipt of such request to allow the
Borough Engineer to certify, in writing, to Borough Council that such
portion of the work upon the improvements has been completed in
accordance with the approved plan. Upon such certification, Borough
Council shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending
institution of an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly
representing the value of the improvements completed, or, if Borough
Council fails to act within the said forty-five-day period, Borough
Council shall be deemed to have approved the release of the funds as
requested. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
G. Retention upon completion. Borough Council may, prior to final release
at the time of completion and certification by the Borough Engineer,
require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the aforesaid
improvements. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
A. Procedure.
(1) When the developer has completed all of the required
improvements, the developer shall notify the governing body, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the collection of the
required improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the
Borough Engineer.
(2) The governing body shall, at the next scheduled meeting after
receipt of such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer
to inspect all of the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer
shall thereupon file a report, in writing, with the governing body
and shall mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or
registered mail. The report shall be made and mailed within 45
days after receipt by the Borough Engineer of the aforesaid
authorization from the governing body. Said report shall be
detailed and shall indicate approval or rejection of said
improvements. If any portion thereof shall be rejected, the report
shall contain a statement of reasons for such nonapproval or
rejection.
(3) After receipt of the Engineer's report and maintenance bond, the
governing body shall notify the developer within 15 days, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the action of the
governing body with relation thereto.
(4) If the governing body or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with
the time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements
will be deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be
§ 163-46 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-47
160:331
§ 163-48. Remedies for completion of improvements.
§ 163-49. Maintenance bond.
released from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty
bond.
(5) If any portion of the required improvements shall not be approved
or shall be rejected by the governing body, the developer shall
proceed to complete the same, and upon completion the same
procedure of notification as outlined herein shall be followed.
(6) Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
subdivider's or developer's right to contest or question, by legal
proceedings or otherwise, any determination of the governing body
or the Borough Engineer.
A. In the event that any improvements that may be required have not been
constructed and installed as provided for in the written agreement, this
chapter or the requirements of the governing body or in accordance
with the approved final plan, the governing body shall enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies.
B. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient to pay the
cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the governing body may, at its
option, install part of such improvements and may institute appropriate
legal or equitable action to recover the moneys necessary to complete
the remainder of the improvements.
C. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any
legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be
used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security and not for any other municipal purpose.
A. Before the Borough Engineer shall issue to the governing body a
written certification that all improvements specified and required have
been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the agreement and
requirements relative to the land development and in compliance with
the specifications, standards, ordinances and requirements of the
Borough, the subdivider or developer shall be required to deposit with
the Borough a corporate maintenance bond in such amount, under such
conditions, in such form and with approved surety as shall be required
by the governing body. Said maintenance bond is to guarantee the
repairs and maintenance by the subdivider or developer of the streets,
roads, pavements, sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm drains and facilities,
sanitary sewer and facilities, sewage treatment plant and facilities and
any other improvements constructed and installed in the subdivision or
development for a period of two years from the date of final and official
§ 163-47 ECONOMY CODE § 163-49
160:332
§ 163-50. Compliance with standards required.
§ 163-51. Recording of plan.
acceptance of the above-said improvements and facilities by the
governing body.
B. The repairs and maintenance required to be performed by the
subdivider or developer shall extend only to making good any inherent
defects which become manifested in the materials and workmanship
under ordinary conditions and shall not be held to cover any breakage
or damage caused by improper use or by accident resulting from
circumstances over which the subdivider or developer has no control.
A. No road, street, land or related improvement shall be accepted as a part
of the highway system of the Borough or for maintenance unless
opened, laid out, graded and improved in strict accordance with the
standards and regulations of the Borough. The requirements,
specifications and standards of construction, material and
appurtenances as designated herein are considered as minimum, and
the governing body may, as it deems advisable, revise said
specifications and requirements to secure a higher standard of
improvements and community development.
B. No stormwater drainage facilities, sanitary sewer and sewage
treatment facilities, water supply and water distribution system and
facilities or any other facilities or improvements will be accepted as a
part of the Borough's facilities for operation and maintenance unless
designed and constructed in strict compliance with all the standards,
specifications, rules, regulations, ordinances and requirements of the
Borough.
A. Upon approval of a final plat by the Borough, the applicant shall record
the final plat in the office of the Beaver County Recorder of Deeds
within 90 days of such final approval or within 90 days of the date of
delivery of an approved plat signed by Borough Council, following
completion of conditions imposed for such approval, whichever is later.
[Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
B. Upon recording of the final plat in the office of the Beaver County
Recorder of Deeds, the applicant shall deliver to the Borough Secretary
or his/her authorized designee, one reproducible mylar and two paper
prints of the final plat, as recorded, containing all required signatures
and dates of approval, including those of the Beaver County Recorder of
Deeds. In addition, in the case of a major subdivision, the applicant
shall deliver to the Borough Secretary or his/her authorized designee, a
CD-ROM containing the final plat in digitized format acceptable to the
Borough. [Added 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 43484]
84.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsections B
through E as Subsections C through F, respectively.
§ 163-49 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-51
160:333
§ 163-52. Borough not responsible where plans not approved.
If any road or any drainage facility in connection therewith shall be opened,
constructed or dedicated for public use or travel, except in strict
accordance with plans approved and recorded as herein provided, neither
the governing body nor any public authority shall place, construct or
operate any sewer, drain, water pipe or other facility or do any work of
any kind in or upon such road, and neither the governing body nor any
other public authority shall have responsibility of any kind with respect to
any such road or drainage facility, notwithstanding any use of the same by
the public; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall prevent
the laying of trunk sewers drains or water or gas mains, if required by
engineering necessity for the accommodating of other territory.
§ 163-53. Standards for location and management of open space.
C. After an approved subdivision plan shall have been officially recorded,
the streets, parks and other public improvements shown hereon shall
be so considered to be a part of the Official Plan of the Borough.
D. Streets, parks and other public improvements shown on a subdivision
plan to be recorded shall be offered for dedication to the Borough by
formal notation thereof on the plan, or the owner shall note on such
plan that any improvements have not been offered for dedication to the
Borough.
E. Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan
shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until such
time as the same shall have been offered for dedication to the Borough
and accepted, by ordinance or resolution, or until it shall have been
condemned for use as a public street, park or other improvement.
F. In the event that an approved subdivision plan is not recorded within
the time period required by Subsection A, above, said approval shall be
deemed voided and rescinded, and the plan must be resubmitted if
approval is sought by the developer. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord.
No. 434]
A. Common open space, when provided, shall be located so as to be
consistent with accepted design principles. It shall be designed as a
contiguous area easily accessible to the residents and preserving
natural features.
B. Provisions to ensure common open space.
(1) There shall be provisions that ensure that the common open space
shall continue as such and be properly maintained. The developer
shall either:
(a) Dedicate such land to public use if the Borough or another
public agency has indicated it will accept such dedications;
§ 163-51 ECONOMY CODE § 163-53
160:334
(b) Retain ownership and responsibility for maintenance of such
open space; or
(c) Provide for and establish one or more organizations for the
ownership and maintenance of all common open space.
(2) In the case of Subsection B(1)(b) and (c) above, each organization
shall be a nonprofit homeowners' corporation, unless the developer
demonstrates that a community open space trust is a more
appropriate form of organization.
C. If a homeowners' association or open space trust is formed, it shall be
governed according to the following regulations:
(1) The organization is established by the developer and operated with
financial subsidization by the developer, if necessary, before the
sale of any lots within the development.
(2) Membership in the organization is mandatory for all purchasers of
homes therein and their successors.
(3) The organization shall be responsible for maintenance, insurance
and taxes on common open space.
(4) The members of the organization shall share equitably the costs of
maintaining and developing common open space, in accordance
with procedures established by them.
(5) The organization shall hire adequate staff to administer facilities
and maintain the common open space.
(6) Failure to maintain.
(a) In the event that the organization established to own and
maintain common open space, or any successor organization,
shall at any time after establishment of the development fail to
maintain the common open space in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan, the
Borough may serve written notice upon such organization or
upon the residents of the development setting forth the
manner in which the organization has failed to maintain the
common open space in reasonable condition.
(b) Said notice shall include a demand that such deficiencies of
maintenance be corrected within 30 days thereof and shall
state the date and place of a hearing thereon, which shall be
held within 14 days of the notice.
(c) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days
or any extension thereof, the Borough may enter upon said
common space and maintain the same for a period of one year.
§ 163-53 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-53
160:335
(d) Said maintenance by the Borough shall not constitute a taking
nor vest in the public any rights of use.
(e) Before the expiration of said year, the Borough shall call a
public hearing upon notice to such organization or to the
residents of the development. At the hearing, such
organization or the residents shall show cause why such
maintenance by the Borough shall not, at the option of the
Borough, continue for a succeeding year.
(f) If the governing body determines that such organization is
ready and able to maintain said common space in reasonable
condition, the Borough shall cease maintenance at the end of
said year.
(g) If the governing body shall determine that such organization is
not ready and able to maintain said common open space in a
reasonable condition, it may, at its discretion, continue
maintenance during the next succeeding year subject to a
similar determination in each year thereafter.
(h) The costs of maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed
against the properties within the development that have a right
of enjoyment of the common open space and shall become a
lien on said properties.
§ 163-53 ECONOMY CODE § 163-53
160:336
ARTICLE XI
Modifications and Amendments
§ 163-54. Modifications. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
The governing body may grant a modification of the requirements of one or
more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in question,
or if an equal or better specification is available to comply with the Borough
construction standards or the design standards of this chapter, provided
that such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and that
the purpose and intent of the chapter is observed.
§ 163-55. Amendments. [Amended 4-10-2012 by Ord. No. 434]
Borough Council may, from time to time, amend this chapter in accordance
with the following provisions:
A. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based or detailed comparative information about the
equal or better specification proposed, whichever is applicable, the
exact provision or provisions of this chapter to be modified and the
minimum modification necessary.
B. The request for modification shall be referred to the Borough Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
C. A request for a modification to authorize an equal or better
specification shall be referred to the Borough Engineer for advisory
comment.
D. The reasons relied upon by Borough Council in approving or
disapproving the request shall be entered into the minutes of the
Borough Council meeting at which action is taken.
E. Any resolution adopted governing an application for which a
modification has been granted or denied shall include specific reference
to the modification and the reasons for approval or disapproval.
F. Whenever a modification is granted by Borough Council, the final plat
for recording shall contain a notation indicating the substance of the
modification granted and the date of approval by Borough Council.
G. Borough Council and the Planning Commission shall keep a written
record of all action on all requests for modifications.
A. Planning Commission review. In the case of amendments other than
those prepared by the Borough Planning Commission, Borough Council
shall submit the proposed amendment to the Planning Commission for
§ 163-54 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-55
160:337
recommendation at least 30 days prior to the date fixed for the public
hearing on the proposed amendment.
B. County Planning Commission review. The proposed amendment shall be
submitted to the Beaver County Planning Commission for review and
recommendation at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the
amendment.
C. Public hearing. Before voting on enactment on an amendment, Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon pursuant to public notice, as
defined herein. Borough Council shall not conduct its public hearing
until comments are received from the Beaver County Planning
Commission or until the expiration of 30 days from the date the
amendment was sent to the county.
D. Publication, advertisement and availability of ordinance.
(1) Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless public notice, as
defined herein, of the proposed enactment is given, including the
time and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered,
and a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of the
proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof.
(2) Borough Council shall publish the proposed amendment once in
one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough not more than
60 nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the
proposed amendment shall include either the full text thereof or
the title and a brief summary prepared by the Borough Solicitor
and setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full
text is not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(b) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in
the County Law Library or other county office designated by
the County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater
than that necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said
ordinances.
(c) In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, Borough Council
shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, a brief
summary setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail
together with a summary of the amendments.
(d) Subdivision and land development amendments may be
incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with
the same force and effect as if duly recorded herein.
§ 163-55 ECONOMY CODE § 163-55
160:338
E. Filing after enactment. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough
Secretary shall forward a certified copy of the amendment to the
Beaver County Planning Commission.
§ 163-55 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-55
160:339

ARTICLE XII
Appeals
§ 163-56. Request for reconsideration.
Any person aggrieved by a finding, decision or recommendation of the
governing body may present additional relevant information and request
reconsideration of the original findings, decision or recommendation upon
written request, within 30 days of notification of the governing body's
decision.
§ 163-57. Approval refused.
A. In a case where the governing body shall refuse to approve any plans
submitted to it, in accordance with this Subdivision Ordinance, any
person aggrieved by the action of the governing body may, within 30
days after such action, appeal therefrom by petition to the County Clerk
of Common Pleas, which Court shall hear the matter de nova, and after
hearing may enter a decree affirming, reversing or modifying the action
of the governing body as may appear just on the premises.
B. The Court shall designate the manner in which notices of the hearing of
any such appeal shall be given to all parties interested. The decision of
the Court shall be final.
§ 163-56 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-57
160:341

ARTICLE XIII
Fees
§ 163-58. Fees.
A. Application filing fees. A schedule of application filing fees shall be
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council. The
application filing fees shall cover the administrative costs associated
with processing an application for approval of a subdivision or land
development and shall be payable to the Borough at the time of
submission of the application. [Amended 4-27-2005 by Ord. No.
400]
B. Application review fees. [Added 4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 40085 ]
(1) An application review escrow deposit in an amount established
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council also shall be
payable at the time of submission of the application to guarantee
payment of the estimated application review fees required by this
subsection. The actual amount of the review fees in excess of the
escrow deposit shall be payable within 10 days of billing by the
Borough. Any monies remaining in the escrow account after all
review fees have been paid shall be returned to the applicant.
(2) Failure to pay the required escrow deposit or any additional review
fees required by this subsection shall cause the application to be
determined to be incomplete and the application shall not be
scheduled for review by the Planning Commission or Borough
Council until such fees are paid.
(3) Application review fees shall include reasonable and necessary
charges by the Borough's professional consultants or the Borough
Engineer for review and report on the application to the Borough.
Such review fees shall be based upon a schedule established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council. Such review fees
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Borough Engineer or other professional
consultants for similar service in the community, but in no event
shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Borough
Engineer or other professional consultants to the Borough when
fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(4) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
the Borough Secretary that such fees are disputed, in which ease
the Borough shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land
development application due to the applicant's request over
disputed fees.
85.Editor's Note: This ordinance also renumbered former Subsections B, C and D as D, E and
F, respectively.
§ 163-58 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-58
160:343
(5) In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the applicant and the Borough shall follow the procedure for
resolution of disputes as set forth below in § 163-58C of this
section.
C. Inspection fees; escrow deposit; dispute of expenses. [Added
4-27-2005 by Ord. No. 400]
(1) The applicant shall reimburse the Borough for the reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred for the inspection of improvements.
Such reimbursement shall be based upon a schedule established
from time to time by resolution of Borough Council. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for
work performed for similar services in the community, but in no
event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Borough
Engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are not
reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
(2) An inspection fee escrow deposit in an amount established from
time to time by resolution of Borough Council shall be payable at
the time of execution of the developer's agreement to guarantee
payment of the estimated inspection fees required by this section.
The actual amount of the inspection fees in excess of the escrow
deposit shall be payable within 10 days of billing by the Borough.
Any monies remaining in the escrow account after all inspection
fees have been paid shall be returned to the applicant.
(3) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough Secretary that such expenses are disputed as
unreasonable or unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not
delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development application
or any approval or permit related to development due to the
applicant's request over disputed engineer expenses.
(4) If within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(5) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
§ 163-58 ECONOMY CODE § 163-58
160:344
(6) In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree upon
the professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the
billing date, then upon application of either party, the President
Judge of the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which
the Borough is located, or if at the time there be no President
Judge, then the senior active judge then sitting shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(7) The fees of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
D. The schedule of fees and charges established shall vary and be
regulated in accordance with the scope and complexity of the plan of
subdivision and land development project.
E. Where a plan of subdivision or land development has for any reason
been rejected by the governing body, the applicant, when resubmitting
plans and application for review and approval of the same, shall be
required to pay a fee as set forth in the Borough's schedule of fees and
charges for such submittals.
F. All fees shall be made payable to the Secretary of the Borough. All fees
submitted are nonrefundable, and the approval or rejection for any
reason of any plan of subdivision or land development will not be reason
or cause for the return of any fee submitted.
§ 163-58 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-58
160:345

ARTICLE XIV
Certificates; Affidavits; Approvals
§ 163-59. Requirements for submission.
The certificates quoted below shall be inscribed on the plan as quoted and
shall be properly signed and attested when the plan is submitted to the
governing body.86 All certificates shall be placed on the final plan in an
arrangement suitable for placement of all required seals.
86.Editor's Note: Said certificates are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 163-59 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-59
160:347

ARTICLE XV
Enforcement
§ 163-60. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. The
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of
civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there
has been a violation, further determines that there was a good-faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to
have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice, and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment. Nothing contained in this
section shall be construed or interpreted to grant to any person or
entity other than the Borough the right to commence any action for
enforcement pursuant to this section.
§ 163-60 STREETS AND SIDEWALKS § 163-60
160:349
Chapter 166
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 166-1. Short title and purpose.
The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the "Private Club and
Residential Swimming Pool Ordinance" and shall be deemed presumptively
to provide for all matters affecting or relating to the location, design,
construction, equipment, maintenance, alteration, repair and operation of
private residential swimming pools constructed within the Borough.
§ 166-2. Definitions; word usage.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meanings given herein:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Economy, County of Beaver, and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or any other organization of any kind.
SWIMMING POOL, ABOVEGROUND-TYPE, SEMIPERMANENT — Any
private residential or club swimming pool semipermanently
constructed as a receptacle for water or any artificial body of water,
together with all appurtenant equipment, which has a depth at any
point of more than 36 inches or a surface area exceeding 100 square
feet, and which is intended or used for the total or partial immersion
therein of human beings for recreational purposes, and which is
permanently or indefinitely or semipermanently located outside of any
building used as a family residence or club, which is intended to be
used as a swimming pool in connection with such family or club, and
which is to be available only to the owner, occupant or club member
of such residence and his or her family and guests or club member, for
which use no admission is charged for use of the private residential
pool. The "thirty-six-inch depth," quoted herein, is defined as the depth
from the floor of the swimming pool, at any point, to the top of any wall,
regardless of the depth of the water. A swimming pool with a sidewall
height in excess of 36 inches is, therefore, covered by this chapter, even
though only filled with 36 inches or less of water.
SWIMMING POOL, IN-GROUND-TYPE — Any private club or
residential swimming pool permanently constructed as a receptacle for
water or any artificial body of water, together with all appurtenant
equipment, which has a depth at any point of more than 23 inches or
§ 163-60 ECONOMY CODE § 166-2
166:350
§ 166-3. Compliance required.
Every swimming pool, as herein defined, constructed, installed, altered,
maintained or operated after the effective date of this chapter shall comply
with all applicable provisions of this chapter. The provisions of this chapter
shall apply to all swimming pools located in the Borough, whether
previously or hereafter constructed; provided, however, that, with regard
to any such swimming pool which has been constructed or substantially
constructed at the time of the enactment of this chapter, the provisions
of § 166-8, Location, and § 166-9, Slope; lifeline, shall not apply, except
to such additions or other alterations as may hereafter be made thereto;
and conformity to the remaining provisions of this chapter in regard to
previously constructed or substantially constructed swimming pools at the
time of enactment of this chapter shall not be required until 60 days after
the enactment hereof or such longer period as may be allowed, upon written
request, by the Zoning Officer, subject to the approval of the Council of the
Borough of Economy.
§ 166-4. Construction permits and fee required.
No swimming pool shall hereafter be constructed, installed, enlarged or
altered unless a building permit shall first be issued therefor by the Zoning
Officer of the Borough, which permit shall be issued if, but only if, the
proposed swimming pool or alteration is in conformity with the
requirements of this chapter, with all other relevant ordinances of the
Borough and with all applicable requirements of the Department of Health
of the County of Beaver and the Department of Environmental Protection
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. A fee of $15 shall be paid to the
Borough for each such permit prior to the issuance thereof.
a surface area exceeding 100 square feet, and which is intended or
used for the total or partial immersion therein of human beings for
recreational purposes, and which is permanently or indefinitely located,
constructed or installed in the ground outside of any building used as a
family residence, or which is intended to be used as a swimming pool in
connection with such club or family, and which is to be available only to
the owner, occupant or club member of such residence and his or her
family, guests or club member, for which use no admission is charged
for use of the residential or club pool. The "twenty-three-inch-depth,"
quoted herein, is defined as the depth from the floor of the swimming
pool, at any point, to the top of any wall, regardless of the depth of the
water. A swimming pool with a sidewall height in excess of 23 inches
is, therefore, covered by this chapter, even though only filled with 23
inches or less of water.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Economy,
County of Beaver, and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The word "shall," as used herein, is to be construed as mandatory and
not directory.
§ 166-2 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-5
166:351
§ 166-5. Plans and specifications.
§ 166-6. Operation permit.
No swimming pool, regardless of when constructed or installed, shall be
operated or used unless a permit for such operation has been issued by the
Zoning Officer, which permit shall be issued if, but only if, such swimming
pool and its operation conform to the applicable requirements and
conditions of this chapter and of all other applicable ordinances of the
Borough and to all relevant requirements of the Department of Health
of Beaver County and the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. Every application for a permit to construct or alter any swimming pool
shall be accompanied by a plan, in duplicate, on paper or cloth,
prepared in ink or by other process so as not to fade, smear or
obliterate and in sufficient detail to show all of the following:
(1) Plot plan and elevations with dimensions all drawn to scale of not
less than one-eighth (1/8) inch to the foot.
(2) Pool dimensions, depths and volume in gallons.
(3) Pipe and size of filter system, filtration and backwash capacity or
cleaning system where the filter has no backwashing facility.
(4) Pool piping, layout, with all pipe sizes shown, and the types of
material to be used and manner of filling.
(5) Rated capacity and head of filtration and backwash flows of the
pump in gallons per minute with the size and type of motor.
(6) Location and type of waste disposal system.
B. Every such application shall be accompanied by one copy of the
manufacturer's specifications for the recirculatory system.
C. Every such application shall be accompanied by detailed drawings of
equipment, if any, to be connected to the Borough storm sewer lines,
which shall show that such equipment and connection will comply with
the plumbing provisions of Borough and county ordinances.
D. Every swimming pool, including water supply and drainage systems
and other appurtenances and equipment, shall be constructed or
installed in accordance with the plans submitted to and approved by the
Zoning Officer of the Borough pursuant to the provisions of this chapter,
and no deviation shall be made from such plans unless supplementary
plans relating thereto, conforming to the provisions of this chapter, are
submitted for approval.
§ 166-5 ECONOMY CODE § 166-7
166:352
§ 166-7. Inspections.
All swimming pools shall be subject to inspection by the Zoning Officer
of the Borough to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are
being complied with, and the owners of any such swimming pools shall
permit the designated agents of the Zoning Officer to have access thereto
at reasonable times for that purpose. Any permit issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be suspended or revoked by the Zoning
Officer of the Borough in the event that a violation of any of the
requirements or conditions imposed by this chapter is determined by him to
have occurred.
§ 166-8. Location.
All swimming pools, including surrounding walkways, pumps and filters,
shall be treated as accessory buildings as defined under the Borough's
Zoning Ordinance87 and shall be treated accordingly.
§ 166-9. Slope; lifeline.
The slope of the bottom of any swimming pool shall not exceed one foot in
each six feet at any point at which the depth of the water is less than five
feet. At the point at which the depth of the water becomes greater than five
feet, corrosion-resistant fasteners shall be securely installed in the walls or
coping on opposite sides of the pool, and a lifeline, with floats not more than
five feet apart, shall be attached thereto.
§ 166-10. Fences and safety barriers.
A. Every swimming pool, including those now existing or under
construction, shall be separated entirely from public thoroughfares and
neighboring properties by a securely constructed and installed artificial
fence or similar artificial barrier or any other type fence approved by
the Zoning Officer having a height at all points of at least four feet
above the grade level. No opening in such a fence or barrier, other than
regular points of entry, shall have either a length or width in excess of
two inches. All points of entry into the area of the swimming pool shall
be equipped with a secure gate having a lock operated by a key for
keeping the gate closed and locked at all times when the pool is not in
use; provided, however, that the door of any dwelling house which
forms a part of the fence or barrier enclosure need not be so equipped.
B. All pools which have a depth of 36 inches or more, including those now
existing or under construction, shall be equipped with a removable or
retractable ladder or steps. Pools which are equipped with
aboveground decks will also be equipped with removable or retractable
ladder or steps. Such pools equipped with gates will be closed and
locked at all times when the pool is not in use. All pools equipped with
87.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Zoning.
§ 166-7 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-10
166:353
§ 166-11. Water supply and filter system.
§ 166-12. Construction, maintenance and operation.
Materials used in the construction of all swimming pools shall be
waterproofed, and the owner of any swimming pool shall maintain said pool
in such a condition as to prevent breaks in the pool structure or water from
overflowing onto adjacent public or private property.
§ 166-13. Lighting.
All lighting used to illuminate any pool shall be so arranged and shaded
as to reflect light away from adjoining premises. All underwater lighting
shall, at the time of installation, comply with the equipment, installation and
maintenance standards of the Electrical Inspection Bureau of the Middle
Department Association of Fire Underwriters, and a duplicate copy of any
inspection reports made by such an agency or its successors shall be filed
within 30 days of its receipt with the Zoning Officer by the owner of any
pool.
§ 166-14. Electrical regulations.
§ 166-15. Sanitary conditions.
All swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition
in compliance with all applicable regulations of the Department of Health
aboveground decks will also be equipped with a back rail, which is to
be approved by the Zoning Officer.
A. There shall be a means of water renewal with all swimming pools. The
means of water renewal for all swimming pools shall be either of the filland-
draw system or of some mechanical filtration system. Whichever
system is used, the system shall be capable of maintaining a clean and
sanitary condition at all times and be subject to the inspection by the
Zoning Officer.
B. Approval, which shall be in writing, may be given by the Zoning Officer
to discharge water at the curb or upon the surface of any street if, in the
opinion of the Zoning Officer, no damage will be done by the discharge
of water to the street or to any abutting properties.
A. All electric wiring installed shall be installed and used in conjunction
with swimming pools in conformity with National Electric Code
standards, and the materials used or installed shall be as approved by
the National Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc.
B. All metal fences, enclosures or railings which are located near or
adjacent to swimming pools and which might become electrically alive
as a result of a contact with broken overhead conductors or from any
other cause shall be effectively grounded.
§ 166-10 ECONOMY CODE § 166-15
166:354
of Beaver County and the Department of Environmental Protection of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and all equipment shall be maintained in a
satisfactory operating condition during the period of time when the pool is
in use.
§ 166-16. Nuisances.
Regardless of the provisions of any other section of this chapter and
regardless of any permits which may be issued hereunder, no swimming
pool shall be used, kept, maintained or operated in the Borough if such
use, keeping, maintaining or operating thereof is at any time determined to
constitute a nuisance or to be unreasonably dangerous to life or detrimental
to health.
§ 166-17. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person violating any provision or regulation of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, be fined a sum not exceeding
$300 and, upon any default of payment of such fine, may be committed to
imprisonment in the Beaver County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days.
Each day that a violation is permitted to exist by such person after notice
in writing shall have been served upon him by the Zoning Officer of the
Borough shall constitute an additional, separate offense.
Chapter 170
TAXATION
§ 166-15 SWIMMING POOLS § 166-17
166:355

ARTICLE I
Tax on Jukeboxes and Amusement Devices
[Adopted 3-13-1958 by Ord. No. 9]
§ 170-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise stated, the following terms shall have, for the purpose of
this article, the meanings herein indicated:
JUKEBOX — Any music-vending machine, contrivance or device which,
upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key into any slot,
crevice or other opening or by the payment of any price, operates or may be
operated for the emission of song, music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any device, other than a jukebox,
which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate or disk may be
operated for use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not
registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered.
PERSON — Includes a natural person, firm, association, copartnership or
corporation.
§ 170-2. Tax imposed. [Amended 10-13-1981 by Ord. No. 236]
The following taxes are imposed for general Borough purposes:
§ 170-3. Tax levied.
Said tax is levied for the fiscal year 1958 and for each year thereafter, in the
amounts stated in § 170-2.
§ 170-4. License required.
No person shall own, possess or maintain any of the articles taxed by
§ 170-2, without first obtaining a license from the designated agent of the
Borough of Economy and paying to him the tax due. Said license shall be
affixed to the machine for which it is issued.
§ 170-5. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the designated agent of the Borough of Economy to
collect and receive the taxes and penalties imposed in § 170-2, for payment
over to the Borough Secretary or Treasurer, and to enforce the provisions
of this article. It shall be his duty also to keep a record showing the amount
received by him from each taxpayer and the date of such receipts.
A. On each jukebox installed for use or available for rental within the
Borough: $50 per year or portion thereof.
B. On each mechanical amusement device installed for use or available for
rental within the Borough: $50 per year or portion thereof.
§ 170-1 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-6
166:357
§ 170-6. Due date; penalty for late payment.
All taxes imposed in this article shall be due on or before 30 days from the
date of erection or installation of the subject taxed and, if not paid within
said period of time, shall be subject to a penalty of 50%.
§ 170-7. Collection of unpaid taxes; violations and penalties.
A. Collection of unpaid taxes. All taxes imposed by this article, together
with all interest and penalties, shall be recoverable by the Borough
Solicitor as other debts of like amount are recoverable.
B. Violations and penalties. Any person convicted before any District
Justice of violating any of the provisions or requirements of this article,
or who shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax or penalties imposed
by this article or any person who shall refuse to permit the collector or
any person designated by the Borough Council, in writing, to examine
his books, records and papers or who shall knowingly make any
incomplete, false or fraudulent return or who shall attempt to do
anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the
tax imposed by this article shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not
more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense, or to
undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days for the nonpayment of
such fine or penalty and costs within 10 days from the imposition
thereof Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty
imposed by any other section of this article. [Amended 2-10-1987 by
Ord. No. 274]
§ 170-6 ECONOMY CODE § 170-7
166:358
ARTICLE II
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 4-1-1965 by Ord. No. 87]
§ 170-8. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including,
among others, theatrical or operatic performances; concerts; movingpicture
shows; vaudeville; circuses; carnivals; fairs and sideshows; all
forms of entertainment at fair grounds and amusement parks; athletic
contests or diversions, including, among others, wrestling matches,
boxing and sparring exhibitions; bowling; pool; billiards; bathing;
swimming; archery; shooting; riding; dancing; and all other forms of
diversion, sports, recreation or pastime, shows, exhibitions, contests,
displays and games, as well as all other methods of obtaining monetary
admission charges, donations, contributions or monetary charges of
any character from the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof, for admission to the premises or for use of facilities provided
for entertainment, amusement, sport or recreational purposes.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charge of any character
whatever, including donations, contributions fixed and exacted or in
any manner fixed and received by producers, as herein defined, from
the general public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or
indirectly, for the privilege to attend or engage in any entertainment or
amusement, provided that when such entertainment or amusement is
conducted at any roof garden, nightclub, cabaret or other place where
the charge for admission is wholly or in part, included in the price paid
for refreshment, service or merchandise, the amount paid for admission
to such amusement shall be deemed to be the amount paid of the cover
or minimum charge, if any.
PERSON — Every individual person, copartnership, association,
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons, or
corporations, domestic or foreign. Whenever used in any clause
prescribing and imposing a penalty, or both, the term "person," as
applied to copartnership or association, shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within the
Borough of Economy, where the general public or a limited or selected
number thereof may, upon payment of an established price, attend or
engage in any amusement as herein defined, including, among others,
theaters, opera houses, moving-picture houses, amusement parks,
stadiums, arenas, baseball parks, skating rinks, circus or carnival tents
or grounds, fair grounds, halls, lodge rooms, riding academies, golf
courses, bowling alleys, poolrooms, bathing and swimming places,
§ 170-8 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-8
166:359
§ 170-9. Permits.
dance halls, tennis courts, archery, rifle or shotgun ranges, roof
gardens, cabarets, nightclubs and other like places.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
TAX COLLECTOR — The person appointed by the Council of the
Borough of Economy to collect the taxes imposed by this article and to
issue permits.
TEMPORARY AMUSEMENT — An amusement to be conducted at one
location for a period of less than one month.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin to conduct any
form of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of amusement
or any itinerant form of amusement within the Borough of Economy
unless an amusement permit or permits shall have been issued to him
as hereinafter prescribed and the tax herein imposed paid in
accordance with the provisions herein made.
B. Every producer, desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Borough of Economy, shall file an
application for a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit
or permits, as the case may be, with the Tax Collector. Every application
for such permit or permits shall be made upon a form prescribed,
prepared and furnished by the Tax Collector and shall set forth the
name under which the applicant conducts or intends to conduct a
permanent or temporary place of amusement and such other
information as the Tax Collector may require. If the applicant has or
intends to have more than one place of amusement within the Borough,
the application shall state the location of each place of the amusement
and, in the case of an itinerant form of amusement, the date and length
of time such amusement is to be conducted at each place. In the case of
an application for a permit for a temporary place of amusement, the
application shall state the name and address of the owner, lessee or
custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to be
conducted. If the applicant is an association or a corporation, the
application shall state the names and addresses of the principal officers
thereof and any other information prescribed by the Tax Collector for
purposes of identification. The application shall be signed by the
producer, if a natural person, and, in the case of an association, by a
member or partner thereof and, in the case of a corporation, by an
officer thereof.
§ 170-8 ECONOMY CODE § 170-9
166:360
§ 170-10. Imposition of tax.
§ 170-11. Collection.
C. Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee or
fees herein required, the Tax Collector shall grant and issue to each
applicant an annual or temporary amusement permit for each place of
amusement within the Borough of Economy set forth in his application.
Amusement permits shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for
the persons in whose names they are issued and for the conduct of
amusements at the places designated therein and shall at all times be
conspicuously displayed at the places for which they are issued. All
permits for permanent places of amusements shall expire on the first
day of January, unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for
cause by the proper authorities of the Borough. Permits for temporary
places of amusement shall expire at the time specified therein. The
producer of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the Tax
Collector promptly of any change in the original contemplated itinerary,
either as to the date or time of the conduct of the amusement at each
place. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
D. The Amusement Tax Collector of the Borough may suspend or, after
hearing, revoke an amusement permit whenever he finds that the
holder thereof has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this
article. Upon suspending or revoking any amusement permit, the Tax
Collector shall request the holder thereof to surrender to him
immediately all permits, or duplicates thereof, issued to him, and the
holder shall surrender promptly all such permits. Whenever the Tax
Collector suspends an amusement permit, he shall notify the holder
immediately, and the Council shall afford him a hearing, if requested,
within five days of such notice. After such hearing, the Council shall
either rescind the order of suspension or, upon good cause appearing
therefor, shall continue the suspension or revoke the permit.
A. Tax is hereby imposed upon the sale of admission to the places of
amusement or the privilege to engage herein, in the Borough of
Economy, at the rate of 2 1/2% of the established price charged the
general public or a limited or selected group thereof by any producer
for such admission or privilege, which shall be paid by the person
acquiring the same.
B. In the case of persons (except bona fide employees of a producer or
municipal or state officers on official business) admitted free or at
reduced rates to any place of amusement, at a time and under
circumstances when an established price is charged to other persons,
the tax imposed by this article shall be computed on the established
price charged to such other persons of the same class for the same or
similar accommodations, to be paid by the person so admitted.
§ 170-9 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-11
166:361
§ 170-12. Ascertaining amount of tax; interest and penalties.
A. Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable
to the Borough of Economy as agents thereof for the payment of the
same into the Borough Treasury through the Tax Collector duly
appointed by the Borough Council.
B. Where permits are obtained for conducting temporary amusements by
persons who are not the owners, lessors or custodians of the places
where the amusements are to be conducted, or where the temporary
amusement is permitted by the owner, lessor or custodian of any place
to be conducted without the procurement of the permit or permits
required by this article, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid by
the owner, lessee or custodian of such place where such temporary
amusement is held or conducted, unless paid by the producer
conducting the amusement.
A. For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by the
producers of the Borough of Economy, it shall be the duty of:
(1) Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting a place
of amusement, on or before the 10th day of each month after the
effective date of this article to transmit to the Tax Collector, on a
form prescribed and prepared by him, a report of the amount of tax
collected by him during the preceding month.
(2) Every producer conducting a temporary place of amusement or
itinerant form of amusement shall file a report with the Tax
Collector promptly after each performance.
B. All reports required under this section shall show such information as
the Tax Collector shall prescribe.
C. Every producer, at the time of making every report by this section, shall
compute and pay to the Tax Collector the taxes collected by him and
due to the Borough of Economy during the period for which the report
is made; provided, however, that such producer may deduct therefrom
2% thereof, provided that payment is made on or before the due date
thereof. The amount of all taxes imposed under the provisions of this
article shall, in the case of places of permanent amusement, be due and
payable on the 10th day of the next succeeding month; and, in the case
of temporary or itinerant forms of amusement, it shall be due and
payable on the day the reports in such cases are required to be made
under this section. All such taxes shall bear interest at the rate of onehalf
of one per centum (1/2 of 1%) per month, or fractional part of a
month, from the date they are due and payable until paid.
D. If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report or payment
as herein required, an additional 10% of the amount of the tax shall be
added as a penalty by the Tax Collector and collected in accordance
with the provisions of this article.
§ 170-11 ECONOMY CODE § 170-13
166:362
§ 170-13. Suit for collection of taxes.
The Tax Collector, as an agent of the Borough of Economy, or the Solicitor
of the Borough of Economy, if designated by the Council, may sue for the
recovery of taxes, interest and penalties due and unpaid under this article.
§ 170-14. Powers and duties of Tax Collector.
If the Tax Collector is not satisfied with the report and payment of tax made
by any producer under the provisions of this article, he is hereby authorized
and empowered to make a determination of the tax due by such producer,
based upon the facts contained in the report or upon any information
within his possession or that shall come into his possession; and for this
purpose, the Tax Collector or such person or persons duly authorized by the
Council are authorized to examine the books, papers, tickets, ticket stubs
and records of any producer taxable under this article to verify the accuracy
of any report or payment made under the provisions thereof or to ascertain
whether the taxes imposed by this article have been paid.
§ 170-15. Payment under protest and refunds.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized to accept payment under protest
of the amount of tax claimed by the Borough of Economy in any case
where any person disputes the validity or amount of the Borough's claim
for the tax. If it is thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent
jurisdiction that there has been an overpayment to the Tax Collector, the
amount of the overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid under
protest.
§ 170-16. Estimate of tax due.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
of tax required by this article, or if, as a result of an investigation by the
Tax Collector or such person or persons duly, authorized by the Council, a
report is found to be incorrect, the Tax Collector shall estimate the tax due
by such producer and determine the amount due by him for taxes, penalties
and interest thereon.
§ 170-17. Use of collected taxes.
All taxes, interest and penalties collected or received under the provisions
of this article, shall be paid into the Treasury of the Borough of Economy for
the use and benefits of said Borough.
§ 170-18. Records and forms.
The Tax Collector is hereby authorized and directed to make and keep
such records, prepare such forms and take such other measures as may
be necessary or convenient to carry this article into effect and may, in
his discretion, require reasonable deposits to be made by applicants for
temporary permits.
§ 170-13 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-19
166:363
§ 170-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person, copartnership, association or corporation who shall fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the terms or provisions of this article, or
of any regulations or requirement pursuant thereto and authorized thereby,
shall be subject to a fine or penalty not to exceed $300, plus costs of
prosecution, for each such offense or to undergo imprisonment for not more
than 90 days for the nonpayment of such fine or penalty and costs. Such
penalty or fine imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
§ 170-19 ECONOMY CODE § 170-19
166:364
ARTICLE III
Mercantile License Tax
[Adopted 11-10-1966 by Ord. No. 105]
§ 170-20. Definitions; word usage.
§ 170-21. Tax levied. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
The Borough hereby levies a mercantile license tax in the manner and at the
rate hereinafter set forth.
§ 170-22. License required. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Every person desiring to continue to conduct or engage in or hereafter to
begin to conduct or engage in a business as a wholesale or retail vendor
or dealer in goods, wares and merchandise, and any person conducting a
restaurant or other place where food, drink or refreshments are sold in the
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates a different meaning:
BOROUGH SECRETARY — The Borough Secretary of the Borough of
Economy.
GROSS VOLUME OF BUSINESS — The whole volume of business and
shall include both cash and credit transactions.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period corresponding to the fiscal
year of the Borough.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership,
association or corporation. The singular shall include the plural, and
the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
RETAIL DEALER or RETAIL VENDOR — Any person who is a dealer
in or vendor of goods, wares and merchandise who is not a wholesale
dealer or vendor.
TEMPORARY, SEASONAL OR ITINERANT BUSINESS — Any business
that is conducted at one location for less than 60 consecutive calendar
days.
WHOLESALE DEALER or WHOLESALE VENDOR — Any person who
sells to dealers in or vendors of goods, wares and merchandise and to
no other persons.
B. The terms "persons," "wholesale dealer," "wholesale vendor," "retail
dealer" and "retail vendor" shall not include nonprofit corporations or
associations organized for religious, charitable or educational or
associations organized for government of the United States or of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or any person vending or disposing of
articles of his own growth, production or manufacture for shipment of
delivery from the place of growth, production or manufacture thereof.
§ 170-20 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-22
166:365
Borough, shall on or before the first day of January or prior to commencing
business in said license year, procure a mercantile license for his place
of business or, if more than one, for each of his places of business in the
Borough from the Borough Secretary, who shall issue the same upon the
payment of a fee of $2 for a wholesale or a retail license and $4 for a
wholesale and a retail license for his place of business or, if more than one,
for each of his places of business in the Borough, for each license year. Such
license shall be conspicuously posted at the place of business or each of the
places of business of every such person at all times.
§ 170-23. Imposition and rate of tax. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord.
No. 274]
Every person engaging in or conducting any of the following businesses or
occupations in the Borough of Economy shall pay a mercantile license tax
at the rate set forth:
§ 170-24. Computation of volume of business.
Every person subject to the payment of the tax hereby imposed shall
compute his gross volume of business upon the actual amount of business
transacted by him during the quarter ending March 31, June 30, September
30 and December 31.
A. Wholesale vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise shall
pay a tax on the privilege of engaging in or conducting said business at
the rate of one-half (1/2) mill [five ten-thousandths (0.0005)] on each
dollar of the volume of the annual gross business transacted by him.
B. Retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and merchandise and all
persons engaged in conducting restaurants or other places where food,
drink or refreshments are sold shall pay a tax on the privilege of
engaging in or conducting said business at the rate of three-fourths (3/
4) mill [seventy-five ten-thousandths (0.00075)] on each dollar of the
volume of the annual gross business transacted by him.
C. Wholesale and retail vendors or dealers in goods, wares and
merchandise shall pay a tax on the privilege of engaging in or
conducting said business at the rate of one-half (1/2) mill [five tenthousandths
(0.0005)] on each dollar of the volume of the annual gross
wholesale business transacted by him, and three-fourths (3/4) mill
[seventy-five ten-thousandths (0.00075)] on each dollar of the volume of
the annual gross retail business transacted by him.
D. No such tax shall be levied on the dollar volume of business transacted
by wholesale and/or retail dealers derived from the resale of goods,
wares and merchandise taken by any dealer as a trade-in or as part
payment for other goods, wares and merchandise, except to the extent
that the resale price exceeds the trade-in allowance.
§ 170-22 ECONOMY CODE § 170-25
166:366
§ 170-25. Returns. [Amended 3-11-1986 by Ord. No. 265; 2-10-1987
by Ord. No. 274]
Every person subject to payment of the tax hereby imposed shall on or
before the 30th day of April, 1967, 30th day of July, 1967, 30th day of
October, 1967 and January 31, 1968, file a return upon a form furnished
by the Borough Secretary setting forth the actual gross amount of business
transacted by him during the respective quarter ending the next previous
March 31, June 30, September 30 and December 31. By April 15 of each
year the person subject to payment of the tax shall furnish an attested and
true copy of such portion of the United States Federal Income Tax return as
will substantiate the gross income for the entire previous calendar year.
§ 170-26. Payment.
At the time of filing the return, the person making the same shall pay the
amount of tax shown as due thereon to the Borough Secretary.
§ 170-27. Powers and duties of Borough Secretary.
§ 170-28. Suit for collection; penalty for late payment.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article for payment over to
the Borough Treasurer. It shall also be his duty to keep a record
showing the amount received by him from each person paying the tax
and the date of such receipt.
B. The Borough Council may prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of this article, including provisions for
the reexamination and correction of returns and payments alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which an overpayment is claimed or found
to have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough
Council shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas as
in other cases provided.
C. The Borough Secretary or any other person designated by Borough
Council is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers and records
of any taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of
any return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due.
Every such taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and
required to give to the Borough Secretary, or any other person
designated by Borough Council, the means, facilities and opportunity
for such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
A. The Borough Secretary may sue for the recovery of taxes due and
unpaid under this article.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and the additional penalty of 1% of
§ 170-25 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-28
166:367
§ 170-29. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Whoever fails, neglects or refuses to file a return or whoever makes any
false or untrue statement of his return or whoever refuses to permit
inspection of the books, records or accounts of any business in his custody
or control, when the right to make such inspection by the Borough
Secretary, or any person designated by Borough Council, is requested, and
whoever fails or refuses to procure a mercantile license when so required
under this article, or fails to keep his license conspicuously posted at his
place of business as required herein shall, upon conviction before any
District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, plus costs
of prosecution, for each offense and, in default of payment of said fine, to be
imprisoned in the Beaver County Jail for a period not exceeding 90 days for
each offense.
§ 170-30. Applicability.
the amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during
which the tax remains unpaid shall be added and collected. Where suit
is brought for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor
shall, in addition, be liable for the costs of collection and the interest
and penalties imposed herein.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
Borough to levy and collect the taxes hereby imposed on any person or
any business or any portion of any business not within the taxing power
of the Borough under the Constitution of the United States and the laws
of and Constitution of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax, or any portion thereof, imposed upon any person under the
provisions of this article shall be held by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be in violation of the Constitution of the United States or
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the decision of the court shall
not affect or impair the right to impose the taxes or the validity of the
taxes so imposed upon other persons as herein provided.
§ 170-28 ECONOMY CODE § 170-30
166:368
ARTICLE IV
Real Estate Transfer Tax
[Adopted 3-10-1987 by Ord. No. 27588]
§ 170-31. Title.
This Article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Economy."
§ 170-32. Statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Economy, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 170-33. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 170-32 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
88.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Article IV, Real Estate Transfer Tax,
adopted 11-10-1966 by Ord. No. 107, as amended.
§ 170-31 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-33
166:369
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation, whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities, such as but not limited to hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs, pets or animals intended for use in sporting or recreational
activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough, including,
without limitation, buildings, structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil,
gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or lower boundaries, trees
and other improvements, immovables or interests which by custom,
usage or law pass with a conveyance or land but excluding permanently
attached machinery and equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings, exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 170-33 ECONOMY CODE § 170-33
166:370
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including, without limitation, an estate in fee simple, life estate
or perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating, those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including, without limitation, a leasehold interest
or possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term
of 30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in actual consideration for the contract or sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 170-33 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-33
166:371
§ 170-34. Imposition of tax.
§ 170-35. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 170-36. Excluded transactions.
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof a
tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S.. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Borough; provided, however, that the Borough and any, other
political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 170-34 shall not be imposed upon:
§ 170-33 ECONOMY CODE § 170-36
166:372
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which the Borough is prohibited from taxing under the
Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax delinquent property at a sheriffs sale or
Tax Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
(5) A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided that the property or interest therein subject to such
transfer was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife
prior to the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent
and child or the spouse of such brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are
contingent or specifically named. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 170-36 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-36
166:373
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to
a successor trustee.
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption, that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(12) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(13) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(14) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt or the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(15) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(a) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding,
processing, publishing, research and development,
transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and
(b) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the
real estate transferred.
(16) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is a bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(17) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
§ 170-36 ECONOMY CODE § 170-36
166:374
§ 170-37. Documents relating to associations or corporations.
Except as otherwise provided in § 170-36, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 170-38. Acquired companies.
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(18) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of
1954, [68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its
primary purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational,
scenic, agricultural or open space opportunities.
(19) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(20) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
(21) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(22) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company, and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer,of stock or corporation or when,
because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition or
transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it fails
§ 170-36 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-38
166:375
§ 170-39. Credits against tax.
§ 170-40. Renewal or extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 170-41. Proceeds of judicial sales.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds or any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation under
this article.
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the Recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value or real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given to the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
§ 170-38 ECONOMY CODE § 170-41
166:376
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 170-42. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 170-42.1. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the
Borough of Economy based on a redetermination of the amount of tax
due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax, without compensation from the Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due to each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use of the
county, together with a report containing the information as is required
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in reporting collections of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission shall be
paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 170-41 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-42.2
166:377
§ 170-42.2. Civil penalties.
§ 170-42.3. Tax to become a lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments or any interest therein lying, being situated,
wholly or in part, within the boundaries of the Borough, which lands,
tenements, hereditaments or interest therein are described in or conveyed
by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax imposed,
assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time when the
tax under this article is due and payable and continue until discharge by
payment or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is authorized to file
a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver County,
in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and Liens Act of
1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 170-42.4. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 170-42.5. Promulgation of additional regulations.
The designee of the Borough of Economy is charged with enforcement and
collection of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable
regulations for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which
have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under
72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 170-42.6. Repealer.
All prior ordinances imposing a real estate transfer tax are hereby repealed
in their entirety.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 170-42.2 ECONOMY CODE § 170-42.6
166:378
ARTICLE V
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-10-1966 by Ord. No. 108]
§ 170-43. Statutory authority.
In pursuance of the authority granted to Boroughs in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania by an Act of the General Assembly known as the "Local Tax
Enabling Act," approved the 31st day of December 1965 (Act No. 511, RL.
1257),89 be it enacted and ordained by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Economy, County of Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and it is
hereby enacted and ordained by the authority of same.
§ 170-44. Definitions; word usage.
A. The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have
the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except if the context
clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership or any other form of unincorporated
enterprise, owned by two or more persons.
BUSINESS — Includes any enterprise, activity, profession or
undertaking of any nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted
for profit, whether by an individual, copartnership or association.
COLLECTOR OF THIS TAX — The collector of this tax for the Borough
of Economy.
COMPENSATION EARNED or COMPENSATION PAID OR EARNINGS
— All salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive payments or
other forms of compensation or remuneration, in cash or in kind,
received by an individual and paid, directly or through an agent, by an
employer for services rendered.
EMPLOYER — Any individuals, copartnership, association, corporation,
government body or unit or agency or any other entity, who or that
employs one or more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation basis.
NET PROFITS — The net gain from the operation of a business,
profession or enterprise, after provision for all costs and expenses
incurred in the conduct thereof, either paid or accrued in accordance
with the accounting system used and without deduction of taxes based
on income.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, copartnership, association or other
entity domiciled outside the Borough of Economy.
PERSON — Includes every natural person, copartnership, association,
firm or fiduciary. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and
imposing a penalty, the term "person" as applied to associations shall
89.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 170-43 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-44
166:379
§ 170-45. Imposition of tax.
§ 170-46. Returns.
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations,
the officers thereof.
RESIDENTS — An individual, copartnership, association or other
entire, domiciled in the Borough of Economy.
TAXPAYER — A person, whether an individual, copartnership or
association, required hereunder to file a return on earnings or net
profits or to pay a tax thereon.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
A. An annual tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1/2% is
hereby imposed on the following: [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
(1) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned or
paid after January 1, by residents of the Borough of Economy.
(2) Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation earned or
paid after January 1, by nonresidents of the Borough of Economy
for work done or services performed or rendered in the Borough of
Economy.
(3) The net profits earned after January 1, of businesses, professions or
other activities conducted by such residents.
(4) Net profits earned after January 1, of businesses, professions or
other activities conducted in the Borough of Economy by
nonresidents.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(l) and (2) of this section shall relate
to and be imposed upon salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation paid by an employer or on his behalf to any person who is
employed by or renders services to him. The tax levied under
Subsection A(3) and (4) of this section shall relate to and be imposed on
the net profits of any business, profession or enterprise carried on by
any person as owner or proprietor, either individually or in association
with some other person or persons.
C. Said tax shall first be levied, collected and paid with respect to the
salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and the net
profits of businesses, professions or other activities earned during the
period between January 1, and December 31; provided, however, that,
where the fiscal year of the business, profession or other activity differs
from the calendar year, the tax shall be applied to that part of the net
profits for the fiscal year as shall be earned from and after January 1.
[Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 170-44 ECONOMY CODE § 170-46
166:380
§ 170-47. Employers.
A. Each taxpayer whose earnings or profits are subject to the tax imposed
by this article shall, on or before April 15, make and file a return with
the collector of this tax on a form furnished by or obtainable from him,
setting forth the aggregate amount of salary, wages and other
compensation or net profits earned by him during the preceding year
and subject to said tax, together with such other pertinent information
as the collector of this tax may require; provided, however, that, when
the return is made for the fiscal year or other period different from the
calendar year, the return shall be made within 75 days from the end of
the said fiscal year or other period. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
B. The return shall also show the amount of the tax imposed by this article
on such earnings and profits. The taxpayer making said return shall, at
the time of filing thereof, pay to the collector of this tax the amount of
taxes shown as due thereon; provided, further, however, that, where
any portion of the tax so due shall have been deducted at the source and
shall have been paid to the collector of this tax by the person making
such deduction pursuant to the provisions of § 170-47 of this article or
where any portion of said tax shall have been paid by such taxpayer
pursuant to the provisions of § 170-48 of this article, credit for the
amount so paid shall be deducted from the amount to be due, and only
the balance, if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing said
return.
C. The collector of this tax is hereby authorized to provide, by regulation,
subject to the approval of the Borough Solicitor, that the return of any
employer or employers showing the amount of tax deducted by said
employer or employers from the salaries, wages or commissions of any
employee and paid by him or them to the collector of this tax shall be
accepted as the return required of any employee whose sole income
subject to the tax or taxes under this article is such salary, wages or
commissions.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Economy who employs one or
more persons on a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
basis shall deduct, monthly or more often than monthly, at the time of
the payment thereof, the tax of one-half per centum (1/2%) of salaries,
wages, commissions or other compensation due by said employers to
the said employee and shall file with the collector of this tax, on a form
or forms furnished by or obtainable from him, a quarterly return on
dates specified herein and pay to him the amount of taxes deducted
during said quarters. The quarterly returns shall be made on or before
April 30 for the quarter beginning January I and ending March 31 and
on or before July 31 for the quarter beginning April 1 and ending June
30 and on or before October 31, for the quarter beginning July 1 and
ending September 30 and on or before January 31 for the quarter
beginning October 1 and ending December 31 of the preceding year.
§ 170-46 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-47
166:381
§ 170-48. Declarations.
§ 170-49. Duties of collector.
It shall be the duty of the collector of this tax, who shall be designated
by resolution of the Borough Council, to collect and receive the taxes and
penalties imposed by this article for payment over to the Borough Treasurer
and to enforce the provisions of this article. It shall also be his duty, in
addition to keeping such records as are now required by law or ordinance,
B. On or before February 15 of each year, each employer shall file a return
on a form or forms prescribed by the Collector of this tax, setting forth
names and residences of each employee of said employer during all or
any part of the preceding year, the amounts of salaries, wages,
commissions or other compensation earned during such preceding year
by each of such employees, the amount of taxes deducted and paid to
the collector of this tax, together with such other pertinent information
as the collector of this may require; provided, however, that the failure
or omission by any employer, either residing within or outside of the
Borough to make such return and/or pay such tax, shall not relieve the
employee from the payment of such tax and the compliance with such
regulations with respect to making returns and payment thereof as may
be fixed in this article or established by the collector of this tax.
A. Every taxpayer who anticipates any income which is not subject to the
provisions of § 170-46 hereof shall file a declaration of the estimated tax
for that part of the taxable year beginning January 1, and ending
December 31. Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 by all
such taxpayers. Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished by
the collector of this tax, which form may simply state that the figures
used in making such declaration are the figures used in making the
declaration of the estimate for the federal income tax, provided that it is
understood that such figures may be modified according to the
provisions of this article so that the declaration required by this section
shall set forth only such income as taxable under the provisions of this
article. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
B. Such declaration of the estimated tax to be paid to the Borough of
Economy shall be accompanied by a payment of at least one-fourth (1/4)
of the estimated annual tax, and at least a similar amount for such year
shall be paid on or before June 30, September 30 and December 31 of
such year; provided, however, that such estimate may be amended at
the time of the making of any quarterly payments, and further,
provided, that on or before April 15 of the year following that for which
such declaration was filed, final return shall be filed, and any balance
which may be due the Borough of Economy shall be paid therewith.
Should it then appear that such taxpayer has paid more than the
amount of tax to which the Borough of Economy would be entitled
under the provisions of this article, a refund of the amount of
overpayment shall be made.
§ 170-47 ECONOMY CODE § 170-49
166:382
to keep a record showing the amount received by him for each taxpayer and
the date of such receipts.
§ 170-50. Enforcement; powers and limitations.
§ 170-51. Interest and penalties.
All taxes imposed by this article remaining unpaid after they become due
shall bear interest, in addition to the amount of the unpaid tax, at the rate
of 6% per annum, and the persons upon whom said taxes are imposed shall
be further liable to a penalty of one-half of one per centum (1/2 of 1%) of
the amount of said unpaid tax for each month or fraction of a month of the
first six months of nonpayment.
A. The Borough Council may prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce
rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining to the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article,
including provisions for the reexamination and correction of returns
and payments alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which an
overpayment or underpayment is claimed or found to have occurred.
B. The collector of this tax or any agent or employee designated in writing
by the Borough Council is hereby authorized to examine the books,
papers and records of any employer or supposed employer or of any
taxpayer or supposed taxpayer in order to verify the accuracy of any
return made or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax imposed by
this article. Every such employer or supposed employer or taxpayer or
supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to give to said
collector or any other person designated by the Borough Council the
means, facilities and opportunity for such examination and
investigation as are hereby authorized. The collector of this tax is
hereby authorized to examine any person concerning any income which
was or should have been returned for taxation and, to this end, may
compel the production of books, papers and records and the attendance
of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whom he
believes to have knowledge of such income.
C. Any information gained by the collector of this tax or any other official
or agent designated by the Borough Council as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with proper judicial order or as otherwise provided by law;
and any person, official or agent divulging such information shall be
dismissed forthwith and shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not more
than $300, plus costs of prosecution, for each offense, or in default
thereof, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
[Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
§ 170-49 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-52
166:383
§ 170-52. Collection of unpaid taxes.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest and penalties,
shall be recoverable by the collector of this tax as other debts of like amount
are recoverable.
§ 170-53. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person convicted before the Mayor or any District Justice of violating
any of the provisions or requirements of this article or who shall fail, neglect
or refuse to make any return required by this article or any employer who
shall fail, neglect or refuse to deduct the tax from the employee at the
source and apply the same to the collector as required by this article or
any taxpayer who shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and
interest imposed by this article or any person who shall refuse to permit the
collector of this tax or any person designated by the Borough Council, in
writing, to examine his books, records and papers or who shall knowingly
make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or who shall attempt to do
anything whatever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of earnings or
profits to avoid the payment of the whole or any part of the tax shall be
summarily subject to a fine or penalty of $300, plus costs of prosecution, for
each such offense or to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days for
the nonpayment of such fine or penalty and the costs within 10 days from
the imposition thereof. Such fine or penalty shall be in addition to any other
penalty imposed by any other section of this article. The failure of anyone
required to file a return to receive or procure a return form shall not excuse
him from paying the tax.
§ 170-54. Applicability.
This Article shall not apply to which it is beyond the legal power of the
Council to impose the tax or duties herein provided.
§ 170-52 ECONOMY CODE § 170-54
166:384
ARTICLE VI
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-8-2009 by Ord. No. 42490]
§ 170-55. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Economy
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 170-56. Legislative authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007, and the Pennsylvania Borough Code.
§ 170-57. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 170-58. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section except where the context clearly
indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person or firm, from time to time, designated by motion
of the Borough Council of the Borough of Economy to collect and administer
the provision of this article and collect the tax levied by this article. Until
changed by subsequent motion, the collector shall be the same person or
firm last designated to collect the emergency and municipal services tax for
the Borough of Economy.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation" as determined under section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971,"91 and regulations in 61 Pa Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating
to personal income tax), not including, however, wages or compensation
paid to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses
are allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons
on a salary, wage, commission, fee or other compensation basis, including a
self-employed person.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance was vetoed by the Mayor; the veto was overridden by the
Borough Council. Said ordinance also superseded former Art. VI, Occupational Privilege
Tax, adopted 11-10-1966 by Ord. No. 109, as amended.
91.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 170-55 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-58
166:385
HE, HIS or HIM — Shall include singular and plural number and male,
female and neuter gender.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person engaged in any occupation, trade or profession
within the jurisdictional limits of Borough of Economy whose total earned
income and net profits within the Borough of Economy are greater than
$12,000 per calendar year.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, (except from corporations), determined under
section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971,"92 and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. 1 Subpt. B Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming, the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on or
performed within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Economy for
which compensation is charged and/or received, whether by salary, wages,
commissions, fees or net profits for services rendered.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax levied in this article.
YEAR — Shall mean a calendar year.
§ 170-59. Levy.
The Borough of Economy hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation within the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of
Economy a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day of
January 2010 and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter, until
modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax is in addition to all
other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by Borough of Economy.
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instruments of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
92.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 170-58 ECONOMY CODE § 170-60
166:386
§ 170-60. Restricted use.
§ 170-61. Duty of employer.
§ 170-62. Returns.
Employers are required to make and file a local services tax quarterly
return 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year. The local
A. The Borough of Economy shall use the revenue derived from this tax for
the following purposes:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 85 Subch.
F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
B. The Borough of Economy shall use no less than 25% of the funds
derived from the local services tax for emergency services.
A. Each employer within the Borough of Economy, and each employer
situate outside the Borough of Economy who engages in business
within the Borough of Economy, is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting the tax from each of the employees engaged by the employer
and performing work for the employer within the Borough of Economy.
Each person subject to the tax shall be assessed a pro rata share of the
tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an
occupation.
B. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person for a payroll period
shall be determined by dividing the combined rate of the local services
tax levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar.
C. Employer collection of the local services tax shall be made on a payroll
period basis for each payroll period, beginning with the first payroll
period in which the person is engaging in an occupation.
D. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to a political
subdivision if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed.
§ 170-60 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-62
166:387
services tax quarterly return shall list the name, address, social security
number of the employee; the physical address of the employee's place of
employment; the number of payroll periods for which the local services tax
was withheld and the amount of local services tax being remitted for each
employee.
§ 170-63. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 30, respectively.
§ 170-64. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
A. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during the payroll
period, the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in
the following order:
(1) The political subdivision in which a person maintains his or her
principal office or is principally employed;
(2) The political subdivision in which the person resides and works, if
the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) The political subdivision in which a person is employed and which
imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax, if the employee provides:
(1) A recent pay statement from a principal employer that includes the
name of the employer, the length of the payroll period and the
amount of local services tax withheld; and
(2) A statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence.
C. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. It is the
intent of this section that no person shall be subject to the payment of
the local services tax by more than one political subdivision during each
payroll period.
§ 170-62 ECONOMY CODE § 170-64.1
166:388
§ 170-64.1. Exemptions to local services tax.
A. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
B. The law requires municipalities and school districts who levy the local
services tax at a combined rate exceeding $10 to exempt any person
from the local services tax whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
the calendar year in which the local services tax is levied.
C. Each political subdivision levying the local services tax shall exempt the
following persons from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. A "reserve component of the armed forces" shall mean
the United States Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve,
United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States Coast Guard
Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army
National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
D. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the collector of the tax for
the Borough of Economy and file a copy of the certificate with the
person's employer affirming that the person reasonably expects to
receive earned income and net profits from all sources within the
political subdivision of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which
the exemption certificate is filed.
E. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of all of the
employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment within the
political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year for which the
employee is requesting to be exempted from the local services tax.
F. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise instructed
by the collector of the tax for the Borough of Economy, the employer
shall not withhold the tax from the person during the calendar year or
remainder of the calendar year for which the exemption certificate
applies. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption from the
local services tax, upon notification to an employer by the person or by
the collector of the tax for the Borough of Economy, that the person has
received earned income and net profits from all sources within the
§ 170-64.1 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-64.1
166:389
§ 170-64.2. Self-employed individuals.
All self-employed individuals and individuals whose employer is not
required to withhold local taxes (certain state and federal agencies) will be
billed quarterly for the local services tax. The full amount of tax must be
paid by the date indicated on such billing. If such taxpayer qualifies for a
low-income exemption, the taxpayer may complete the required exemption
certificate or make application for a refund of the tax paid.
Borough of Economy equal to or in excess of S12,000 in that calendar
year or that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption
for that calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the Borough of Economy in an amount equal to or
in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person as follows:
(1) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the
calendar year, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year.
(2) The employer shall withhold from the person, for the first payroll
period after receipt of the notification under the above paragraph,
a lump sum equal to the amount of the tax that was not withheld
from the person due to the exemption certificate filed by the
person, plus the per payroll amount due for that first payroll period.
(3) The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the remaining
payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same amount
withheld for other employees.
(4) In the event the employment of a person subject to withholding of
the local services tax under this exception is severed in that
calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision levying the tax may
pursue collection under this article.
G. Employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee from a local services tax.
H. Employers shall be responsible for retaining a copy of all exemption
certificates filed by employees within a given calendar year for a
minimum of three years. Employers who have failed to withhold the
local services tax from an employee or employees, and do not have
copies of the employee exemption certificate or certificates, will be held
responsible for the payment of the local services tax as if the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 170-64.1 ECONOMY CODE § 170-64.3
166:390
§ 170-64.3. Employees and self-employed individuals residing
beyond limits of Borough.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside the Borough of Economy, but who engage in any
occupation within the Borough of Economy, do by virtue thereof agree
to be bound by and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and
regulations promulgated under this article with the same force and effect
as though they were residents of the Borough of Economy. Further, any
individual engaged in an occupation within the Borough of Economy and an
employee of a nonresident employer may for the purpose of this article be
considered a self-employed person and in the event this tax is not paid, the
collector shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or
employee for collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 170-64.4. Administration of tax.
§ 170-64.5. Suit for collection.
A. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby empowered to prescribe,
adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to any
matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement of this article,
including provisions for the examination of the payroll records of any
employer subject to this article; the examination and correction of any
return made in compliance with this article; and any payment alleged or
found to be incorrect or as to which overpayment is claimed or found to
have occurred. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the collector
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Beaver
County as in other cases provided.
C. The collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer; or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event any of the tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due date set forth above, the collector may sue for the
recovery of such tax due or unpaid together with interest and penalty.
§ 170-64.3 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-64.5
166:391
§ 170-64.6. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts
in his custody and control in order to determine the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his employment, or who fails or refuses to
file any return required by this article, or fails or refuses to pay the tax
herein levied shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, be
sentenced to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refused to file a return required by this article.
§ 170-64.7. Effective date.
This article shall become effective in accordance with applicable law and
with the repeal of the previous Emergency and Municipal Services Tax
Ordinances, effective January 1, 2010.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax and an additional penalty of 10%
shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where
suit is brought for the recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor
shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of collection,
including, but not limited to, attorney's fees.
§ 170-64.5 ECONOMY CODE § 170-64.7
166:392
ARTICLE VII
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1975 by Ord. No. 177]
§ 170-65. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except if the context clearly
indicates and requires a different meaning:
PERSON — Every natural person who has attained the age of 18 years.
RESIDENT — An individual domiciled or residing in the Borough of
Economy, County of Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 170-66. Applicability. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No. 274]
Any person being 18 years of age or over and residing in the Borough of
Economy on January 1 shall be liable for the tax. Any person moving into
the Borough of Economy during said fiscal year and any person becoming
18 years of age during said fiscal year shall be liable for the tax.
§ 170-67. Exemption. [Amended 7-13-1999 by Ord. No. 372]
§ 170-68. Payment.
Each person subject to the tax imposed by this article shall pay the same
to the Tax Collector of Economy Borough on or before the day said tax
becomes due.
§ 170-69. Collection.
All taxes levied under this article and all penalties shall be collected in
accordance with the provisions of the Local Tax Collection Law of 1945, as
amended, and supplemented with applicable discounts and penalties.
§ 170-70. Failure to receive notice.
Failure by any person to receive notice from the Tax Collector of Economy
Borough shall not in any way relieve said person from the obligation of
paying the tax herein levied or from the penalties provided for the
nonpayment of same.
A. Residents whose income from all sources is below $5,000 per year are
exempt from paying the per capita tax; and
B. The Tax Collector is hereby exonerated from collecting per capita tax
from married and living together husband and wife whose joint income
is less than $10,000.
§ 170-65 SWIMMING POOLS § 170-71
166:393
§ 170-71. Recoverability.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with all interest and penalties,
shall be recoverable by the Solicitor as other debts of like amount are
recoverable.
§ 170-72. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties and
interest imposed upon him or her by this article on or before the tax
becomes due and payable shall be subject to a fine or penalty of not more
than $300, plus costs of prosecution, for each such offense or, in default
thereof, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days. Such fine
or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other
section of this article.
§ 170-71 ECONOMY CODE § 170-72
166:394
Chapter 173
TREES AND SHRUBS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 160.
§ 173-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSONAL NOTICE — Includes notice upon the owner of real property,
either by personal service upon such owner or by certified mail to such
owner at his last known address, or where service shall not have been
successfully made by either of the two methods first-mentioned herein, then
by leaving such notice at or upon such premises.
STREET — Includes any street, road, lane, court, cul-de-sac, public way and
public square used or intended to be used within the Borough as public
passageways.
TRAFFIC HAZARD — Shall be of two types:
§ 173-2. Traffic hazards prohibited.
Any tree, shrub or other similar obstruction or any part thereof which
obstructs the view of the street by any driver of a motor vehicle upon
the street.
A.
Any building, shed, fence or similar structure or part thereof which
obstructs the view of the street by any driver of a motor vehicle upon
that street.
B.
A. From and after the date of enactment of this chapter, it shall be
unlawful for any owner of real property within Economy Borough to
erect, construct, maintain or permit to exist on his property any traffic
hazard as hereinbefore defined.
B. When the Economy Borough Police Department or other authority
designated by the Borough determines on the basis of an engineering
and traffic investigation that a traffic hazard exists, it shall personally
notify the owner and order the hazard removed within 10 days from the
date of notification.
C. Upon receipt of such notification, the property owner shall remove or
cause to be removed the traffic hazard.
D. If a property owner fails to remove the traffic hazard within 10 days, as
hereinbefore provided, the Borough may declare the traffic hazard to
§ 170-72 TREES AND SHRUBS § 173-2
173:395
§ 173-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
The failure of the property owner to remove the traffic hazard within 10
days after notice under § 173-2B is a summary offense, and every day the
owner fails to remove it shall be a separate and distinct offense. The offense
is punishable by fine of not more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and,
in default of payment thereof, imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90
days.
Chapter 175
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Speed-timing devices — See Ch. 153. Unlicensed vehicles — Ch. 177.
be a nuisance and may abate said nuisance by removing or causing to
be removed the traffic hazard, to be done at the cost of such owner, and
may collect the cost thereof, together with all charges and expenses,
from such owner, and may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the
same by action in assumpsit.
§ 173-2 ECONOMY CODE § 173-3
173:396
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 175-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 175-2. Enactment of permanent traffic and parking regulations.
[Amended 10-23-1996 by Ord. No. 358]
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Economy. However, all schedules identified under Article IX
titled "Schedules" may be amended, either by addition or deletion, by way
of resolution of the Economy Borough Council.
§ 175-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
§ 175-4. Experimental regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq.), as now in force or as hereafter amended, enacted or
reenacted, except where the context clearly indicates a different
meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include the following: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day or days
celebrated as such.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Borough Council shall have the following powers to regulate traffic
and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation shall, upon conviction thereof be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
§ 175-1 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-4
173:397
§ 175-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Chief of Police and the police officers
of the Borough of Economy, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic
on the highways and intersections of the Borough in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
A. The Mayor and Police Department may, from time to time, designate
places upon and along the highways in the Borough where, for a period
of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations,
prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall
designate such locations by proper signs and markings. Such
regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as if
they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or park
a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition or
restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 175-4 ECONOMY CODE § 175-5
173:398
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 175-6. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those streets described in Schedule I (§ 175-42), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 175-7. Speed limits.
The maximum speed at which vehicles may proceed on or along any streets
or highways within the Borough is hereby established at 25 miles per hour,
except that the speed limit for vehicles proceeding on or along those streets
or parts of streets described in Schedule II (§ 175-43) shall be as indicated
in said schedule.
§ 175-8. Prohibited turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the locations described in Schedule III (§ 175-44), attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 175-9. Prohibited right turns on red signal.
No person shall make a right turn when facing a steady red signal (stop
indication) at any of the locations described in Schedule IV (§ 175-45),
attached to and made a part of this chapter.
§ 175-10. Stop intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule V (§ 175-46), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as stop intersections. Stop
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 175-11. Yield intersections.
The intersections described in Schedule VI (§ 175-47), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as yield intersections. Yield
signs shall be installed as provided therein.
§ 175-12. Lane use reservations.
The lane locations described in Schedule VII (§ 175-48), attached to and
made a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as lane use reservations,
and traffic shall move only as indicated.
§ 175-6 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-13
173:399
§ 175-13. No-passing zones.
No-passing zones are hereby established and maintained along those
streets or parts of streets described in Schedule VIII (§ 175-49), attached to
and made a part of this chapter.
§ 175-13.1. One-way streets. [Added 7-2-1991 by Ord. No. 312]
The streets described in Schedule VIIIA (§ 175-49.1), attached to and made
a part of this chapter, are hereby designated as one-way streets, and traffic
shall move only as indicated. Any motorist violating said restrictions shall
be subject to the fine and penalty as set forth for similar violations under
the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.).
§ 175-13 ECONOMY CODE § 175-13.1
173:400
ARTICLE III
Parking, Standing and Stopping
§ 175-14. Parking prohibited at all times.
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the streets or parts
thereof described in Schedule IX (§ 175-50), attached to and made a part of
this chapter.
§ 175-15. Parking prohibited certain hours.
No person shall park a vehicle between the hours specified in Schedule X
(§ 175-51) of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets or
parts of streets described in said Schedule X, attached to and made a part
of this chapter.
§ 175-16. Time limit parking.
No person shall park a vehicle for longer than the time limit shown in
Schedule XI (§ 175-52) at any time between the hours listed in said
Schedule XI of any day, unless otherwise indicated, upon any of the streets
or parts of streets described in said Schedule XI, attached to and made a
part of this chapter.
§ 175-17. Bus stops.
The locations described in Schedule XII (§ 175-53), attached to and made a
part of this chapter, are hereby designated as bus stops.
§ 175-14 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-17
173:401

ARTICLE IV
Vehicle Weight Limits
§ 175-18. Special permit required for certain vehicles.
No vehicle in excess of 10 tons' gross weight, including cargo, shall be
permitted to travel upon any road, street or alley of the Borough of
Economy, County of Beaver and Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, without a
special permit, provided that this prohibition shall not apply to any road,
street or alley in the Borough which is owned and maintained by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 175-19. Exceptions.
The terms and provisions of this chapter shall not apply to school buses,
authorized emergency vehicles, public utility vehicles, vehicles owned and
operated by the Borough of Economy and vehicles owned and operated
by subcontractors of the Borough of Economy operating under a Borough
contract. Vehicles used in the delivery of building materials and
transportation of site excavation materials are exempt from the provisions
of this chapter only to the extent of one load per day per site. Subsequent
loads require the issuance of a permit as provided by § 175-20.
§ 175-20. Application for permit. [Amended 7-11-1995 by Ord. No.
349]
Upon application to the Borough Secretary, on a form supplied by the
Borough, any person may seek a permit authorizing the movement of
vehicles with a weight in excess of the posted weight limit. The procedure
for seeking a permit, the type(s) of permits available, and the provisions
regarding security shall be the same as set forth in Chapter 189 of the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Regulations, which chapter is
hereby incorporated and made a part of this ordinance by this reference
thereto.
§ 175-21. Signs to be erected.
The Borough shall erect and maintain at each end of restricted Borough
roads, streets and alleys signs bearing the words: "Road Restrictions -
Vehicles Over Ten Tons Prohibited Without Permit."
§ 175-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be prosecuted
under Section 4902(a) of the Vehicle Code [75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902(a)] and,
upon conviction, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall be sentenced
to pay a fine of $75 for each 500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000
pounds over the maximum allowable weight.
§ 175-18 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-22
173:403

ARTICLE V
Emergency Vehicles
§ 175-23. Obstruction of operation prohibited.
The owner or operator of any vehicle is hereby prohibited from parking said
vehicle in such a manner or in such a location which will impede, obstruct
or block the operation of emergency vehicles, including but not limited to
maintenance and snow removal vehicles, fire trucks and ambulances.
§ 175-23 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-23
173:405

ARTICLE VI
Pennsylvania Northern Lights Shoppers City
§ 175-24. Provisions adopted by reference and declared applicable.
Those provisions set forth in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 101 et seq.) governing the operation of motor vehicles on public roads
and streets in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania are hereby adopted by
reference, incorporated herein and declared to be applicable to and to
govern the flow of traffic and operation of vehicles on the streets or lanes
established on the property of Pennsylvania Northern Lights Shoppers City,
hereinafter known as the "shopping center," said provisions including, but
not being limited to, violations of speeding, reckless driving, driving too fast
for conditions, overtaking and passing other vehicles and racing.
§ 175-25. Stop intersections.
§ 175-26. One-way lanes.
In the event that traffic flows or patterns are established in the shopping
center whereby certain lanes are designated one-way, any motorist violating
said restrictions shall be subject to fine and penalty as set forth for similar
violations under the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq.).
§ 175-27. Parking restricted.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the shopping center in locations
and areas so indicated by duly erected signs and in those places where
prohibited upon public highways as set forth in the Vehicle Code of
Pennsylvania (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.).
§ 175-28. Enforcement.
The Mayor of the Borough of Economy and the police of said Borough are
hereby empowered to enforce the aforementioned regulations and to arrest
any violators of same on the shopping center premises.
§ 175-29. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Those intersections of the streets, roadways or lanes in the shopping
center presently or in the future designated as stop intersections by the
erection of stop signs are, for the purposes of this Article, declared stop
intersections.
B. It shall be unlawful for the driver or operator of any vehicle, before
entering one of the said designated stop intersections, to fail to come to
a full stop within a reasonable distance before entering the
intersection.
§ 175-24 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-29
173:407
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in times of emergency in the shopping center
premises:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the case
of conduct of processions and public events, to restrict or prohibit
parking or traffic in limited areas for reasonable periods of time.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the police of the Borough in the same manner as permanent
regulations.
§ 175-29 ECONOMY CODE § 175-29
173:408
ARTICLE VII
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 175-30. Authorization of removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police of the Borough is hereby authorized to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on
any of the streets, highways or public property in the Borough in violation
of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough; provided,
however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this Article.
§ 175-31. Approved storage garages designated.
The following garages located in the Borough are hereby designated as
approved storage garages, as pounds for the storage of such impounded
vehicles:
Name of Garage Address
(Reserved)
§ 175-32. Bonding of approved storage garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in the
amount of $50,000 for the indemnifying of the owner of every such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof or injury or damage thereto
while in the custody of such poundkeeper, provided that the Borough garage
need not be bonded.
§ 175-33. Towing and storage charges.
The towing charge and storage charge shall be established by the approved
storage garage and/or pound, and a schedule of these charges shall be
registered with the Police Department.
§ 175-34. Notice of impoundment to owner.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this Article, the owner of record of said vehicle shall be notified
that his/her vehicle has been impounded by the Police Department.
§ 175-35. Effect of payment of charges; payment under protest.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
Article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a District Justice or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
§ 175-30 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-35
173:409
§ 175-36. Record of impounded vehicles.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 175-37. Liability for fines or penalties.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this Article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 175-38. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this Article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
such defendant shall be proceeded Against and shall receive such
notice as is provided in the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) in
other cases of summary offenses and shall have the same rights as to
appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 175-35 ECONOMY CODE § 175-38
173:410
ARTICLE VIII
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 175-39. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable, and, if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 175-40. Repealer.
§ 175-41. Violations and penalties.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Economy pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Violations generally. Unless another penalty is expressly provided by
the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.) or except as
hereinafter specified, every person convicted of a violation of a
provision of this chapter, or any supplement thereto, shall be liable to a
penalty of $25 and costs of prosecution.
B. Parking violations. Any person violating any of the provisions of Article
III of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a summary offense
and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $15 and costs of prosecution for
the first offense and shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of
prosecution for any subsequent violations.
§ 175-39 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-41
173:411

ARTICLE IX
Schedules
§ 175-42. Schedule I: Traffic Control Signals.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-6, traffic control signals shall be
installed at the following described intersections:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 175-43. Schedule II: Speed Limits.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-7, speed limits other than 25
miles per hour are established as indicated upon the following streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street
Speed
limit
(mph) Location
Anne Street 15 Entire length
§ 175-44. Schedule III: Prohibited Turns at Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-8, no person shall make a turn of
the kind designated below at any of the following locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
At
Intersection
of
Anne Street East Left All Northern
Lights
Shoppers City
Northern Lights
Shoppers City
(private road)
South Right All Anne Street
§ 175-45. Schedule IV: Prohibited Right Turns on Red Signal.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-9, no person shall make a right
turn when facing a steady red signal (stop indication) at any of the following
locations:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel
Prohibited Right Turn on Red
Signal Onto
(Reserved)
§ 175-42 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-46
173:413
§ 175-46. Schedule V: Stop Intersections. [Amended 3-11-2008 by
Ord. No. 416]
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-10, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as stop intersections, and stop signs
shall be installed as follows:
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
2nd Avenue Both First Street
2nd Avenue Both Marr Road
2nd Avenue Both Meteor Circle
2nd Avenue Both Stange Road
2nd Avenue North Constellation Drive
2nd Avenue North Satellite Drive
2nd Avenue West Tevebaugh Road
3rd Avenue Both Tevebaugh Road
3rd Avenue East First Street
3rd Avenue West Tevebaugh Road
Acorn Drive East Walnut Drive
Almond Way East Hickory Drive
Amsler Ridge Road East Big Sewickley Creek
Road
Amsler Road South Campbell Drive
Amsler Road South Conway Wallrose Road
Amsler Ridge Road North Campbell Drive
Andrus Drive West Conway Wallrose Road
Anne Street West Beaver Road
Ashwood Court West Conway Wallrose Road
Beaver Road Both Anne Street
Blank Drive West Conway Wallrose Road
Brookside Drive South Ridgeway Drive
Brookside Drive West Woodcroft Road
Campbell Drive Both Amsler Ridge Road
Celestial Drive Both Satellite Drive
Celestial Drive Both Sunset Hills Drive
Celestial Drive East Gemini
Celestial Drive West 2nd Avenue
Checkerberry Road North Bradford Park Road
Checkerberry Road West Heath Drive
§ 175-46 ECONOMY CODE § 175-46
173:414
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Chestnut Court South Hickory Drive
Clara Street East Merriman Road
Clara Street West Longvue Circle
Clara Street West Merriman Road
Clearview Drive North Gross Drive
Clearview Drive West Gross Drive
Cliff Road West Wallrose Heights Road
Clover Road East Golden Grove Road
Clover Road North Rockrose Drive
Comet Drive East 2nd Avenue
Comet Drive West Moon Ridge Drive
Compton Court Circle East Compton Court Drive
Compton Court Drive West Compton Road
Compton Road East Conway Wallrose Road
Compton Road North Amsler Road
Compton Road South Campbell Drive
Concord Church Road West Ridge Road Ext.
Constellation Drive East Gemini Drive
Constellation Drive West Satellite Drive
Cooney Hollow Road West Hoenig Road
Davis Road South Big Sewickley Creek
Road
Dean Street North Roberts Lane
Dogwood Circle East Giant Oak Drive
Donald Avenue East Woodlawn Road
Donald Avenue West Shaffer Road
Doniport Road East Firethorn Road
Droz Avenue East Ridge Road Ext.
Droz Avenue East Shady Lane
Droz Avenue West Perry Drive
East Ridge Avenue South Highland Road
Edgewood Road Both Woodlawn Road
Edgewood Road East Hoenig Road
Edgewood Road West Shaffer Road
Evan City Road South Ridge Avenue
Fairview Avenue South Ridge Road Ext.
§ 175-46 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-46
173:415
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Fernwood Drive West Brookside Drive
Firethorn Road Both Doniport Road
Firethorn Road Both Lamplighter Lane
Firethorn Road North Foxglove Road
First Street Both 2nd Avenue
First Street Both 3rd Avenue
First Street North Conway Wallrose Road
First Street North Freedom Road
First Street North Lynn Street
First Street South Conway Wallrose Road
Foxglove Road East Firethorn Road
Foxglove Road South Shady Spring
Frederick Road East Conway Wallrose Road
Fredrick Drive North Sunnyview Drive
Freedom Road Both First Street
Freedom Road East Conway Wallrose Road
Freedom Road West Tevebaugh Road
Friel Road North Wallrose Heights Road
Giant Oak Drive East Walnut Drive
Green Forest Drive East Golden Grove Road
Gross Drive East Mary Reed Road
Grove Hill Road West Golden Grove Road
Hamilton Court East Firethorn Road
Harmony Road East Phillips Street Ext.
Heath Drive North Bradford Park Road
Heath Drive West Mary Reed Road
Herr Road West Ridge Road Ext.
Hickory Drive East Amsler Ridge Road
High Meadow Road West Mary Reed Road
Hillsdale Avenue North Hemmerle Road
Hilltop Court East Silverdale Drive
Howard Road East Amsler Road
Howard Road South Amsler Road
Kenneth Campbell Way East Conway Wallrose Road
Kruest Drive South Ridge Road Ext.
Lamplighter Lane East Firethorn Road
§ 175-46 ECONOMY CODE § 175-46
173:416
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Lawnview Drive South Rolling Hills Road
Leaf Court South Giant Oak Drive
Legionville Hollow
Road
East Ridge Road Ext.
Lockwood Road East Firethorn Road
Locust Road West Golden Grove Road
Longvue Circle North Longvue Circle
Longvue Circle North Ridge Road Ext.
Lynden Lane South Foxglove Road
Lynn Drive East Zehnder Road
Lynn Drive West Woodside Drive
Lynn Street West First Street
Marr Road Both 2nd Avenue
Marr Road North Conway Wallrose Road
Mary Reed Road Both Gross Drive
Mary Reed Road Both High Meadow Road
Mary Reed Road Both Nettle Creek Road
Mary Reed Road North Bradford Park Road
Mary Reed Road North Conway Wallrose Road
McGuire Road East Friel Road
McGuire Road West Conway Wallrose Road
Merriman Road North Ridge Road Ext.
Merriman Road South Big Sewickley Creek
Road
Meteor Circle East 2nd Avenue
Moon Ridge Drive East 2nd Avenue
Neeley Road North Ridge Road Ext.
Nettle Creek Road East Mary Reed Road
Nettle Creek Road West Foxglove
NLSC South Anne Street
Nova Drive North Apollo Drive
Oakhaven Drive East Pinehurst Drive
Oakhaven Drive South Ridgewood Drive
Oliver Avenue North Conway Wallrose Road
Orchard Drive West Ridge Road Ext.
Orchard Lane South Conway Wallrose Road
§ 175-46 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-46
173:417
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Overlook Drive North Zehnder Road
Park Hill Road Both Fernwood Drive
Park Hill Road Both Ridgeway Drive
Park Hill Road South Bradford Park Road
Park Street South Conway Wallrose Road
Paul Street South Lynn Street
Perry Drive South Droz Avenue
Pfaff Road East Conway Wallrose Road
Pinehurst Drive Both Oakhaven Drive
Pinehurst Drive Both Ridgewood Drive
Pinehurst Drive Both Willow Drive
Pinehurst Drive North Willow Drive
Pinehurst Drive South Oakhaven Drive
Pineview Road North Winterset Road
Pineview Road South Grove Hill Road
Recreation Drive West Mary Reed Road
Red Fox Court [Added
11-12-2013 by Ord.
No. 446]
East Walnut Drive
Ridge Avenue East Woodcroft Road
Ridge Avenue West Conway Wallrose Road
Ridgeway Drive North Brookside Drive
Ridgeway Drive South Park Hill Drive
Ridgewood Drive Both Sherwood Drive
Ridgewood Drive East Pinehurst Drive
Ridgewood Drive West Dunlap Hill Road
Roberts Lane East Conway Wallrose Road
Roberts Lane East Dean Street
Rockrose Drive East Golden Grove Road
Rockrose Drive West Green Forest Drive
Rolling Hills Road South Freedom Road
Rose Street North Roberts Lane
Sarah Lane North Campbell Drive
Satellite Drive North Celestial Drive
Satellite Drive West 2nd Avenue
Schell Drive North Ridge Road Ext.
§ 175-46 ECONOMY CODE § 175-46
173:418
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Shady Hollow Drive East Walnut Drive
Shady Lane North Droz Avenue
Shady Spring Road East Mary Reed Road
Shady Spring Road West Firethorn
Shaffer Road South Big Sewickley Creek
Road
Shaffer Road South Ridge Road Ext. 989
Sherwood Drive North Ridgewood Drive
Sherwood Drive South Willow Drive
Shortcut Road North Bradford Park Road
Shortcut Road South Foxglove Road
Silver Hollow Drive
[Added 11-12-2013
by Ord. No. 446]
East Walnut Drive
Silver Hollow Drive
[Added 11-12-2013
by Ord. No. 446]
West Conway Wallrose Road
Silver Hollow Road East Walnut Drive
Silver Hollow Road West Conway Wallrose Road
Silverdale Drive North Ridgeway Drive
Silverdale Drive South Bradford Park Road
Southvue Drive North Overlook Drive
Springer South Conway Wallrose Road
Sproat Avenue North Conway Wallrose Road
Stange Road Both 2nd Avenue
Stange Road South Lynn Street
Saint Matthews Church
Road
East Friel Road
Saint Matthews Church
Road
North Wallrose Heights Road
Summerfield Drive East Lovi Road
Summerfield Drive South Bradford Park Road
Sunridge Drive West Sunset Hills Drive
Sunset Drive West Golden Grove Road
Sunset Hills Drive Both Celestial Drive
Sunset Hills Drive East Satellite Drive
Sunset Hills Drive North Conway Wallrose Road
§ 175-46 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-46
173:419
Stop Sign On Direction of Travel At Intersection of
Tevebaugh Road Both 3rd Avenue
Tevebaugh Road North Conway Wallrose Road
Tevebaugh Road North Freedom Road
Tevebaugh Road South Conway Wallrose Road
Thomas R Johnson
Boulevard
West Ridge Road Ext.
Timber Ridge Drive East Lovi Road
Timber Ridge Drive West Summerfield Drive
Tyro Road North Ridge Road Ext.
Valley Drive East Conway Wallrose Road
Valley Road East Conway Wallrose Road
Valley Road North Amsler Road
Valleyview Drive North Longvue Circle
Venus Circle East Moon Ridge Drive
Walnut Drive North Bock Lane
Wassum Road North Conway Wallrose Road
Watchhill Drive West Ridge Road Ext.
White Pine Lane
[Added 11-12-2013
by Ord. No. 446]
North Walnut Drive
Willow Drive Both Sherwood Drive
Winterset Road West Golden Grove Road
Woodberry Road North Grove Hill Road
Woodcroft Road Both Ridge Avenue
Woodcroft Road South Bradford Park Road
Woodlawn Road Both Edgewood Road
Woodlawn Road South Big Sewickley Creek
Road
Woodlawn Road West Shaffer Road
Woodside Drive North Zehnder Road
Woodside Drive South Lynn Drive
Zehnder Road East Overlook Drive
Zehnder Road North Ridge Road Ext.
Zehnder Road South Lynn Drive
Zehnder Road South Overlook Drive
Zehnder Road South Shaffer Road
§ 175-46 ECONOMY CODE § 175-47
173:420
§ 175-47. Schedule VI: Yield Intersections.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-11, the following described
intersections are hereby designated as yield intersections, and yield signs
shall be installed as follows:
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 175-48. Schedule VII: Lane Use Reservations.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-12, all vehicles shall move as
described below:
Intersection
(Location)
Lane
Reserved Purpose
(Reserved)
§ 175-49. Schedule VIII: No-Passing Zones.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-13, no-passing zones are hereby
established and shall be maintained upon the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Location
West State Street Both From the boundary line between the
Boroughs of Baden and Economy to the
boundary between the Boroughs of
Economy and Conway
§ 175-49.1. Schedule VIIIA: One-Way Streets. [Added 7-2-1991 by
Ord. No. 312]
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-13.1, the following streets are
designated as one-way streets, and traffic shall move only in the direction
indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Lynn Street [Amended
5-11-1993 by Ord. No.
333]
East To intersection of Stang Road
Perry Drive [Added
5-11-1993 by Ord. No.
333]
Southwest Entire length from Ridge Road
Extension to Droz Avenue
§ 175-47 TREES AND SHRUBS § 175-50
173:421
§ 175-50. Schedule IX: Parking Prohibited at All Times.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-14, no person shall park a vehicle
at any time upon any of the following described streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Location
Beaver Road [Added
3-12-1991 by Ord.
No. 310]
Both Entire length
Lynn Street [Added
7-2-1991 by Ord. No.
312]
— Entire length in front of Ambridge
Area Junior High School
Swamp Run Road Both Entire length
§ 175-51. Schedule X: Parking Prohibited Certain Hours.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-15, no person shall park a vehicle
between the hours listed upon any of the following described streets or
parts of streets:
Name of Street Side Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 175-52. Schedule XI: Time Limit Parking.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-16, no person shall park a vehicle
for longer than the time limit shown upon any of the following described
streets or parts of streets:
Name of Street Side
Time Limit;
Hours/Days Location
(Reserved)
§ 175-53. Schedule XII: Bus Stops.
In accordance with the provisions of § 175-17, the following described
locations are hereby designated as bus stops:
Name of Street Side Location
(Reserved)
§ 175-50 ECONOMY CODE § 175-53
173:422
Chapter 177
VEHICLES, UNLICENSED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 175.
§ 177-1. Consent required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, motorbike,
trail bike, motor scooter, go-cart or snowmobile upon private property of
the operator within 200 feet to any dwelling house other than that of the
operator unless consent to the operation is obtained as hereinafter set forth
and filed with the Borough Secretary of the Borough.
§ 177-2. Permission of owner of property required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motorcycle, motorbike,
trail bike, motor scooter, go-cart or snowmobile upon private property other
than the private property of the operator of such motor vehicle unless the
prior written permission of the owner of such property has been obtained
by such operator and filed with the Borough Secretary of the Borough.
§ 177-3. Consent forms.
§ 177-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 2-10-1987 by Ord. No.
274]
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more
than $300, plus costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment thereof, be
imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
A. Consent of the owners of the property upon which the vehicle is being
operated or the consent of the owners of the property within the twohundred-
foot limitation aforesaid shall be made on a form prescribed by
and available from and filed with the Borough through the office of the
Secretary of the Borough. For this purpose, "owners" shall include
"lessee."
B. The consent shall be for such period of time as set forth therein but in
no event for a greater period than seven days.
§ 175-53 VEHICLES, UNLICENSED § 177-4
177:423
Chapter 178
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 145.
Subdivision of land — See Ch. 163.
Zoning — See Ch. 180.
§ 177-4 ECONOMY CODE § 177-4
178:424
ARTICLE I
Connection and Fees
[Adopted 9-26-1990 as Ord. No. 304]
§ 178-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
AUTHORITY — The Water Authority.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within the Borough of Economy
upon which there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic
habitation, occupancy or use by human beings.
MOBILE HOME PARK or TRAILER COURT — A parcel of land which has
been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for
nontransient use, consisting of two or more mobile home lots.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, authority or other group or entity.
SERVICE LINE CONNECTIONS (TAP) — The pipe, valves and other
facilities by means of which the Authority conducts water from its
distribution mains to the curb stop to be located at the curbline or property
line of the premises and specifically includes the corporation stop or other
means of connection to the main, the service line connected to the
corporation stop and extending to the point of connection to the curb stop,
the curb stop, the service box and such other facilities.
SERVICE LINE EXTENSIONS — The pipe, valves and other facilities by
means of which water is conducted from the curb stop to the premises and
specifically includes the service line extending from a point of connection
to the curb stop to a point inside the walls of the premises or meter box,
where approved, a stopcock or compression valve on the line at this point,
connections for the inlet and outlet sides of the meter, a stop- and waste
cock on the outlet side of the meter and such other facilities.
WATER MAINS — Water distribution pipelines which are located in streets,
highways, public ways or private rights-of-way and which are to serve the
general public.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for supply,
production, transmission, storage and distribution of water in the Borough
of Economy owned by the Authority or the Borough of Economy.
§ 178-2. Tapping fee required.
A. The owner of any improved property wherein the front wall of the
principal structure is within 150 feet of the property line nearest the
§ 178-1 WATER § 178-2
178:425
§ 178-3. Water main and connections.
water main shall, within 12 months after notice to such owner from the
Borough, pay the prevailing tapping fee.
B. The notice by the Borough to pay the tapping fee shall consist of a
written or printed document requiring payment of the tapping fee in
accordance with the provisions of this article and specifying that such
payments shall be made within 12 months after the date such notice is
given or served. Such notice shall be given or served after the
construction of the Kenneth E. Campbell Booster Station and the
transmission line from Duss Avenue to Ridge Road Extension in the
Borough of Economy are completed and adequate water pressure and
volume are present at the location of the property in question. Such
notice shall be given or served upon the owner in accordance with the
law.
C. Installments: allowable financial status for installment payments. Upon
request to the appointed Borough representative within 60 days from
notice, an owner may be granted permission to pay the prevailing tap-in
fee at a mutually agreeable schedule due to financial hardship.
D. Multiple connections.
(1) Multiple-occupancy structures are required to pay a single
prevailing tap-in fee, the actual cost of master meters installed, and
will be $750, payable to the Borough, for each unit in the structure
being provided service.
(2) Multiple unique structures on one property will be required to have
individual taps.
(3) Existing trailer courts.
(a) Existing trailer courts will pay the prevailing tap-in fee, the
actual cost of the master meters installed, and will be $750,
payable to the Borough, for each site being provided service.
(b) The existing internal distribution and storage system will
continue to be owned, maintained and operated by the owner
of the trailer court.
(c) The quarterly service rates will be in accordance with
prevailing rates and the Authority's billing methods.
(4) New or expanded trailer courts, after the passage of this article,
will pay the actual cost of the meter installed and the prevailing
tapping fee for each site being provided service.
E. Application for tap-in permit. The property owner shall register and
obtain an application for a permit at the office of the Borough of
Economy. Upon completion, the application for a tap-in permit must be
submitted to the Authority.
§ 178-2 ECONOMY CODE § 178-3
178:426
A. No person shall uncover, connect with, make any opening into, use,
alter or disturb, in any manner, any water main or any part of the water
system.
B. Application for a permit for a service line extension required under
§ 178-2E of this article shall be made by the owner of the improved
property served or to be served with notice as provided in § 178-2B or
by the duly authorized agent of such owner.
C. No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property to a service line connection until such person fulfills
each of the following conditions:
(1) Notify the Authority of the desire and intentions to connect such
improved property to the service line connection.
(2) Apply for and obtain a permit as required by § 178-2E of this
article.
(3) Give the Authority at least 24 hours' notice before such connection
will be made in order that the Authority may inspect or may cause
to be inspected the work of connection and necessary testing.
(4) If applicable, furnish satisfactory evidence to the Authority that any
tapping fee which may be charged and imposed by the Authority or
assessment by the Borough against the owner of each property who
connects such property to a main has been paid.
D. Except as otherwise provided, each improved property shall be
connected separately and independently to the water main service line
connection. Grouping of more than one improved property on one water
main shall not be permitted, except under special circumstances and
for good cause shown, but then only after special permission of the
Authority, in writing, shall have been secured and only subject to such
rules, regulations and conditions as may be prescribed by the Authority.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a service line extension shall
be borne by the owner of the property to be connected. Such owner
shall indemnify and shall save harmless the Authority and the Borough
from all loss and damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly,
as a result of construction of a service line extension.
F. A service line extension shall be constructed in accordance with the
Authority's rules and regulations.
G. If the owner of any property located within the Borough of Economy
and within the distance requiring payment of the tapping fee as
provided herein after 12 months notice from the Borough in accordance
with § 178-2A shall fail to pay such tapping fee and assessments, the
Borough may collect from such owner the tapping fee and/or
assessments by filing a municipal lien therefor.
§ 178-3 WATER § 178-4
178:427
§ 178-4. Service line extensions.
§ 178-5. Rules and regulations.
As a customer of the Authority, the owner will abide by the Authority's rules
and regulations pertaining to the connection and maintenance of service
lines as adopted and amended and in their entirety.
A. No service line extension shall be covered until it has been inspected
and approved by the Authority. If any part of the service line extension
is covered before so being inspected and approved, it shall be
uncovered for inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the
property.
B. Every service line extension of any property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such property.
C. Every excavation for a service line extension shall be guarded
adequately to protect all persons from damage and injury. Any street
sidewalk or other public property disturbed in the course of installation
of the service line extension shall be restored, at the cost and expense
of the owner of the property being connected, in a manner satisfactory
to the Borough of Economy.
D. If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice, in
writing, of the Authority, to remedy an unsatisfactory condition with
respect to a service line extension within 60 days of receipt of such
notice, the Authority may refuse to permit such person to be served by
the water system until such conditions shall have been remedied to the
satisfaction of the Borough and of the Authority.
E. The Borough and the Authority reserve the right to jointly adopt from
time to time additional rules and regulations they shall deem necessary
and proper relating to connections with the water system, which
additional rules and regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and
shall be construed as part of this article.
§ 178-4 ECONOMY CODE § 178-5
178:428
Chapter 180
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 25.
Building construction — See Ch. 55.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 66.
Fences — See Ch. 81.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 92.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 108.
Mobile home parks — See Ch. 119.
Parks and recreation areas — See Ch. 132.
Signs — See Ch. 147.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
163.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 166.
§ 178-5 WATER § 178-5
178:429

ARTICLE I
Basic Provisions
§ 180-1. Title.
The official title of this chapter is "Economy Borough Zoning Ordinance."
§ 180-2. Authority.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority granted to the Borough
by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968, as amended by Act 170 of 1988 (53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq., as may be amended from time to time).
§ 180-3. Interpretation.
§ 180-4. Community development objectives.
Community development objectives are set forth in the SHALE Region
Comprehensive Plan Update adopted by Ordinance No. 388 of Borough
Council on 6-10-2003. In addition to the specific objectives stated in the
Comprehensive Plan Update, the general community development
objectives on which this chapter is based are:
A. In the event of conflicts between the provisions of this chapter and any
other ordinance or regulation, the more restrictive provisions shall
apply.
B. In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter
shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion
of the health, safety and general welfare of the public.
C. In interpreting the language of this chapter to determine the extent of
the restriction upon the use of property, the language shall be
interpreted, where doubt exists as to the intended meaning of the
language written and enacted by Borough Council, in favor of the
property owner and against any implied extension of the restriction.
A. To promote the interest of public health, safety, morals and the general
welfare;
B. To secure safety from fire and to provide adequate open spaces for light
and air;
C. To conserve and stabilize property values;
D. To preserve woodlands, open space, recreational, agricultural and
environmental sensitive lands from conflict with urban development;
E. To facilitate the economic provision of adequate transportation, water,
sewage, schools, parks and other public requirements;
§ 180-1 WATER § 180-4
178:431
§ 180-5. Compliance.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
altered, converted or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be used or
designed to be used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this
chapter and after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required
by this chapter.
F. To prevent the overcrowding of land, blight, danger and congestion in
travel and transportation, loss of health, life or property from fire, flood,
panic or other dangers;
G. To promote stormwater management and soil and water conservation;
H. To set forth population density controls;
I. To promote coordinated and practical community development; and
J. To promote the utilization of renewable energy sources.
§ 180-4 ECONOMY CODE § 180-5
178:432
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 180-6. Word usage.
All words used in this chapter shall carry their customary dictionary
definitions as provided in the most recent edition of Webster's Collegiate
Dictionary, except where specifically defined herein. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future. The singular number shall include
the plural, and the plural the singular. The word "shall" is always mandatory
and not permissive; the word "may" is permissive. The words "used" or
"occupied," as applied to any land or structures, shall be construed to
include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied."
The word "person" shall include the individual, corporation, partnership,
incorporated association or any other entity. Words in the masculine gender
shall include the feminine gender. The words "includes" and "including"
shall not limit the defined term to the specific examples but are intended to
extend the term's meaning to other instances of like kind and character.
§ 180-7. Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall have the particular meaning
specified for the purpose of interpreting this chapter:
ACCESS — A means of providing vehicular or pedestrian ingress and egress
to and from a property.
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure, located on the
same lot with the principal use or structure, that is subordinate and
incidental to the principal structure or use of the property and that may
occupy a separate structure and/or area on or in the ground, including, but
not limited to, storage sheds or other storage structures, off-street parking,
signs, off-street loading, gazebos, children's playhouses, greenhouses for
personal use, garages, swimming pools, detached decks, fences and similar
structures.
ACTIVE RECREATION, HIGH-IMPACT — See "recreation, active, highimpact."
ACTIVE RECREATION, LOW-IMPACT — See "recreation, active, lowimpact."
ADJACENT; ADJOINING — Sharing common property lines uninterrupted
by any alley, public street or private street right-of-way.
ADULT ARCADE — Any place where the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically
controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or other imageproducing
devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons
per machine at any one time and where the images displayed are sexually
explicit or depict nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR VIDEO STORE — An establishment having a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, including, but not
§ 180-6 WATER § 180-7
178:433
limited to, videocassettes, movies, books, magazines and other periodicals,
which is distinguished or characterized by its emphasis on matters
depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein, or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or
display of such material.
ADULT BUSINESS — Any of the following uses, as defined herein: adult
arcade, adult bookstore or video store, adult novelty store, adult live
theater, adult mini motion-picture theater, adult motion-picture theater,
adult motel, adult newsrack, adult nightclub, bathhouse, body-painting
studio, escort service, massage parlor, nude model studio or sexual
encounter or meditation center, and any other use of a premises, not
specifically defined herein, that includes or primarily offers to its patrons
or members retail goods, commercial services or entertainment that is
characterized by an emphasis on matter or activities depicting, describing
or relating to nudity or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Movies, videos, still or motion pictures,
photographs, slides, films or other visual representation, books, magazines
or other printed material or live dramatic, musical or dance performances
that are sexually explicit or depict nudity or sexual conduct, as defined
herein.
ADULT LIVE THEATER — Any commercial establishment which features
live shows for public viewing in which all, or some, of the performers are
displaying nudity or engaging in sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT MINI MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A completely enclosed
building, as defined herein, with a capacity for accommodating fewer than
50 persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel or motel presenting adult motion pictures by
means of closed circuit television, the material being presented having as
a dominant theme or presenting material distinguished or characterized by
an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A completely enclosed building,
as defined herein, with a capacity for accommodating 50 or more persons
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting, describing or relating to nudity or sexual conduct, as
defined herein, for observation by patrons therein.
ADULT NEWSRACK — Any coin-operated machine or device that dispenses
printed material substantially devoted to the depiction of nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein.
ADULT NIGHTCLUB — Any nightclub, as defined herein, that offers adult
entertainment, as defined herein.
ADULT NOVELTY STORE — Any commercial establishment offering one
or more of the following items for sale to the general public: apparel,
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:434
accessories and performance aids used to enhance or participate in sexual
conduct.
AGRICULTURAL SALES — The sale of products raised, grown or produced
on a farm, provided the sales are conducted on the farm property where the
products are raised, grown or produced and where products sold that are
not raised, grown or produced on the farm shall be less than 50% of the
total sales.
AGRICULTURE — Any principal or accessory use of land or structures
for farming, dairying, pasturage, agronomy, horticulture, floriculture,
arboriculture, or animal or poultry husbandry. Accessory uses permitted in
conjunction with agriculture may include barns, stables, corn cribs, silos
and other uses or structures that are clearly related to an agricultural
operation.
AISLE — A paved area of a minimum width specified by this chapter that
provides direct access to one or two rows of parking spaces and connects
those parking spaces with the driveways that provide circulation through a
parking area.
AMENDMENT — See "zoning amendment."
ANIMAL SHELTER — Any premises used for the care and protection of
domestic pets rescued by humane officers or volunteers, whether on a
permanent basis or temporarily until the animals can be relocated, and that
may or may not include a kennel.
APARTMENT IN COMBINATION WITH BUSINESS — A dwelling unit
located in the same building with an office and/or retail business.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
ARCHITECT — A registered professional architect licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
AREA OF BUILDING — See "lot coverage."
AREA OF LOT — See "lot area."
ARTERIAL STREET — See "street, arterial."
ART STUDIO — See "educational studio."
ASSEMBLY — See "place of assembly."
ASSISTED-LIVING FACILITY — A residential building or group of buildings
designed to provide multifamily dwelling units for elderly or physically or
mentally disabled persons who are independently mobile and are not in
need of the level of service provided by a personal-care boarding home but
that provides on-site supervision and assistance available to the residents
on an occasional, "as-needed" basis and where at least one meal each
day is provided in a common dining area and that includes certain design
features associated with the needs of the elderly that are not customary
in the construction of conventional dwelling units, such as emergency call
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:435
systems, handicapped facilities, common dining facilities, common laundry
facilities, minimal housekeeping services, common leisure and recreational
facilities, transportation services and similar supporting services for the
convenience of the residents.
AUTOMOBILE SERVICE STATION — A retail establishment that provides
for one or more of the following activities:
BAKERY — A retail establishment that sells baked goods, including the
baking of goods when prepared for retail sales on the premises only and not
for distribution to another retail outlet.
BAR or TAVERN — A business, licensed by the commonwealth, that sells
alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as the principal use
and that may offer food for consumption on the premises as an accessory
use.
BATHHOUSE — An establishment that provides baths of all kinds, including
methods of hydrotherapy involving nudity or sexual conduct, but not
including hydrotherapy treatment practiced by or under the supervision of
a medical practitioner, such as a medical doctor, physician, chiropractor or
similar professional licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A dwelling that is the principal residence of the
operator where no more than four sleeping rooms are offered to transient
overnight guests for compensation and where the only meal served and
included with the overnight accommodations is breakfast.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST INN — A dwelling which is not the principal
residence of the operator where sleeping rooms are offered to transient
overnight guests for compensation and where breakfast is included with
the overnight accommodations and where other meals may be served or
provided to the guests and the general public.
The servicing of motor vehicles and operations incidental thereto and
limited to the retail sale of petroleum products and that may include
one or more of the following activities: retail sales and installation
of automotive accessories; automobile washing by hand; undercoating
and rustproofing; waxing and polishing of automobiles; tire changing
and repairing (excluding recapping); battery service, changing and
replacement, excluding repair and rebuilding; radiator cleaning and
flushing, excluding steam cleaning and repair; installation of
accessories; and state inspection; and/or
A.
The following operations, if conducted within a completely enclosed
building, as defined by this chapter: lubrication of motor vehicles;
replacement of exhaust systems; brake servicing limited to servicing
and replacement of brake cylinders, lines and brake shoes; wheel
balancing; the testing, adjustment and replacement or servicing of
carburetors, filters, generators, points, rotors, spark plugs, voltage
regulators, water and fuel pumps, water hoses and wiring; and/or
B.
The operation of a convenience food store, provided retail sale of
petroleum products is a part of the operation.
C.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:436
BEVERAGE DISTRIBUTOR — An establishment licensed by the
commonwealth for retail and wholesale sales to businesses and the general
public of beer and other malt beverages, soft drinks and snacks, but not
including the sale of wine or liquor.
BILLBOARD — Any off-premises sign with a changeable or permanent
advertising face that advertises an establishment, person, activity, product
or service that is unrelated to or not available on the premises on which the
sign is located.
BOARDING STABLE — The keeping of horses and ponies owned by persons
other than the owner of the stable, or the rental of horses owned by the
owner of the stable for a fee or other form of compensation. (See also
"riding academy.")
BODY-PAINTING STUDIO — Any establishment that provides the service of
applying paint or other substance, whether transparent or nontransparent,
to or on the human body in a state of nudity, as defined herein.
BUFFER AREA — A landscaped area of a certain depth specified by this
chapter that shall be planted and maintained in trees, grass, ground cover,
shrubs, bushes or other natural landscaping material and shall consist of a
mix of types and sizes of plant material that, within three years of planting,
meets the standard of providing a compact year-round visual screen at least
six feet in height or an existing natural barrier, such as vegetation and/or
topography, that duplicates the effect of the required buffer area, provided
the natural barrier is maintained with vegetation or landscaping at all times.
BUILDING — Any structure having enclosing walls and roofs and having
a permanent location on the land intended for the shelter, housing and/
or enclosure of persons, animals or other property. See also "completely
enclosed building."
BUILDING-MOUNTED SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system
attached to any part or type of roof on a lawfully permitted accessory or
principal building on the subject lot. This system also includes any solarbased
architectural elements.[Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
BUILDING FOOTPRINT — The area of the lot expressed in square feet that
is covered by the ground floor of a building, measured between exterior
faces of walls. If the floor area of any upper floor exceeds the floor area
of the ground floor by more than 10%, the upper floor shall be used to
determine the building footprint.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat roofs, to the deck lines of mansard roofs and to the
mean height between eaves and ridge for gable, hip and gambrel roofs. In
calculating the height of a building, habitable area under the roof (attic or
other habitable floor area) shall be counted as a story. A basement shall be
counted as a story if it is more than six feet above grade for more than 50%
of its perimeter or is more than 12 feet above grade at any point.[Amended
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:437
BUILDING LINE, FRONT — A line parallel to or concentric with the front lot
line, the minimum measurement of which is the front yard depth required
by this chapter. See also "building setback line."
BUILDING PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough Building Inspector
pursuant to the authority granted by and in conformance with the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
BUILDING, PUBLIC — See "public building."
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — An established line within a property defining
the minimum required distance between the face of any structure to be
erected and an adjacent street right-of-way or property line, the minimum
measurement of which is the yard depth required by this chapter.
BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — Any office of recognized
professions, other than medical offices or medical clinics, including, but
not limited to, lawyers, architects, engineers, real estate brokers, insurance
agents and others who, through training, are qualified to perform services
of a professional nature, and other offices used primarily for accounting,
corresponding, research, editing or other administrative functions, but not
including banks or other financial institutions. See also "medical offices"
and "medical clinic."
BUSINESS SERVICES — Establishments engaged in providing services
to business offices on a fee or contract basis, including, but not limited
to, advertising and public relations; management and consulting services;
employment services; building security and maintenance services;
equipment servicing, rental/leasing and sales; computer and data
processing services; mailing, photocopying, quick printing and fax services;
sale of office supplies; and similar business services, but not including the
rental, sale or repair of vehicles or heavy equipment.
CANDY OR ICE CREAM STORE — A retail establishment that sells candy
and/or ice cream and that may include on-site processing of the products
sold on the premises but that shall not include on-site processing of
products for delivery off the premises.
CARRY-OUT RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, carry-out."
CARTWAY — That portion of the street right-of-way that is surfaced for
vehicular use, excluding curbs and shoulders.
CAR WASH — A facility, whether automatic, semiautomatic or manual,
where the principal use is washing and polishing vehicles.
CEMETERY — Property used for the interring of dead persons or domestic
pets, including mausoleums, columbariums, crematoriums and funeral
homes when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of the
cemetery.
CENTER LINE OF A STREET — A line that is usually at an equal distance
from both edges of the cartway or established right-of-way.
CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY — A document issued by the Zoning Officer
indicating that a premises for which a building permit and/or a zoning
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:438
certificate has been issued is ready for occupancy and is in compliance with
the provisions of this chapter and the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), if
applicable.
CHANGE IN USE OR OCCUPANCY — The discontinuance of a use of a
building or lot followed by the establishment of a different use, whether by
the same owner or tenant or by a new owner or tenant.
CHURCH — A building or buildings, other than a dwelling, used primarily
as a place of worship on a regular basis by a religious denomination that
may also include, as accessory uses, rooms for religious education, social
and recreational activities and administrative offices, rectories, parsonages,
convents, preschool programs and elderly or child day-care centers.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — A triangular area of unobstructed vision at the
intersection of two streets or of a driveway and a street defined by line of
sight a given distance from the intersection of the center lines of two streets
or the center lines of the driveway and the street. (See the illustration in
Appendix A.93)
CLINIC, MEDICAL — See "medical clinic."
CLINIC, VETERINARY — See "veterinary clinic."
CLUB, PRIVATE — See "private club."
COLLECTOR STREET — See "street, collector."
COMMERCIAL — A business, enterprise, activity or other undertaking
engaged in for a profit.
COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE — A retail business that sells flowers, plants,
shrubs, trees and other natural flora and products that aid their growth
and care and that may include a greenhouse and/or the growing of plant
material outside on the lot.
COMMERCIAL SCHOOL — See "school, commercial."
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE — A motor vehicle licensed by the Department
of Transportation, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, having a gross vehicle
weight in excess of 10,000 pounds; or any other vehicle either motorized,
self-propelled or designed to be towed by another vehicle for use in
commercial or industrial enterprises, such as air compressors, welding
units and the like; or any and all earthmoving equipment, such as
bulldozers, hi-lifts, backhoes, ditching equipment and the like.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas or areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
93.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:439
COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA — Any structure designed for transmitting
or receiving wireless communications of video, voice, data and similar
transmissions, including, but not limited to, distributed antenna systems
(DAS), omnidirectional or whip antennas, directional or panel antennas and
satellite or microwave dish antennas that may be mounted on an existing
building, an existing public utility storage or transmission structure or
an existing communications tower, excluding transmission and receiving
devices licensed by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
exclusively for private use by citizens.[Amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No.
454]
COMMUNICATIONS EQUIPMENT CABINET — An unmanned structure
that contains the equipment necessary to maintain and operate
communications antennas.
COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, whether freestanding or
attached to a building, designed to support multiple communications
antennas, including monopole, self-supporting and guyed towers and one
or more of the following mounts for antennas: rotatable platform, fixed
platform, multipoint or side-arm mounts and pipe mounts for microwave
dish antennas.
COMMUNITY CLUB — An organization comprised of residents in the
neighborhood in which it is located, the primary purpose of which is the
advancement of its members' interests in recreation, education, cultural or
civic pursuits and activities.
COMMUNITY SANITARY SEWER — See "sanitary sewer, community."
COMMUNITY SWIMMING POOL — See "swimming pool, community."
COMPARABLE USE NOT SPECIFICALLY LISTED — A use which is not
specifically listed in a particular zoning district but which is determined by
the Zoning Hearing Board, in accordance with the express standards and
criteria set forth in this chapter, to be similar in characteristics and impacts
to another use which is specifically listed in the same zoning district as a
permitted use, conditional use or use by special exception.
COMPLETELY ENCLOSED BUILDING — A building designed and
constructed so that all exterior walls shall be solid from the ground to the
roofline, containing no openings except for windows and doors that are
designed so that they may be kept closed and any other small openings
required for the ventilation system.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Plan of the Borough that
guides the physical development of the Borough and that consists of maps,
charts and textual matter in accordance with the provisions of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
COMPRESSOR — A device used alone or in series to raise the pressure of
natural gas and/or byproducts to create a pressure differential to move or
compress a liquid, vapor or gas.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
COMPRESSOR STATION — A facility designed and constructed to compress
natural gas and/or oil that originates from a single well site or a collection
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:440
of such well sites, operating as a midstream facility for delivery of gas
and/or oil to a transmission pipeline, distribution pipeline, processing plant
or underground storage field, including one or more natural gas and/or
oil compressors, associated buildings, pipes, valves, tanks and other
equipment.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
CONDITIONAL USE — An authorized use that may be granted only by
Borough Council pursuant to express standards and criteria contained in
this chapter after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission
and after conducting a public hearing pursuant to public notice.
CONSTRUCTION TRAILER, TEMPORARY — A structure designed, used or
constructed to provide temporary offices for construction supervision on the
site of an approved subdivision or land development during the time that a
valid building permit or grading permit is in effect.
CONTRACTING BUSINESS — The administrative offices of a business that
provides landscaping, construction, remodeling, home improvement, land
development and related services on a contractual basis and that may
include the storage of materials, equipment and vehicles, provided all
materials, equipment and vehicles are stored within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein.
CONTRACTOR'S YARD — An establishment that may or may not include
administrative offices for a business that provides landscaping,
construction, remodeling, home improvement, land development and
related services on a contractual basis but that involves the outdoor storage
of all or part of the materials, equipment or vehicles used in the business.
CONVENIENCE STORE — See "store, convenience."
CONVERSION APARTMENT — A dwelling unit created within an existing
single-family dwelling in accordance with all applicable requirements of this
chapter.
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
COUNCIL — All references to Council are to the Borough Council of the
Borough of Economy.
COUNTRY CLUB — See "golf course; golf or country club."
COUNTY — Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
COVERAGE — See "lot coverage."
CREMATORIUM — An establishment containing a furnace designed to
cremate or reduce to ashes human or animal remains of the deceased.
CUTOFF ANGLE — The angle formed by a line drawn from the direction of
light rays at the light source and a line perpendicular to the ground from
the light source, above which no light is emitted. (See Appendix B.94)
DANCE STUDIO — See "educational studio."
94.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:441
DAY-CARE CENTER — A facility, licensed by the commonwealth, located
within a building that is not used as a dwelling unit, for the care, on a
regular basis, during part of a twenty-four-hour day, of children under the
age of 16 or handicapped or elderly persons.
DAY-CARE HOME — See "family day-care home."
DECK or PATIO — Any uncovered outdoor living area, without a roof, in
excess of 24 square feet, constructed on or above the surface of the ground.
DELICATESSEN — A retail establishment, other than a restaurant, that
sells ready-to-eat food products such as cooked meats, sandwiches and
prepared salads, primarily for consumption off the premises, but which
may provide a few tables or a counter for on-premises consumption as an
accessory use and that may include off-premises catering.
DENSITY, DWELLING UNIT — See "dwelling unit density."
DEPTH OF LOT — See "lot depth."
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, or agent of such landowner, or tenant, with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to an improved or unimproved
land or water area, including, but not limited to, construction of buildings or
structures or additions thereto, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving,
excavation or drilling operations.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The written and graphic materials describing
a development, including a plat of subdivision, a planned residential
development (PRD), all covenants relating to use, location and bulk of
buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of development,
streets, ways, parking facilities, common open space and public facilities.
DIRECT VEHICULAR ACCESS — A curb cut on or a private driveway
leading directly to a public street right-of-way. In the case of the
requirement for direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street,
the point of access shall be onto the arterial or collector street without
traversing any other public street right-of-way.
DISTANCE BETWEEN BUILDINGS — The minimum spacing between two
buildings on the same lot, measured from the outermost wall or projection,
excluding bay windows, chimneys, flues, columns, ornamental features,
cornices and gutters that project beyond the wall of the building no more
than two feet.
DISTRICT — See "zoning district."
DOMESTIC PETS — Animals, fish or fowl customarily found in a dwelling
and kept for company or pleasure, including, but not limited to, dogs and
cats, provided there is not a sufficient number to constitute a kennel, as
herein defined; rabbits, gerbils, hamsters, parakeets or canaries and similar
small animals or birds, but not including any exotic animals such as lions,
tigers, bears, ocelots or other feral cats or poisonous snakes, alligators,
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:442
monkeys or other animals normally found in a zoo; nor any livestock, as
defined herein.
DRILLING — The drilling or redrilling of a well or the deepening of an
existing well.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
DRILLING EQUIPMENT — The derrick, all parts and appurtenances to
such structure and every piece of apparatus, machinery or equipment used,
erected or maintained in connection with oil and gas drilling, as defined
herein.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
DRIVE-THROUGH FACILITY — Any principal use or accessory use that
involves a window, service lane, bay or other facility where customers are
provided services either inside or outside their vehicles and where cars may
or may not wait in line to access these services, including, but not limited
to, "drive-in" or "drive-through" windows at fast-food restaurants, banks
or other businesses, exterior automated teller machines (ATMs), quick oil
change facilities, car washes and similar automotive services and other such
facilities.
DRIVEWAY — A private vehicular way providing access between a street
and a parking area or garage located on a lot.
DRUGSTORE — A retail establishment that sells prescription drugs, patent
medicines, surgical and sickroom supplies and which also may sell
cosmetics, household goods and a limited selection of food products.
DWELLING — A building designed exclusively as living quarters for one or
more families, but not including hotels, motels or boardinghouses.
DWELLING TYPES — The following dwelling types are included in this
chapter:
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A residential building
containing one dwelling unit that is the only principal structure on the
lot, surrounded on all sides by open space.
A.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A residential building
containing one dwelling unit that is attached by unpierced vertical walls
to no more than three other dwelling units where each dwelling unit is
either located on a separate recorded lot having a property line along
common walls between the units or where the dwellings are located on
property shared in common with other single-family attached dwellings.
B.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — A residential building designed exclusively
for occupancy by two families living independently of each other and
containing two dwelling units, each with a separate entrance directly to
the outside, including double houses, duplexes and carriage homes.
C.
TRIPLEX — A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy
by three families living independently of each other, containing three
dwelling units, each having independent access directly to the outside
and having no other units above or below.
D.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:443
FOURPLEX — A residential building designed exclusively for occupancy
by four families living independently of each other, containing four
dwelling units, each having independent access directly to the outside
and having no other units above or below.
E.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A residential building designed
exclusively for occupancy by three or more families living
independently of each other and containing three or more separate
dwelling units, including triplexes, fourplexes, townhouses and garden
apartments.
F.
GARDEN APARTMENT — A multifamily residential building no more
than three stories in height containing three or more dwelling units that
share a common entrance to the outside, usually through a common
corridor, and which dwelling units may have other dwelling units either
above or below them.
G.
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — Any supervised long-term group living
arrangement licensed by the commonwealth for any of the following:
Persons who do not meet the definition of "mentally or physically
handicapped" provided in the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the
Americans with Disabilities Act, excluding those regulated by the
definition of "transitional dwelling."
(1)
Persons who do meet the definition of "mentally or physically
handicapped" provided in the Fair Housing Amendments Act or the
Americans with Disabilities Act living in an institutional setting and
not maintaining a common household.
(2)
Persons who, whether handicapped or not, are criminal offenders,
juvenile offenders or delinquents or who have been found by any
governmental tribunal, court or agency to be a danger to society
or who are under the jurisdiction of the criminal justice system,
a governmental bureau of corrections or similar agency or
institution.
(3)
H.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A factory-built single-family dwelling that
meets the National Manufactured Home Construction and Safety
Standards Act (43 U.S.C. § 5401) of 1976 intended for permanent
occupancy.
I.
MODULAR DWELLING — A factory-fabricated single-family dwelling
that is delivered to its site in at least two sections that are set upon a
permanent foundation and the sections joined together. Such dwellings
shall be certified as meeting the minimum standards for manufactured
housing in Pennsylvania. Modular dwellings shall be permitted
wherever single-family dwellings are allowed, provided they are
installed on a permanent foundation and connected to all available
utilities.
J.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:444
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms that are used as living quarters
for one family and that have permanent facilities for sleeping, cooking and
eating, as well as sanitary facilities.
DWELLING UNIT DENSITY — The maximum number of dwelling units
authorized by this chapter per acre of land.
EASEMENT — A grant of one or more property rights by the property owner
to and for use by the public, a utility, a corporation or any other person, the
use of which shall not be inconsistent with the rights of the grantee and in
which no permanent structure shall be erected.
EDUCATIONAL STUDIO — An establishment that provides training to
individuals or groups in specialized recreational activities or avocations,
including, but not limited to, dance, gymnastics, martial arts, photography,
music, arts and crafts and similar pursuits.
EFFECTIVE DATE — The date on which this chapter is duly adopted by
Borough Council or as specified in the ordinance so adopted.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — See "fire and emergency medical
services."
ENGINEER — A registered professional engineer licensed as such by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PERSONAL-CARE BOARDING HOME — A dwelling or institutional
building licensed by the commonwealth where room and board is
provided to more than three permanent residents who are not relatives
of the operator and who are mobile or semimobile and require
specialized services for a period exceeding 24 consecutive hours in
such matters as bathing, dressing, diet and medication prescribed for
self-administration, but who are not in need of hospitalization or skilled
nursing or intermediate nursing care.
K.
TOWNHOUSE — A multifamily residential building containing at least
five, but no more than eight, dwelling units, each of which is separated
from the adjoining unit or units by a continuous, unpierced vertical wall
extending from the basement to the roof, each unit having independent
access directly to the outside and having no other units above or below
them.
L.
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — A dwelling unit occupied on a shortterm
basis by persons assigned by a court of law, or who are selfreferred,
or referred by a public, semipublic or nonprofit agency, and
managed by a public, semipublic or nonprofit agency responsible for
the occupants' care, safety, conduct, counseling and supervision for
a specified period of time, including alcoholic recovery, shelters for
battered persons and their children, maternity homes, community
reentry services following incarceration, prison assignment, house
arrest or other court-ordered treatment, and other such short-term
supervised assignments.
M.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:445
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of a tract
of land occupied by an existing use.
EQUIPMENT STORAGE YARD — An area of land devoted to the storage,
whether temporary or permanent, of construction equipment, farm
equipment or other heavy equipment or vehicles in excess of 26,000 pounds
gross vehicle weight (GVW).
ESCORT SERVICE — A business that provides a service by appointment
or upon request where individuals leave one premises and go to another
premises for a specified period of time for the purpose of engaging in nudity
or sexual conduct, as defined herein.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The provision by continuous conduit of
distribution and collection systems by public utilities, regulated by the
Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or any agency, franchisee or authority of
the Borough of underground or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, steam,
or water lines, sewers, fire alarm boxes, traffic signals, hydrants, cable TV
(not including towers) and accessories in connection therewith, reasonably
necessary to furnish adequate services within Economy Borough to the
general public.
FAMILY —
An individual, or two or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption or foster child care, including domestic servants or gratuitous
guests, thereof; or a group of not more than three unrelated persons
living together without supervision in a dwelling unit, or not more
than eight persons living together in a group living arrangement with
supervision, provided that the group living arrangement meets all of
the following criteria:
It provides nonrouting support services, including supervision,
personal care, social or counseling services, and transportation,
to persons who need such assistance in order to use and enjoy a
dwelling or to avoid being placed within an institution, because of
physical disability, old age, mental retardation, or other "handicap"
or "disability" as defined by the Fair Housing Amendments Act or
the Americans with Disabilities Act.
(1)
It provides for the joint occupancy of a dwelling unit where the
residents maintain a common household and practice, on a
permanent or long-term basis, a joint economic, social and cultural
life.
(2)
(3) It does not involve the housing of persons on a transient basis.
It does not involve the housing or treatment of persons accepted
for residence in the group living arrangement on the basis of their
status as criminal offenders, juvenile offenders or delinquents or
who would otherwise qualify for residence by virtue of having
been found by any governmental tribunal, court or agency to be
(4)
A.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:446
FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME — A facility, licensed or approved by the
commonwealth, as required by the laws of the commonwealth, located
within a dwelling in which the operator resides, for the care on a regular
basis during part of a twenty-four-hour day of not more than six children
under 16 years of age, including care provided to children who are relatives
of the provider, where such use shall be secondary to the use of the dwelling
for living purposes and shall meet all applicable requirements for a home
occupation.
FARM — A site of 10 acres or more used for the pursuit of agriculture, as
defined herein.
FAST-FOOD RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, fast-food."
FENCE — An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire,
metal or any other manufactured or natural material or combination of
materials erected for the enclosure of land and/or dividing one area of
land from another. This definition shall not include agricultural fences
erected for the purpose of enclosing livestock in areas properly used for
agricultural purposes, nor shall it include retaining walls that are designed
and approved in accordance with the Borough Grading Ordinance.
FINANCIAL INSTITUTION — A bank, savings-and-loan association or
similar institution that lends money or is engaged in a finance-related
business.
FIRE AND EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES — Facilities owned and
operated by a public agency or nonprofit corporation used for the storage
of fire trucks, fire-fighting equipment, ambulances and other emergency
medical equipment and for the training of firefighters, paramedics and
other medical rescue personnel and that may or may not include offices,
meeting rooms, exercise rooms, sleeping quarters for the employees and
volunteers, kitchen facilities and a social hall.
FITNESS CENTER — See "health club or fitness center."
FLEX SPACE — Any building designed to accommodate a combination of
office and warehousing or office and manufacturing or assembly.
FLOOR AREA, GROSS — The sum of all the horizontal floor areas of a
building, measured between exterior faces of walls.
FLOOR AREA, NET — The total floor area of a building designed for tenant
occupancy, or areas accessible to the customers, clients or general public,
but excluding storage areas, equipment rooms, food preparation areas in a
a danger to society or are on release or under the jurisdiction of
the criminal justice system, a government bureau of corrections or
similar institution.
"Family" shall not include persons living together in a group-care
facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional dwelling, as
defined herein, or any other supervised group living arrangement for
persons not protected by the Fair Housing Act or for any persons who
constitute a direct threat to others or their physical property.
B.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:447
restaurant and common areas such as halls, corridors, stairwells, elevator
shafts, rest rooms, interior vehicular parking and loading areas and similar
common areas, expressed in square feet and measured from the center line
of joint partitions and exteriors of outside walls.
FOOD STORE — See "store, food."
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when practiced
in accordance with accepted silviculture principles, through developing,
cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for commercial
purposes that does not involve any land development.
FOURPLEX — See Subsection E under the definition of "dwelling types."
FRONT BUILDING LINE — See "building line, front."
FRONT LOT LINE — See "lot line, front."
FRONT YARD — See "yard, front."
FUNERAL HOME — A building used for the embalming of the deceased for
burial, but not including cremation, and for the display of the deceased and
ceremonies connected therewith before burial or cremation.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or a portion of the principal
building, not accessible to the general public used for the shelter and
storage of private vehicles and personal property of the occupants of the
principal building.
GARAGE, PUBLIC PARKING — See "public parking garage."
GARAGE, VEHICLE REPAIR — See "vehicle repair garage."
GARDEN APARTMENT — See Subsection G under the definition of
"dwelling types."
GAS DRILLING — See "oil and gas wells."
GENERAL MERCHANDISE STORE — See "store, general merchandise."
GOLF COURSE; GOLF OR COUNTRY CLUB — A recreational facility
operated by a public or private entity that has as its principal use a course,
with a minimum of nine regulation-size holes, for playing golf and that may
include one or more of the following accessory uses: a clubhouse and/or
restaurant, locker rooms, pro shops, swimming pool, facilities for racquet
sports and maintenance facilities.
GREENHOUSE — See "commercial greenhouse."
GROCERY STORE — See "store, grocery."
GROSS FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, gross."
GROUND-MOUNTED SOLAR SYSTEM — A solar photovoltaic system
mounted on a structure, pole, or series of poles constructed specifically
to support the solar photovoltaic system and not attached to any other
structure.[Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
GROUP-CARE FACILITY — See Subsection H under the definition of
"dwelling types."
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:448
HAZARDOUS MATERIAL — Any material designated as a "hazardous
material" under the terms and provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste
Management Act of 198095 and/or any regulations promulgated thereunder
by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and
designated as "hazardous materials."
HEALTH CLUB or FITNESS CENTER — A commercial, recreational
enterprise or private club that has as a principal use a gymnasium,
swimming pool or other sports or exercise facility and that may offer
massages, whirlpool baths, steam rooms, saunas and/or medical facilities as
accessory uses to the principal use.
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — See "building height."
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade around the sign to the highest point on the
sign and its supporting structure, including the foundation of the sign, if it
is elevated above the ground level.
HEIGHT OF STRUCTURE — For structures other than buildings or signs,
the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished
grade around the structure to the highest point on the structure.
HELIPAD — See "private use helipad."
HIGH-TECHNOLOGY INDUSTRIES — The assembly of component parts or
the production of finished products, excluding any process that involves
toxic or highly volatile substances, including computer components and
accessories; electrical parts, accessories and equipment; laboratory
apparatus; robotics; optical instruments; precision instruments; surgical,
medical and dental instruments and supplies; timers and timepieces; search
detection and navigational equipment; musical instruments and
photographic equipment and accessories.
HOME-BASED BUSINESS, NO-IMPACT — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use that is clearly
secondary to the use of a dwelling for residential purposes and that involves
no customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, and
no pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises in excess
of those normally associated with residential use.
HOME GARDENING — The growing of flowers, plants or vegetables for
consumption by the persons residing on the premises and not for sale,
including backyard composting for personal use and noncommercial
greenhouses not exceeding 150 square feet in gross floor area.
HOME OCCUPATION — An accessory use of a service character that does
not meet the definition of a no-impact home-based business conducted
entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which use is clearly
secondary to the use of the dwelling for living purposes and does not, in any
way, change the character of the dwelling.
95.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:449
HOSPITAL — An institution licensed by the commonwealth for the care of
human patients suffering from physical or mental illnesses and that may
or may not include facilities for major surgery and that may be publicly or
privately operated.
HOTEL — See "motel or hotel."
HVAC — Equipment used to heat, cool, or ventilate a structure.[Added
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
HYDRAULIC FRACTURING (FRACKING) — The process of injecting water,
customized fracking fluid, steam, or gas into an oil or gas well under
pressure to break apart rock layers in order to release gas and improve
recovery of gas.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
ICE CREAM STORE — See "candy or ice cream store."
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — Surfaces with a coefficient of runoff greater
than 0.85, including all buildings, roofed areas, parking areas, driveways,
streets, sidewalks and areas paved in concrete and asphalt and any other
areas determined by the Borough Engineer to be impervious within the
meaning of this definition.
IMPOUNDMENT — An open, earthen receptacle used to store fresh water,
wastewater or other fluids produced by or used exclusively for oil and gas
operations at one or more well sites.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
IMPROVEMENT — See "development."
INDEPENDENT LIVING FACILITY — A residential building or group of
buildings designed to provide housing for elderly or senior citizens who
are independently mobile and not in need of supervision but that includes
certain design features associated with the needs of elderly or senior
citizens not customary in the construction of conventional multifamily
dwellings, such as emergency call systems, handicapped facilities, minimal
housekeeping and laundry services, common leisure and recreational
services, personal services (beauty shop or barbershop or cleaner's valet),
transportation services and similar support services for the convenience of
the residents.
INDOOR ENTERTAINMENT — A commercial establishment located within
a completely enclosed building, as defined by this chapter, where customers
or patrons engage in nonathletic leisure activities as spectators or
participants, including, but not limited to, theaters (live and motionpicture),
arenas, bowling alleys, pool halls, virtual reality and simulation
gaming parlors, video arcades, dance halls and similar facilities, but
excluding any adult business, as defined herein.
JUNK — Any rubbish or scrap material, including all paper cartons, boxes,
barrels, wood, excelsior, bedding, cans, metal, glass, crockery, mineral
refuse, ashes and any similar substances, scrapped or used appliances,
fixtures, vehicles and vehicle parts, machinery and machinery parts or
other similar material or any other form of discarded, unused or unusable
materials, including building materials.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:450
JUNKYARD — Any premises devoted wholly or in part to the storage, buying
or selling, salvaging, recycling or otherwise handling or dealing in junk, as
defined by this chapter.
KENNEL — An establishment licensed by the Pennsylvania Department
of Agriculture for the boarding, breeding or training of domestic pets for
compensation.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — The improvement of one lot or two or more
contiguous lots, tracts or parcels for any purpose involving:
LAND DEVELOPMENT PLAN — A plan prepared in accordance with the
application requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, for approval of a land development, as defined herein.
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LANDSCAPE ARCHITECT — A registered professional landscape architect
licensed as such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
LANDSCAPING CONTRACTOR — A retail business that includes the
growing and/or selling of flowers, plants, trees, shrubs and other natural
flora and the products that aid their growth and care and that may include
one or more of the following activities as accessory uses only: storage
of decorative landscaping materials such as landscaping ties, decorative
rocks, marble chips, sandstone or limestone chips; storage of mulch,
reddog, sand or gravel to be used in landscaping; and/or shredding,
screening or storage of topsoil.
LANDSCAPING PLAN — A plan prepared by a registered architect or a
registered landscape architect, identifying each tree and shrub by size,
type and scientific name, indicating balled and burlapped or bare root,
and location. The plan shall include a planting diagram and such other
diagrams or reports necessary to show the methods of planting, staking and
mulching, grass seeding specifications and mixtures and existing trees over
10 inches in diameter at breast height.
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings, whether
proposed initially or cumulatively; or
A.
A single nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
B.
Any change of use or structural alteration that results in an increase in
total lot coverage by structures and/or paving; or
C.
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or prospective
occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets, common areas,
leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other features.
D.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:451
LAUNDROMAT — A retail business equipped with a number of individual
clothes washing machines and clothes dryers and that may include
individual dry-cleaning machines for use by the general public, excluding
laundry facilities provided as an accessory use in a multifamily residential
building.
LIFE-CARE COMMUNITY — A residential development that provides a
continuum of care for the elderly, including three or more of the following
uses: independent-living facility, assisted-living facility, personal-care
boarding home or nursing home, and that may or may not include
conventional single-family dwellings and/or multifamily dwellings.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The assembly, processing or production of
finished products, not involving the use of any raw materials or large
quantities of any hazardous materials, as regulated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and/or the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (U.S. EPA), including, but not limited
to, communications equipment and services; computer components and
accessories; dolls, toys and sporting goods; electrical parts, accessories
and equipment; electronic components; accessories and equipment; jewelry
and musical instruments; laboratory apparatus, machinery, equipment and
supplies; metal fabrication and machining; office machines and equipment;
optical instruments and products; precision instruments; printing,
publishing, shipping, packaging, mailing and distribution; and similar
products and services.
LIVESTOCK — Any member of the bovine or equine species and other
animals customarily found on a farm, including, but not limited to, cows,
steers, horses, ponies, mules, donkeys, llamas, alpacas, sheep, goats, pigs,
chickens, peacocks and other fowl or game animals raised for profit.
LOADING SPACE — An area within a principal building or on the same lot
with the principal building designed in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter and used for the standing, loading or unloading of tractortrailer
trucks and other vehicles.
LOCAL STREET — See "street, local."
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
described in a deed or other instrument recorded pursuant to the laws of
the commonwealth to be used, developed or built upon as a unit.
LOT AREA — The total area within the lot lines, excluding the area within
any street right-of-way.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the intersection of, and fronting on, two or more
street rights-of-way.
LOT COVERAGE — That portion of the lot area covered by all principal and
accessory structures, expressed as a percentage.
LOT DEPTH — The mean horizontal distance between the front lot line and
the rear lot line.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:452
LOT FRONTAGE — That portion of the lot that adjoins the street right-ofway
or through which access is provided to a public street.
LOT LINE — A line of record bounding a lot that divides one lot from
another lot or from a public or private street or other public space.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That lot line which is contiguous with the street rightof-
way line, or in the case where the lot line is contiguous with the street
center line, the front lot line shall be considered to be coterminous with
the street right-of-way line. In the case of a lot which has no frontage on a
street, the front lot line shall be the lot line through which vehicular access
is provided, regardless of which way the dwelling faces.
LOT LINE, REAR — That lot line that is generally opposite the front lot line.
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line that is not a front lot line or rear lot line.
LOT, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming lot."
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot that, individually, or as part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the Office of the Recorder of Deeds of Beaver County.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot that fronts on two parallel streets or that fronts on
two streets that do not intersect at the boundaries of the lot.
LOT WIDTH — The straight line distance between the point of intersection
of the front building line with the side lot lines.
MACHINE SHOP — A work shop where a machinist fabricates, assembles
or repairs parts and/or equipment.
MANUFACTURED HOME — See Subsection I under the definition of
"dwelling types."
MANUFACTURING — The mechanical or chemical transformation of raw
materials or substances into new products or other raw materials, including
the assembling of component parts, the manufacturing of products and the
blending of materials into finished or semifinished products.
MANUFACTURING, LIGHT — See "light manufacturing."
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment that provides services of massage
or body manipulation, including exercises, heat and light treatments of
the body, and all forms of physiotherapy, unless operated by a medical
practitioner, chiropractor or professional physical therapist licensed by the
commonwealth, not including any athletic club, health club, school,
gymnasium, reducing salon, spa or similar establishment where massage
or similar manipulation of the human body is offered as an incidental or
accessory service to the principal service.
MEDIATION — A voluntary negotiating process in which parties to a dispute
mutually select a neutral mediator to assist them in jointly exploring and
settling their differences, culminating in a written agreement that the
parties themselves create and consider acceptable.
MEDICAL CLINIC — Any establishment, including mobile diagnostic units,
where human patients receive medical, dental, chiropractic, psychological
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:453
and surgical diagnosis, treatment and counseling under the care of a group
of licensed medical doctors and/or dentists and their supporting staff, where
said patients are not provided with board or room or kept overnight on the
premises.
MEDICAL OFFICES — One or more administrative offices of an individual
doctor, dentist, chiropractor or other medical practitioner and his or her
supporting staff where human patients receive diagnosis, treatment and
counseling.
MINERAL REMOVAL — Any extraction of any mineral for sale or other
commercial purpose which involves removal of the surface of the earth or
exposure of the mineral or subsurface of the earth to wind, rain, sun or
other elements of nature. The term "mineral" includes, but is not limited
to, anthracite and bituminous coal, lignite, limestone and dolomite, sand,
gravel, rock, stone, earth, slag, ore, vermiculite, clay and other mineral
resources, excluding mining activities carried out beneath the surface of the
earth by means of shafts, tunnels or other underground mine openings.
MINI WAREHOUSE OR SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — A building or group of
buildings in a controlled access and fenced compound that contains various
sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls and/or
lockers leased to the general public for a specified period of time for the
dead storage of personal property.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit, or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, that arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land that has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement of mobile homes.
MOBILE HOME SALES, SERVICE AND STORAGE — An establishment
engaged in the retail sales of mobile homes, including the servicing and onsite
storage of mobile homes offered for sale.
MODEL HOME — The temporary use of a dwelling unit for the purpose
of marketing dwelling units to be constructed in an approved plan that is
under construction.
MODULAR DWELLING — See Subsection J under the definition of "dwelling
types."
MOTEL or HOTEL — An establishment that offers transient overnight
lodging accommodations, including extended stays, to the general public
and that also may provide additional supporting services such as
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:454
restaurants, meeting rooms, recreation facilities and living quarters for a
resident manager or proprietor.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection F under the definition of
"dwelling types."
MUNICIPALITIES PLANNING CODE (MPC) — Act of 1968, P.L. 805, No.
247, as reenacted and amended (53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.).
MUSIC STUDIO — See "educational studio."
NATURAL GAS — A fossil fuel consisting of a mixture of hydrocarbon
gases, primarily methane, and possibly including ethane, propane, butane,
pentane, carbon dioxide, oxygen, nitrogen and hydrogen sulfide and other
gas species. The term includes natural gas from oil fields known as
associated gas or casing head gas from natural gas fields known as
nonassociated gas, coal beds, shale beds and other formations, but does not
include coal bed methane.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
NATURAL GAS PROCESSING PLANT — A facility that receives natural gas
and associated hydrocarbons from a gathering line system serving one or
more well sites that compresses, condenses, pressurizes or otherwise treats
natural gas and which removes or separates materials such as ethane,
propane, butane and other constituents or similar substances from natural
gas to allow such natural gas to be of such quality as is required or
appropriate for transmission or distribution to commercial markets,
including, but not limited to, cooling facilities, storage tanks and related
equipment and facilities.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
NET FLOOR AREA — See "floor area, net."
NIGHTCLUB — A restaurant, or portion thereof, or any other establishment
serving food and/or drink, whether or not the consumption of alcoholic
beverages is permitted or allowed on the premises that offers on a monthly
or more frequent basis live entertainment on a stage or bandstand and/
or dancing to music, either live or recorded, and that has a maximum
permitted occupancy authorized by the Borough Uniform Construction
Code (UCC) of 50 or more persons.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — See "home-based business, noimpact."
NONCONFORMING LOT — Any lot the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter but that fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reasons of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING SIGN — Any sign that was lawfully erected and
maintained prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter that fails to
conform to all applicable regulations and restrictions of this article.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure that
does not comply with the applicable area and bulk provisions of this chapter
or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such structure
lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or an amendment
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:455
thereto, or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Nonconforming signs are included in this
definition.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of a structure, that
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or an amendment thereto,
or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by
reason of annexation.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or who displays "specified anatomical areas" and is provided to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed or similarly
depicted by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
"Nude model studio" shall not include a proprietary school licensed by the
State of Pennsylvania or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or in part by public taxation; a private college or university which
maintains and operates education programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation; or in a structure:
NUDITY — The showing of any part of the human male or female genitals,
pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage with less than a fully opaque
covering, the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any part of the nipple, or the showing of the covered male
genitals in a discernible turgid state.
NURSING HOME — An institution licensed by the commonwealth for the
care of human patients requiring skilled nursing or intermediate nursing
care, but not including facilities for major surgery or care and treatment of
drug or alcohol addiction.
OCCUPANCY, CERTIFICATE OF — See "certificate of occupancy."
OFFICES, BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL — See "business or professional
offices."
OFFICES, MEDICAL — See "medical offices."
OFFICIAL DATE OF FILING — The date of the Planning Commission
meeting at which an application is first considered after filing of an
application that is determined to be complete and properly filed.
OFF-STREET PARKING AREA — See "parking area."96
That has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude person is available for viewing; and
A.
Where in order to participate in a class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class; and
B.
C. Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one time.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:456
OIL — Hydrocarbons in liquid form at standard temperature of 60° F. and
pressure of 14.7 PSIA, also referred to as petroleum.[Added 1-22-2013 by
Ord. No. 440]
OIL AND GAS OPERATIONS — [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
OPEN SPACE, COMMON — See "common open space."
OPERATOR — Any person, partnership, company or corporation and its
subcontractors and agents who have an interest in real estate for the
purpose of oil and gas operations, including impoundments used exclusively
for oil and gas operations, natural gas compressor stations or natural gas
processing plants.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
OUTDOOR SALES — Any display of merchandise outside an enclosed
building which is offered for sale, regardless of whether the purchase is
completed indoors or outdoors.
OWNER — See "landowner."
PA DEP — Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection or its
successor agency.
PARKING AREA — A portion of a lot designated for the parking of motor
vehicles in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
PARKING GARAGE — See "public parking garage."
PARKING LOT — See "public parking lot."
PARKING SPACE — A portion of a garage or parking area designated for the
parking of one motor vehicle in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
PASSIVE RECREATION — See "recreation, passive."
PATIO — See "deck or patio."
Well location and assessment, including seismic operations, well site
preparation, construction, drilling, hydraulic fracturing and site
restoration associated with an oil or gas well of any depth; water
and other fluid storage or impoundment areas used exclusively for oil
and gas operations; construction, installation, use, maintenance and
repair of oil and gas pipelines and all equipment directly associated
with oil and gas operations, provided the equipment is located at or
immediately adjacent to a well site, impoundment, oil and gas pipeline,
natural gas compressor station or natural gas processing plant.
A.
While the Pennsylvania Oil and Gas Act includes "impoundments,"
"natural gas compressor stations" and "natural gas processing plants"
in the definition of "oil and gas operations," for the purposes of this
chapter these terms are separately defined so that they can be
separately regulated by this chapter.
B.
96.Editor's Note: The former definition of "oil and gas wells," which immediately followed
this definition, was repealed 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:457
PERIMETER SETBACK — The distance specified by this chapter from the
entire boundary of a site proposed for a development, as required by this
chapter, in which no principal or accessory structures may be located.
PERMITTED USE — An authorized use specifically allowed as a matter of
right upon review and approval by the Zoning Officer subject to compliance
with all applicable requirements of this chapter and land development plan
approval, if applicable.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
PERSONAL-CARE BOARDING HOME — See Subsection K under the
definition of "dwelling types."
PERSONAL SERVICES — Any enterprise providing services pertaining to
the person, his or her apparel, or personal effects commonly carried on
or about the person, including, but not limited to, shoe repair, tailoring,
clothes cleaning, watch repairing, barbershops, beauty parlors, tanning
salons, day spas, tattoo parlors and related activities, but not including any
adult business, as defined herein.
PET GROOMING — Any establishment that offers services for domestic
pets, including, but not limited to, bathing, trimming, manicuring,
massaging or other services to maintain the animals' well-being and which
may sell pet care products and pet supplies as an accessory use, but not
including a veterinary clinic or kennel, as defined herein.
PETS, DOMESTIC — See "domestic pets."
PET SERVICES — A business establishment that sells pet food and other pet
care products to the general public and that may offer animal grooming and
limited veterinary services as accessory uses; or a business establishment
that offers care during part of a twenty-four-hour day of domestic pets as
a principal use and which may sell food or other pet care products as an
accessory use, provided the uses shall not include an animal hospital or
kennel, as otherwise regulated by this chapter.
PHOTOGRAPHY STUDIO — See "educational studio."
PHOTOVOLTAIC (PV) — A semiconductor-based device that converts light
directly into electricity.[Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
PILOT MANUFACTURING — An establishment or part thereof used to
test concepts and ideas, determine physical layouts, material flows and
processes, types of equipment required, costs and other information
necessary prior to undertaking full-scale production.
PLACE OF ASSEMBLY — An indoor or outdoor space with or without fixed
seating used for public gatherings for religious, recreational, educational,
cultural, political, social or entertainment purposes.
PLANNED INDUSTRIAL PARK — A development comprised of authorized
industrial uses on a site that is under single ownership and control at the
time of an application for development and that is planned and developed
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:458
as a single unit wherein several buildings or lots utilize a common means of
access and may share other common facilities such as parking and signs.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT (PRD) — An area of land
controlled by a single landowner, to be developed as a single entity for
a number of dwelling units, the development plan for which does not
correspond in lot size, bulk, type of dwelling or use, density or intensity, lot
coverage and required open space to the regulations established in any one
zoning district.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Economy
Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
PORCH — A roofed or uncovered accessory structure without enclosing
walls with an area of more than 24 square feet that is attached to or part of
the principal building and which has direct access to and from the principal
building.
POSTSECONDARY SCHOOL — See "school, postsecondary."
PRESCHOOL FACILITY — An establishment that offers private educational
services to children who are under the minimum age for education in public
schools.
PRINCIPAL BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — The building or structure in
which the principal use is conducted.
PRINCIPAL USE — The primary or predominant use to which the property
is or may be devoted and to which all other uses on the premises are
accessory.
PRINTING ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment engaged in commercial
or job printing, including offset printing, engraving, photolithographing,
and publishing and binding books, newspapers, pamphlets and other
printed materials.
PRIVATE — Owned, operated or controlled by an individual, group of
individuals, association or corporation, not for profit, and restricted to
members and their guests.
PRIVATE CLUB — Any establishment other than a sportsmen's club, as
defined herein, operated by a private organization for social, recreational,
educational, fraternal or sororal purposes, which is open only to members
and their guests and not to the general public.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PRIVATE SANITARY SEWER — See "sanitary sewer, private."
PRIVATE SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."
PRIVATE STABLE — The keeping or raising of horses and/or ponies as
an accessory use to a single-family dwelling for the personal use and
enjoyment of the residents of the lot, not involving any profit-making
activity.
PRIVATE STREET — See "street, private."
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:459
PRIVATE USE HELIPAD — A helicopter landing pad licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, and
regulated by the Federal Aviation Administration that is owned by a private
entity and restricted to use by helicopters owned by such entity.
PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER — A qualified individual who is licensed as a
professional engineer in a state or commonwealth in the United States.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICES — See "business or professional offices."
PROTECTED STRUCTURE — Any occupied residence, business, school,
church or public building located within 500 feet of a natural gas well
head, as defined herein, that may be impacted by noise or other impacts
generated from the drilling or hydraulic fracturing at the well site, as
defined herein, excluding any structure owned by an oil or gas lessor who
has signed a lease with the operator granting surface rights to drill the
subject well or whose owner or occupants have signed a waiver relieving
the operator from complying with the noise abatement provisions of this
chapter.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
PUBLIC — Owned, operated or controlled by a government agency, federal,
state, county or local.
PUBLIC BUILDING — Any building owned or operated by a government
agency, federal, state, county or local, used to provide services to the
public, including administrative offices, public works buildings and storage
yards, libraries, museums, senior centers, recreation buildings, government
service centers and similar facilities.
PUBLIC GARAGE — See "public parking garage."
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by Borough Council or the Planning Commission, intended to inform and
obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this
chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act."97
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC OR PRIVATE SCHOOL — See "school, public or private."
PUBLIC PARKING GARAGE — A parking area that is located in a building
or parking structure that is the principal use on the lot and that may be
operated by either a public agency or private entity, whether for profit or
not, and that is available for use by the general public, usually for a fee.
97.Editor's Note: The Sunshine Act of 1986 (65 P.S. § 271 et seq.) was repealed 10-15-1998 by
P.L. 729, No. 93; see now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:460
PUBLIC PARKING LOT — A parking area on the surface of the ground that
is the principal use on the lot, that may be operated by either a public
agency or private entity, whether for profit or not, and that is available for
use by the general public, usually for a fee.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWER — See "sanitary sewer, public."
PUBLIC STREET — See "street, public."
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — Any administrative
building, maintenance building, garage or other building intended for
human occupancy or storage of movable equipment owned or operated by
a utility company regulated by the Public Utility Commission (PUC), or any
building or structure owned or operated by a utility company regulated
by the Public Utilities Commission (PUC) or any governmental agency
or municipal authority that is necessary for the generation, treatment,
regulation or intermunicipal distribution of essential services, as defined
herein, including, but not limited to, long-distance transmission facilities
such as electrical power lines or high-pressure natural gas or petroleum
lines, switching facilities, substations, treatment plants, reservoirs, water
towers, transmission towers and similar facilities.
REAR LOT LINE — See "lot line, rear."
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."
RECREATION, ACTIVE, LOW-IMPACT — Indoor or outdoor leisure time
pursuits involving activities that customarily raise the heart rate of
participants above the resting level, including participation by individuals,
groups of individuals or teams and any spectators, usually requiring the use
of special equipment and/or a prescribed site, field or facility, including, but
not limited to, soccer fields, football, baseball and softball fields, basketball
courts, tennis courts, handball or racquetball courts, swimming pools,
community centers and similar facilities of a size and operational character
that they have a low impact on surrounding properties. (This definition
excludes "boarding stable"; "golf course; golf or country club"; "health
club"; "indoor entertainment"; "private stable"; "riding academy"; "shooting
range"; and "sportsmen's club," which are separately defined and regulated
by this chapter.)
RECREATION, ACTIVE, HIGH-IMPACT — Indoor or outdoor leisure time
pursuits that draw in excess of 200 spectators and/or participants at any
one time and any indoor or outdoor leisure time pursuits that draw fewer
than 200 spectators or participants that have operational characteristics
that have a significant impact on surrounding properties, including, but
not limited to, motorcross or dirt bike trails, paintball facilities, arenas,
amusement parks, water parks, ski resorts, campgrounds, fairs, truck and
tractor pulls, off-road vehicle courses and trails, amphitheaters and similar
uses that have significant environmental, noise, traffic or lighting impacts.
(This definition excludes "betting parlors, casinos, gaming facilities, race
tracks and boarding stable"; "golf course; golf or country club"; "health
club"; "indoor entertainment"; "private stable"; "riding academy"; "shooting
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:461
range"; and "sportsmen's club," which are separately defined and regulated
by this chapter.)
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A single-axle or multiple-axle structure
mounted on wheels or otherwise capable of being made mobile, either
with its own motive power or designed to be mounted on or drawn by
an automotive vehicle, for the purpose of travel, camping, vacation and
recreational use, including, but not limited to, travel trailers, mobile homes,
motor homes, tent trailers, boats, boat trailers, pickup campers, horse
trailers, snowmobiles, jet skis, wave runners, motorcycles and all-terrain
vehicles.
RECREATION, PASSIVE — Outdoor leisure time pursuits involving activities
that do not raise the heart rate significantly above the resting level but
rather provide refreshment through furnishing a visual and/or psychological
release from the pressure of everyday life for individuals or small groups of
individuals, including, but not limited to, bridle trails, trails with exercise
stations, Nordic ski trails, hiking, biking, walking, fishing, picnicking,
children's playgrounds, table games, observation areas, bird watching,
botanical gardens, historical or archaeological sites, scenic areas, nature
preserves and similar facilities for relaxing in a natural environment.
REPAIR SHOP — A service establishment providing maintenance and
repairs of items that can be carried in by hand, including personal effects
(such as jewelry, watches, bicycles), small household appliances, office
equipment, small gasoline engines and similar items, but not including
repair of large appliances, motorized vehicles or heavy equipment.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT — Any establishment, including
laboratories, that carries on investigation in the natural, physical or social
sciences or engineering and development as an extension of such
investigation with the objective of creating end products and that may
include supporting storage and transportation facilities and pilot
manufacturing as accessory uses, but not including the mass production of
such products.
RESTAURANT — An establishment that offers food and beverages for sale
and consumption either on or on and off the premises as the principal use
and may serve alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises as an
accessory use.
RESTAURANT, CARRY-OUT — A restaurant where refreshments, beverages,
meals or frozen desserts or the like are served for consumption primarily
outside of the premises and where no more than 12 permanent seats are
provided.
RESTAURANT, FAST-FOOD — A restaurant principally devoted to the retail
sale of prepared or premeasured food items where such food items are
ordered by the customer at a window, counter or vehicle rather than from a
table and that is designed to facilitate quick service and takeout orders.
RESTAURANT, SIT-DOWN — An establishment where orders are placed
with waitpersons by customers seated at tables and food and beverages
are served at the table by waitpersons or are offered by buffet service that
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:462
includes a complete meal and where the usual length of stay is one hour or
more. A sit-down restaurant may or may not serve alcoholic beverages for
consumption on the premises as an accessory use and may or may not offer
take-out service as an accessory use, but shall not include a pickup window
or drive-through window.
RETAIL STORE — See "store, retail."
RIDING ACADEMY — An establishment where instruction in riding,
jumping and showing is offered for a fee and where horses may be hired
for riding. A riding academy may also include a boarding stable, as defined
herein.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land reserved or dedicated for use as a street, crosswalk
or other means of travel, or other public or private purposes, including
existing and future rights-of-way.
SALES OFFICE — A temporary use for the purpose of marketing the
dwelling units in a residential development or the leasable space or other
occupancy in a nonresidential development.
SANITARY SEWER, COMMUNITY — Any sewer system that is privately
owned or owned by an association of property owners in which sewage is
collected from more than one lot and piped to a sewage treatment plant
approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PA
DEP) as a community treatment facility.
SANITARY SEWER, PRIVATE — An on-lot sewage disposal system providing
for the disposal of effluent for one building and its accessory building on a
single lot, subject to the approval of the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
SANITARY SEWER, PUBLIC — Any sewer system owned by a municipality
or municipal authority in which sewage is collected from more than one lot
and piped to an approved sewage disposal plant.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — A privately operated, for-profit establishment
providing technical or skilled training, vocational or trade educational
courses and programs.
SCHOOL, POSTSECONDARY — An educational institution that provides
training beyond the secondary school curriculum and which is authorized
by the commonwealth to award associate, baccalaureate or higher degrees.
SCHOOL, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE — An accredited institution of learning that
offers elementary and secondary level instruction or which offers associate,
bachelor or higher degrees in the several branches of learning required by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SEAT — The area required for one individual to sit on as regulated by the
Uniform Construction Code (UCC) of the Borough.
SELF-STORAGE FACILITY — See "mini warehouse or self-storage facility."
SERVICE STATION, AUTOMOBILE — See "automobile service station."
SETBACK — See "building setback line."
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:463
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations, descriptions or acts of masturbation, excretory
functions, homosexuality, sodomy, sexual intercourse or physical contact
with a person's clothed or unclothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks, or, if
such person be female, breast.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER OR MEDITATION CENTER — A business, agency
or person which, for consideration, provides for commercial purposes a
place where persons, not all members of the same family, may congregate,
assemble or associate for the purpose of engaging in nudity or sexual
conduct, as defined herein.
SHOOTING RANGE — An outdoor facility that may or may not include a
clubhouse but which includes facilities for one or more of the following
activities: archery, target shooting, skeet or trap shooting, marksmanship,
tournaments and similar activities.
SHOPPING CENTER — A site under single ownership and control that is
developed as a unit for two or more retail establishments in one or more
buildings and designed so that parking, loading and access facilities are
shared.
SIDE LOT LINE — See "lot line, side."
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."
SIGN — Any structure or device used to attract attention by word or graphic
display. (See Article XIV for regulations governing signs.)
SIGN FACE — The entire area upon which graphic or written material or
information is placed for viewing from a single direction.
SIGN, HEIGHT OF — See "height of sign."
SIGN, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming sign."
SIGN, SURFACE AREA OF — See § 180-85C of this chapter for the
definition.
SIGN TYPES AND CLASSES — See definitions for various types and classes
of signs in Article XIV.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — See Subsection B under the
definition of "dwelling types."
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — See Subsection A under the
definition of "dwelling types."
SIT-DOWN RESTAURANT — See "restaurant, sit-down."
SITE — A tract of land or one or more contiguous lots proposed for
development.
SITE AREA — The total area within the boundary lines of a site proposed for
development, expressed in acres or square feet.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:464
SLOPE — The degree of rise or descent of the land surface calculated
by dividing the number of feet of vertical rise/descent in elevation by the
number of feet of horizontal distance, expressed as a percentage.
SOLAR PANELS — See "solar photovoltaic system."[Added 5-24-2016 by
Ord. No. 456]
SOLAR PHOTOVOLTAIC SYSTEM[Added 5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456] —
SOLAR TRACKING SYSTEM — A number of photovoltaic modules mounted
such that they track the movement of the sun across the sky to maximize
energy production, either with a single-axis or dual-axis mechanism.[Added
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — See "use by special exception."
SPECIALTY FOOD STORE — See "store, specialty food."
SPECIALTY RETAIL STORE — See "store, specialty retail."
SPORTS COURT — A private outdoor recreational facility accessory to a
dwelling for personal use by the residents comprised of an all-weather
surface designed for regulation play of tennis, basketball, handball or
similar games.
SPORTSMEN'S CLUB — A legally chartered organization for the pursuit
of hunting, fishing, marksmanship and related activities that may or may
not include a clubhouse and that has a roster of membership and a regular
calendar of activities limited to members and their guests.
STABLE, BOARDING — See "boarding stable."
STABLE, PRIVATE — See "private stable."
A solar collection system consisting of one or more building-mounted
solar systems and/or ground-mounted solar systems, solar photovoltaic
cells, panels or arrays and solar-related equipment that rely upon solar
radiation as an energy source for collection, inversion, storage and
distribution or solar energy for electricity generation.
A.
A solar PV system is a generation system which:
Has a nameplate capacity of not greater than 50 kilowatts if
installed on a residential lot and not greater than 3,000 kilowatts if
installed on a nonresidential lot; and
(1)
Does not produce excess on-site energy greater than currently
permitted by PUC guidelines.
(2)
B.
C. A solar PV system shall not be considered a service structure.
Solar PV system types shall include the following:
(1) Building-mounted solar system.
(2) Ground-mounted solar system.
D.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:465
STOOP — A covered or uncovered porch located at a front, side or rear door
to a dwelling unit not exceeding 24 square feet in area.
STORE, CONVENIENCE — A retail store with a gross floor area of 5,000
square feet or less, offering a limited selection of grocery, household and
personal items for quick purchase and that may include the dispensing of
gasoline.
STORE, FOOD — A retail establishment that has a gross floor area of no
more than 10,000 square feet and that offers for sale specialty or gourmet
food items or meats or groceries that are packaged and are not available for
consumption on the premises.
STORE, GENERAL MERCHANDISE — A retail business that offers a
sampling of a wide variety of merchandise categories, including, but not
limited to, automotive, apparel, garden center, cards and gifts, crafts,
groceries, drugs and sundries, jewelry, hardware, home decorating items,
household furnishings, pet supplies, small appliances, sporting goods, toys
and similar products.
STORE, GROCERY — A retail establishment in excess of 10,000 square feet
of gross floor area that primarily sells meat, food and household products
but that may also include as accessory uses a pharmacy, a florist, a travel
agency, a video rental (excluding an adult video store), a coffee shop, a
delicatessen, banking and copy/fax services.
STORE, RETAIL — Any establishment not otherwise specifically defined in
this article that sells commodities and/or services on the premises directly
to consumers, but not including the manufacturing or processing of any
products or wholesale sales.
STORE, SPECIALTY FOOD — A retail establishment that has a gross floor
area of no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area and that offers
for sale specialty or gourmet food items or meats and groceries that are
packaged for consumption off the premises and that may or may not have
a limited number of tables for consumption of some food items on the
premises.
STORE, SPECIALTY RETAIL — A business located in an existing building
that is devoted to the sale of a small inventory of distinctive, high-quality
merchandise, including one or more of the following: apparel and accessory
boutique; art, music or photography studio or gallery; antique or interior
design shop; custom bakery; bookstore; card, gift or stationery store;
confectionery; florist; historic or museum shop; ice cream parlor; jeweler;
kitchen accessory shop; optical shop; newsstand; tobacco shop; travel
agency; wine shop; and similar specialty shops with small inventories or
distinctive, high-quality merchandise.
STORY — That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above
it, then the space between any floor and the ceiling next above it, excluding
cellars.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:466
STREET — A public or private recorded right-of-way that affords primary
means of vehicular access to abutting property, but not including alleys.
STREET, ARTERIAL — A public street that serves large volumes of highspeed
and long-distance traffic. Streets classified as arterial in the Borough
for the purposes of interpreting this chapter are PA Route 65 and PA Route
989.
STREET CENTER LINE — See "center line of a street."
STREET, COLLECTOR — A public street that, in addition to giving access
to abutting lots, intercepts local streets and provides a route for carrying
considerable volumes of local traffic to community facilities and arterial
streets. For the purposes of interpreting this chapter, streets classified as
"collector" in the Borough are Beaver Street (also known as West State
Street), Big Sewickley Creek Road, Conway-Wallrose Road, Hemmerle
Road, Hoenig Road, Lovi Road and Wallrose Heights-Golden Grove Road.
STREET, LOCAL — Any public street not defined herein as an arterial or a
collector street.
STREET, PRIVATE — A street, including the entire private right-of-way, that
is privately owned and maintained and that is intended for private, rather
than public, use.
STREET, PUBLIC — A public right-of-way dedicated and open for public
use that has been adopted by the Borough, county, commonwealth or other
governmental body.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
STRUCTURE, HEIGHT OF — See "height of structure."
STRUCTURE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming structure."
SUBDIVISION — The division of a lot, tract or parcel of land by any means
into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other division of land, including
any changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels
of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access
or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUPPLY YARD — A commercial establishment engaged in storing and
selling building supplies, industrial supplies or feed and grain primarily to
businesses, rather than the general public.
SURFACE AREA OF SIGN — See § 180-85C of this chapter for the definition.
SURVEYOR — A professional surveyor registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
SWIMMING POOL — Any body of water or receptacle for water having a
depth at any point greater than two feet and a surface area greater than
100 square feet, used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:467
and constructed, installed or maintained outside any building, including
aboveground and in-ground swimming pools.
SWIMMING POOL, COMMUNITY — A swimming pool owned and
maintained by a community club, condominium association or homeowners'
association that provides recreation for the residents of the neighborhood
or residential development in which it is located.
TAVERN — See "bar or tavern."
TEMPORARY CONSTRUCTION TRAILER — See "construction trailer,
temporary."
TEMPORARY USE OR STRUCTURE — Any use or structure that is intended
to be used either on a seasonal basis, during the time of construction and
completion of an approved development or for any other period of time
that is six months or less, including, but not limited to, tents, air-supported
structures, bleachers, portable bandstands, reviewing stands, mobile office
units, construction trailers, model homes or sales offices and similar uses or
structures.
TENTATIVE APPROVAL — Approval prerequisite to final approval of a
planned residential development (PRD) granted by Borough Council in
accordance with Article X of this chapter.
THROUGH LOT — See "lot, through."
TOWNHOUSE — See Subsection L under the definition of "dwelling types."
TRAFFIC IMPACT STUDY — A report prepared by a qualified traffic
engineer utilizing the manuals and methodologies of the Institute of
Transportation Engineers (ITE) to analyze:
TRANSITIONAL DWELLING — See Subsection M under the definition of
"dwelling types."
TRIPLEX — See Subsection D under the definition of "dwelling types."
TRUCK AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT RENTAL, SALES AND SERVICE — An
establishment engaged in the rental, sale and/or service of vehicles in
excess of 26,000 pounds gross vehicle weight (GVW) and/or any other heavy
A. Projected traffic volumes associated with a proposed development;
Inventory of existing roadway and traffic conditions in the vicinity of
the site, including traffic controls, peak hour and average daily traffic,
planned roadway improvements by others, lane widths and roadway
conditions;
B.
Existing and future levels of service of streets, intersections and
driveways in the immediate vicinity of the plan with and without the
proposed development; access to the site utilizing PennDOT criteria
and on-site circulation (pedestrian and vehicular) and traffic controls;
and
C.
Recommendations for mitigating negative impacts and maximizing
positive impacts.
D.
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:468
equipment, including, but not limited to, construction or farm equipment,
whether or not the equipment is classified as a "motor vehicle."
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility to accommodate the fueling, routine
maintenance and storage of trucks and other motorized equipment and
trailers and that may provide warehousing and transfer facilities as
accessory uses.
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — See Subsection C under the definition of
"dwelling types."
TYPES AND CLASSES OF SIGNS — See definitions for various types and
classes of signs in Article XIV.
UNREGULATED YARD AREA — An area not located within a building and
not located in a setback and/or yard established by this chapter.[Added
5-24-2016 by Ord. No. 456]
USE — The purpose, business or activity for which any land or structure is
utilized.
USE BY SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use authorized by this chapter that may
be granted only by the Zoning Hearing Board following a public hearing
subject to express standards and criteria contained in this chapter.
USE, NONCONFORMING — See "nonconforming use."
VARIANCE — A departure from the specific regulations of this chapter
that may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
criteria established by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act
247 of 1968, as amended)98 for a particular piece of property that, because
of special circumstances applicable to it, cannot be developed in compliance
with the literal terms of this chapter without undue physical hardship.
VEHICLE ACCESSORIES SALES AND INSTALLATION — An establishment
engaged in the retail sales and installation of accessories for trucks,
automobiles and motorcycles, including but not limited to such items as
tires, hubcaps, mirrors, seat covers, floor mats, tonneau covers, truck caps,
windshield wipers, trim packages, running boards and the like, but not
including any mechanical parts.
VEHICLE RENTAL, SALES AND SERVICE — The rental, sales and service
of automobiles, motorcycles and trucks under 26,000 pounds gross vehicle
weight (GVW), but not including any heavy equipment or any other vehicle
or equipment that is not classified as a "motor vehicle" under the
Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code.99
VEHICLE REPAIR GARAGE — A building, or part thereof, used for the
servicing and repair of motor vehicles, including engine overhaul, body
work and the recapping/retreading of tires and where all storage of parts
and dismantled vehicles and all repair work are conducted entirely inside a
completely enclosed building as defined by this chapter.
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
99.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq. for the Vehicle Code.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:469
VETERINARY CLINIC — An establishment where animals are examined
and treated by veterinarians and which may include indoor kennels for
temporary boarding of animals during treatment.
VIEWING BOOTHS — Booths, stalls, partitioned portions of a room,
cubicles, compartments, rooms or other enclosures that are available to
members of the public, patrons or members for viewing 1) films, movies,
videos or visual reproduction of any kind depicting or describing nudity or
sexual conduct or 2) persons who appear in a state of nudity or who offer
performances or presentations characterized by the exposure of nudity or
by sexual conduct, as defined by this chapter.
WAREHOUSING AND DISTRIBUTION — A building used for the storage
and handling of freight or merchandise, but not including the maintenance
or fueling of commercial vehicles. Warehousing that is incidental to retail
sales and that does not constitute in excess of 30% of the total floor area of
the retail establishment shall be excluded from this definition.
WELL — A bore hole drilled or being drilled as part of oil and gas operations
for the purpose of, or to be used for, producing, extracting or injecting gas,
petroleum or another liquid related to oil and gas production or storage,
including brine disposal, but excluding a bore hole drilled to produce
potable water.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
WELL HEAD (WELL BORE) — The precise point of entry into the ground
where drilling takes place including the structure that is placed over the
opening upon completion of the well and that is maintained during
production.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
WELL PAD — The disturbed area of the well site occupied by the well head,
all drilling equipment and the surface facilities, structures and equipment
incidental to the oil and gas operations, but not including the access
road.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
WELL SITE — The area occupied by all equipment or facilities necessary for
or incidental to drilling, production or plugging a well, including, but not
limited to the access road, the well pad, tanks, meters, storage tanks and
impoundments.[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
WHOLESALE BUSINESS — An establishment engaged in selling
merchandise to retailers, institutional, commercial or professional business
customers or other wholesalers, rather than to the general public, or acting
as a broker for such merchandise sales.
WIDTH OF LOT — See "lot width."
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, HEIGHT OF THE — The distance measured from
the natural grade or finished grade to the tip of the rotor blade at its highest
point.[Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 423]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, PERSONAL — A wind energy conversion system
that has a rated capacity of not more than 60 kW that converts wind energy
into electricity, consisting of a wind turbine, a tower and associated control
or conversion electronics, including collection, distribution and storage
equipment, intended for private use to reduce on-site consumption of utility
§ 180-7 ECONOMY CODE § 180-7
178:470
power or supplement or replace utility power.[Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
WIND ENERGY SYSTEM, RATED CAPACITY OF — The maximum rated
output of electric power production equipment specified by the
manufacturer and typically found on a nameplate on the equipment.[Added
11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 423]
WIND TURBINE — A device consisting of a rotor with two or more blades
that converts kinetic wind energy into rotational energy that drives an
electrical generator.[Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 423]
YARD — A required open space located on a lot that is unobstructed by
any portion of a principal structure, other than certain projections expressly
permitted by this chapter.
YARD, FRONT — A yard extending between the side lot lines across the full
lot width from the front lot line to a line parallel to, or concentric with, the
front lot line known as the "front building line," the minimum horizontal
distance required by this chapter.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending between the side yard lines parallel to the
rear lot line and being the minimum horizontal distance from the rear lot
line required by this chapter.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending from the required front building line to the
rear lot line parallel to the side lot line, the minimum horizontal distance
from the side lot line required by this chapter.
ZONING AMENDMENT — A change to the text of this chapter or to the
Zoning District Map proposed for adoption by Borough Council pursuant to
the procedures specified in this chapter.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — A document issued by the Zoning Officer stating
that the proposed use of a particular structure, building or lot conforms
to the requirements of this chapter and any conditions attached to the
approval in the case of a conditional use or use by special exception.
ZONING DISTRICT — An area accurately defined as to boundaries and
location on the Zoning District Map and within which area only certain
types of land uses are permitted and within which other types of land uses
are excluded, as set forth in this chapter.
ZONING DISTRICT MAP — The official map delineating the zoning districts
of Economy Borough, Beaver County, Pennsylvania, together with all
amendments subsequently adopted which is incorporated in and made a
part of this chapter by reference thereto.
ZONING HEARING BOARD — The Zoning Hearing Board of the Borough of
Economy, Beaver County, Pennsylvania.
ZONING OFFICER — That person appointed by the Economy Borough
Council and charged with the responsibility of administering and enforcing
this chapter.
§ 180-7 WATER § 180-7
178:471

ARTICLE III
District Regulations
§ 180-8. Zoning District Map.
§ 180-9. Zoning districts.
The Borough is divided into the districts set forth by this chapter and as
shown by the district boundaries on the Official Zoning District Map. The
zoning districts are:
R-A Rural Agricultural District
R-1 Restricted Residential District
R-2 Suburban Residential District
R-3 Limited Residential District
C-1 General Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
§ 180-10. District boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on the
Official Zoning District Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. The Borough is hereby divided into zoning districts, as shown on the
Official Zoning District Map, that, together with all explanatory matter
thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of
this chapter.
B. The Official Zoning District Map shall be identified by the signature of
the Chairman of Borough Council, attested to by the Borough Secretary
and certified by the Borough Engineer and shall bear the seal of the
Borough under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the
Official Zoning District Map referred to in Article III of Ordinance
Number 417, as amended, of Economy Borough, Beaver County,
Pennsylvania," together with the date of adoption of this chapter.
C. All amendments affecting district boundaries shall be noted on the
Official Zoning District Map by the Borough Engineer, including the
date of adoption, and shall be attested to by the Borough Secretary.
D. No changes of any nature shall be made in the Official Zoning District
Map or matter shown thereof except in conformity with the procedure
set forth in this chapter. Any unauthorized change of whatever kind by
any person shall be considered a violation of this chapter and
punishable as provided in Article XVII of this chapter.
E. The Official Zoning District Map, that shall be located in the Borough
Municipal Building, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning
status of land and water areas, buildings and other structures in the
Borough.
§ 180-8 WATER § 180-10
178:473
§ 180-11. General district regulations.
The following regulations shall apply in all zoning districts:
A. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow the center lines of
streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such center
lines.
B. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow platted lot lines
shall be construed as following such lot lines.
C. District boundaries indicated as appearing to follow municipal
boundaries shall be construed as following municipal boundaries.
D. District boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to be midway between the main tracks.
E. District boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streams, rivers or other bodies of water shall be construed to
follow center lines and, in the event of change in the location of
streams, rivers and other bodies of water, shall be construed as moving
with the actual body of water and following the center line.
F. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official Zoning District Map
shall be determined by the scale of the map.
A. In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, any use not specifically listed as an
authorized use in the zoning district shall not be permitted in that
zoning district.
B. In the R-A, C-1 and I Districts, any use not specifically listed in the
authorized uses for the zoning district shall not be permitted in that
zoning district, unless such use is authorized by the Zoning Hearing
Board as a use by special exception in accordance with the applicable
express standards and criteria for "comparable uses not specifically
listed" in § 180-66M of this chapter.
C. In all zoning districts where single-family dwellings or two-family
dwellings are an authorized use or are a legally nonconforming use, the
single-family dwelling or two-family dwelling shall be the only principal
structure on the lot, except in an approved planned residential
development (PRD) where single-family dwellings or two-family
dwellings may be authorized on the same lot with other single-family
dwellings or two-family dwellings.
D. In the zoning districts where such uses are authorized by this chapter,
two or more multifamily or nonresidential buildings may occupy the
same lot, provided each building can independently meet the applicable
area and bulk regulations and parking requirements to accommodate
the possibility of subdivision of the property in the future to separate
the buildings.
§ 180-10 ECONOMY CODE § 180-11
178:474
E. In the C-1 and I Districts, two or more authorized uses may occupy the
same building, provided all applicable area and bulk regulations and
parking requirements for each of the uses can be met on the lot.
F. In all zoning districts, all accessory structures shall be located on the
same lot with the principal structure to which they are accessory. Any
accessory structure shall not be built unless or until the principal
structure it serves exists on the lot.
§ 180-11 WATER § 180-11
178:475

ARTICLE IV
R-A Rural Agricultural District
§ 180-12. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to preserve productive agricultural land
resources and to provide for low-density single-family residential
development that will be compatible with agricultural pursuits and will
preserve natural features and to provide for accessory uses and compatible
public and semipublic uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception.
§ 180-13. Authorized uses.
In the R-A Rural Agricultural District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Agriculture, subject to § 180-75.
(b) Commercial greenhouse.
(c) Essential services.
(d) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(e) Impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas operations,
subject to § 180-78.1. [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440100]
(f) Oil and gas operations, subject to § 180-78.1. [Added
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(g) Passive recreation.
(h) Pet grooming.
(i) Public buildings.
(j) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Agricultural sales, subject to § 180-75.
(b) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(c) Keeping of domestic pets.
(d) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 180-78.
(e) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
100. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(1)(e) through (h) as Subsection A(1)(g) through (j), respectively.
§ 180-12 WATER § 180-13
178:477
(f) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to § 180-70.
(g) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts, subject to
§ 180-70.
(h) Private stable, subject to § 180-75.
(i) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(j) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 180-74.
(k) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, high-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Active recreation, low-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(c) Animal shelter, subject to § 180-66W.
(d) Bed-and-breakfast, subject to § 180-66D.
(e) Boarding stable or riding academy, subject to § 180-66F.
(f) Communications tower, subject to § 180-66K.
(g) Community club or community swimming pool, subject to
§ 180-66L.
(h) Compressor station, subject to § 180-66OO. [Added
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440101]
(i) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(j) Golf course; golf or country club, subject to § 180-66R.
(k) Group-care facility, subject to § 180-66S.
(l) Hospital, subject to § 180-66U.
(m) Mineral removal, subject to § 180-66Y.
(n) Mobile home park, subject to § 180-66AA.
(o) Oil and gas wells, subject to § 180-66BB.
(p) Personal-care boarding home, subject to § 180-66S.
101. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
B(1)(h) through (q) as Subsection B(1)(i) through (r), respectively.
§ 180-13 ECONOMY CODE § 180-13
178:478
§ 180-14. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-A Rural Agricultural District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI:
(q) Sportsmen's club, subject to § 180-66HH.
(r) Transitional dwelling, subject to § 180-66S.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Private use helipad, subject to § 180-66EE.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Cemetery, subject to § 180-66H.
(b) Churches, subject to § 180-66I.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(d) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 180-66M.
(e) Day-care center or preschool facility in a church or school,
subject to § 180-66N.
(f) Kennel, subject to § 180-66W.
(g) Public utility building or structure, subject to § 180-66GG.
(h) Schools (public or private), subject to § 180-66I.
(i) Temporary use or structure other than a construction trailer,
model home or sales office, subject to § 180-66II.
(j) Veterinary clinics, subject to § 180-66MM.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Family day-care home, subject to § 180-66P.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 180-66T.
(c) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
(d) Accessory structures in excess of 15 feet in height, subject to
§ 180-66PP. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
A. Minimum lot area:
§ 180-13 WATER § 180-14
178:479
(6) All other principal uses: two acres (87,120 square feet).
(1) Agriculture: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(2) Boarding stable or riding academy: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(3) Mobile home park: 10 acres (435,600 square feet).
(4) Private stable or kennel: five acres (217,800 square feet).
(5) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(b) With public sewers: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers: 150 feet.
(b) With public sewers: 100 feet.
(2) All other principal uses: 200 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 15%.
D. Minimum front yard:
(1) Principal and accessory structure: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 70 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 180-70C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Dwellings: 25 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 30 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 180-70C.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 180-70.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 180-71.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) Accessory farm structures: 75 feet.
§ 180-14 ECONOMY CODE § 180-14
178:480
§ 180-15. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-16. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-17. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-18. Storage.
See § 180-76.
(3) All other accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 180-72.
§ 180-14 WATER § 180-18
178:481

ARTICLE V
R-1 Restricted Residential District
§ 180-19. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to protect agricultural uses and preserve
natural features and resources while encouraging low-density single-family
residential development suited to the natural conditions and to provide for
accessory uses and compatible public and semipublic uses as conditional
uses or uses by special exception.
§ 180-20. Authorized uses.
In the R-1 Restricted Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(b) The keeping of domestic pets.
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 180-78.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to § 180-70.
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts, subject to
§ 180-70.
(g) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(h) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 180-74.
(i) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
§ 180-19 WATER § 180-20
178:483
§ 180-21. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-1 Restricted Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI:
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, low-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Community club or community swimming pool, subject to
§ 180-66L.
(c) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(d) Golf course; golf or country club, subject to § 180-66R.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Churches, subject to § 180-66I.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
on an existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(c) Day-care center or preschool facility in a church or school,
subject to § 180-66N.
(d) Public utility building or structure, subject to § 180-66GG.
(e) Schools (public or private), subject to § 180-66I.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Family day-care home, subject to § 180-66P.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 180-66T.
(c) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
(d) Accessory structures in excess of 15 feet in height, subject to
§ 180-66PP. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling: one acre (43,560 square feet).
(2) All other principal uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
§ 180-20 ECONOMY CODE § 180-21
178:484
§ 180-22. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-23. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-24. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-25. Storage.
See § 180-76.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
D. Minimum front yard:
(1) Principal and accessory structures: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 75 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: see § 180-70C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Dwellings: 20 feet.
(b) All other principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: See § 180-70C.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 180-70.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 180-71.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) All other accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 180-72.
§ 180-21 WATER § 180-25
178:485

ARTICLE VI
R-2 Suburban Residential District
§ 180-26. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to encourage single-family development at
suburban densities in locations in the Borough where utilities and
transportation facilities exist or are anticipated in the future and to provide
for accessory uses and compatible public and semipublic uses as conditional
uses and uses by special exception.
§ 180-27. Authorized uses.
In the R-2 Suburban Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(b) The keeping of domestic pets.
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 180-78.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to § 180-70.
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts, subject to
§ 180-70.
(g) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(h) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 180-74.
(i) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
§ 180-26 WATER § 180-27
178:487
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, low-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Community club or community swimming pool, subject to
§ 180-66L.
(c) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(d) Hospital, subject to § 180-66U.
(e) Nursing home, subject to § 180-66U.
(f) Oil and gas operations and impoundments used exclusively for
oil and gas operations, subject to § 180-66BB. [Amended
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(g) Planned residential development (PRD), subject to Article X.
(h) Private club, subject to § 180-66DD.
(i) Transitional development, subject to § 180-66JJ.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Cemetery, subject to § 180-66H.
(b) Churches, subject to § 180-66I.
(c) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
on an existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(d) Day-care center or preschool facility in a church or school,
subject to § 180-66N.
(e) Public utility building or structure, subject to § 180-66GG.
(f) Schools (public or private), subject to § 180-66I.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Family day-care home, subject to § 180-66P.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 180-66T.
(c) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
(d) Accessory structures in excess of 15 feet in height, subject to
§ 180-66PP. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 180-27 ECONOMY CODE § 180-28
178:488
§ 180-28. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-2 Suburban Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by Article X
governing planned residential developments (PRDs) or by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers and public water: one acre (43,560
square feet).
(b) With public sewers and on-site water: 0.57 acre (25,000 square
feet).
(c) With public sewers and public water: 0.46 acre (20,000 square
feet).
(2) All other principal uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 100 feet.
(2) All other principal uses: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: see § 180-70C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family dwellings: 20 feet.
(2) All other principal structures: 50 feet.
(3) Accessory structures: see § 180-70C.
G. Special yard requirements: see § 180-70.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: see § 180-71.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
§ 180-28 WATER § 180-28
178:489
§ 180-29. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-30. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-31. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-32. Storage.
See § 180-76.
J. Height exceptions: see § 180-72.
§ 180-28 ECONOMY CODE § 180-32
178:490
ARTICLE VII
R-3 Limited Residential District
§ 180-33. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide for medium-density single-family
development and to provide multifamily housing opportunities in planned
residential developments in areas served by public sewers and other public
services and to provide for compatible public, semipublic and accessory
uses as conditional uses or uses by special exception.
§ 180-34. Authorized uses.
In the R-3 Limited Residential District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Essential services.
(b) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(c) Passive recreation.
(d) Public buildings.
(e) Single-family dwellings.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(b) The keeping of domestic pets.
(c) No-impact home-based business, subject to § 180-78.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(e) Private garages and storage buildings, subject to § 180-70.
(f) Private residential swimming pools or sports courts, subject to
§ 180-70.
(g) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(h) Temporary construction trailer, model home or sales office,
subject to § 180-74.
(i) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
§ 180-33 WATER § 180-34
178:491
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, low-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Assisted-living facility, subject to § 180-66C.
(c) Community club or community swimming pool, subject to
§ 180-66L.
(d) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(e) Independent living facility, subject to § 180-66C.
(f) Life-care community, subject to § 180-66X.
(g) Nursing home, subject to § 180-66U.
(h) Oil and gas operations and impoundments used exclusively for
oil and gas operations, subject to § 180-66BB. [Amended
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(i) Personal-care boarding home, subject to § 180-66S.
(j) Private club, subject to § 180-66DD.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Churches, subject to § 180-66I.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
on an existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(c) Day-care center or preschool facility in a church or school,
subject to § 180-66N.
(d) Public utility building or structure, subject to § 180-66GG.
(e) Schools (public or private), subject to § 180-66I.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Family day-care home, subject to § 180-66P.
(b) Home occupation, subject to § 180-66T.
(c) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
(d) Accessory structures in excess of 15 feet in height, subject to
§ 180-66PP. [Added 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
§ 180-34 ECONOMY CODE § 180-35
178:492
§ 180-35. Area and bulk regulations.
In the R-3 Limited Residential District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by Article X
governing planned residential developments or by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special exception
contained in Article XI:
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Single-family dwelling:
(a) Without public sewers and public water: one acre (43,560
square feet).
(b) With public sewers and on-site water: 0.57 acre (25,000 square
feet).
(c) With public sewers and public water: 0.46 acre (20,000 square
feet).
(2) All other principal uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width:
(1) Single-family dwelling: 100 feet.
(2) All other principal structures: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 30%.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures: 50 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: see § 180-70C.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Single-family dwellings: 20 feet.
(2) All other principal structures: 50 feet.
(3) Accessory structures: See § 180-70C.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 180-70.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 180-71.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures:
(a) Single-family dwellings: 2 1/2 stories, but no more than 35 feet.
§ 180-35 WATER § 180-35
178:493
§ 180-36. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-37. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-38. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-39. Storage.
See § 180-76.
(b) All others: three stories, but no more than 45 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 15 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 180-72.
§ 180-35 ECONOMY CODE § 180-39
178:494
ARTICLE VIII
C-1 General Commercial District
§ 180-40. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to provide retail shopping and service
facilities that serve the needs of the general community and are located on
arterial and collector streets in appropriate locations to allow convenient
access and to minimize traffic impacts on neighborhoods and local streets.
§ 180-41. Authorized uses.
In the C-1 General Commercial District, only the following uses are
authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Antiques, interior decorating.
(b) Apparel and accessories store.
(c) Appliance or home furnishing store.
(d) Art, book, stationery store.
(e) Automobile service station.
(f) Bakery shop, including processing primarily for on-site sale.
(g) Bar or tavern.
(h) Beverage distributor.
(i) Business or professional offices.
(j) Business services.
(k) Candy or ice cream store, including processing primarily for
on-site sale.
(l) Card and gift shop.
(m) Catering service, including rental hall.
(n) Church.
(o) Commercial greenhouse.
(p) Commercial school.
(q) Contracting business.
(r) Convenience store.
§ 180-40 WATER § 180-41
178:495
(s) Delicatessen.
(t) Drugstore.
(u) Dry-cleaning pickup store.
(v) Educational studio.
(w) Essential services.
(x) Financial institution.
(y) Fitness center.
(z) Florist shop.
(aa) Food store.
(bb) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(cc) Funeral home.
(dd) General merchandise store.
(ee) Grocery store.
(ff) Health club.
(gg) Hobby shop.
(hh) Impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas operations,
subject to § 180-78.1. [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440102]
(ii) Indoor entertainment.
(jj) Laundromat.
(kk) Medical clinic.
(ll) Medical offices.
(mm) Motel/hotel.
(nn) Multifamily dwellings.
(oo) Newsstand.
(pp) Oil and gas operations, subject to § 180-78.1. [Added
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440103]
(qq) Passive recreation.
(rr) Personal services.
102. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(1)(hh) through (nn) as Subsection A(1)(ii) through (oo), respectively.
103. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(1)(oo) through (ddd) as Subsection A(1)(qq) through (fff), respectively.
§ 180-41 ECONOMY CODE § 180-41
178:496
(ss) Pet grooming.
(tt) Pet services.
(uu) Pharmacy.
(vv) Places of assembly.
(ww) Private club.
(xx) Public buildings.
(yy) Public utility building or structure.
(zz) Restaurant, carry-out.
(aaa) Restaurant, fast-food.
(bbb) Restaurant, sit-down.
(ccc) Retail businesses not otherwise listed herein.
(ddd) Vehicle accessories sales and installation.
(eee) Vehicle rental sales and service.
(fff) Video store, excluding adult video store.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Drive-through facilities, subject to § 180-73.
(b) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(c) No-impact home-based business or home occupation in a
dwelling that is a nonconforming use.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(e) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(f) Temporary construction trailer or sales office, subject to
§ 180-74.
(g) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, low-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Communications tower, subject to § 180-66K.
(c) Day-care center, subject to § 180-66N.
§ 180-41 WATER § 180-41
178:497
§ 180-42. Area and bulk regulations.
In the C-1 General Commercial District, all uses shall be subject to the
following regulations, except as they may be modified by the express
standards and criteria for the specific conditional uses and uses by special
exception contained in Article XI:
(d) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(e) Group-care facility, subject to § 180-66S.
(f) Mini warehouse and self-storage buildings, subject to
§ 180-66Z.
(g) Nursing home, subject to § 180-66U.
(h) Oil and gas wells, subject to § 180-66BB.
(i) Personal-care boarding home, subject to § 180-66S.
(j) Public parking lot or public parking garage, subject to
§ 180-66FF.
(k) Transitional dwelling, subject to § 180-66S.
(2) Accessory uses: none.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Car wash, subject to § 180-66G.
(b) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
on an existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(c) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 180-66M.
(d) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer,
model home or sales office, subject to § 180-66II.
(e) Veterinary clinic, subject to § 180-66MM.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
A. Minimum lot area: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
C. Maximum lot coverage: 70%.
D. Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
§ 180-41 ECONOMY CODE § 180-42
178:498
§ 180-43. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-44. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-45. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-46. Storage.
See § 180-76.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) All principal and accessory structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 50 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 25 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) All principal and accessory structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 50 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 10 feet.
G. Minimum distance between buildings (where two or more buildings are
on the same lot): 20 feet.
H. Special yard requirements: See § 180-70.
I. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 180-71.
J. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: three stories, but no more than 45 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 20 feet.
K. Height exceptions: See § 180-72.
§ 180-42 WATER § 180-46
178:499

ARTICLE IX
I-1 Industrial District
§ 180-47. Purpose.
The purpose of this district is to encourage development of light industrial
uses in appropriate locations in the Borough, consistent with sound
planning and environmental controls.
§ 180-48. Authorized uses.
In the I-1 Industrial District, only the following uses are authorized:
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Automobile service station.
(b) Beverage bottling and distribution.
(c) Business or professional offices.
(d) Cleaning and dyeing plant.
(e) Commercial greenhouse.
(f) Contracting business.
(g) Contractor's yard.
(h) Day-care center.
(i) Essential services.
(j) Flex space.
(k) Food and related products, packaging, storage and
distribution.
(l) Forestry, subject to § 180-77.
(m) High-technology industries.
(n) Impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas operations,
subject to § 180-78.1. [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440104]
(o) Landscaping contractor.
(p) Light manufacturing, provided all storage and operations are
within a completely enclosed building.
(q) Machine shop.
104. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(1)(n) through (r) as Subsection A(1)(o) through (s), respectively.
§ 180-47 WATER § 180-48
178:501
(r) Mini warehouse or self-storage facilities.
(s) Mobile home sales, service and storage.
(t) Oil and gas operations, subject to § 180-78.1. [Added
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440105]
(u) Packaging and delivery services.
(v) Printing establishment.
(w) Public utility building or structure.
(x) Repair shop.
(y) Research and development, including pilot manufacturing.
(z) Restaurant, carry-out.
(aa) Restaurant, fast-food.
(bb) Restaurant, sit-down.
(cc) Supply yard.
(dd) Vehicle rental, sales and service.
(ee) Vehicle repair garage.
(ff) Warehousing and distribution.
(gg) Wholesale business.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Drive-through facilities, subject to § 180-73.
(b) Fences, subject to § 180-70.
(c) No-impact home-based business or home occupation in a
dwelling that is a nonconforming use.
(d) Off-street parking and loading, subject to Article XIII.
(e) Retail sales of products produced on site.
(f) Signs, subject to Article XIV.
(g) Temporary construction trailer or sales office, subject to
§ 180-74.
(h) Other accessory uses customarily incidental to and on the
same lot with any permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception authorized in this district.
105. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
A(1)(s) through (ee) as Subsection A(1)(u) through (gg), respectively.
§ 180-48 ECONOMY CODE § 180-48
178:502
B. Conditional uses.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Active recreation, high-impact, subject to § 180-66A.
(b) Adult business, subject to § 180-66B.
(c) Billboard, subject to § 180-66E.
(d) Communications tower, subject to § 180-66K.
(e) Compressor station, subject to § 180-66OO. [Added
1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440106]
(f) Fire and emergency medical services, subject to § 180-66Q.
(g) Mineral removal, subject to § 180-66Y.
(h) Natural gas processing plant, subject to § 180-66OO.
[Amended 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(i) Planned industrial park, subject to § 180-66CC.
(j) Truck terminal, subject to § 180-66LL.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Private use helipad, subject to § 180-66EE.
C. Uses by special exception.
(1) Principal uses.
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an existing building or
on an existing public utility storage or transmission structure,
subject to § 180-66J.
(b) Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to § 180-66M.
(c) Equipment storage yard, subject to § 180-66O.
(d) Junkyard, subject to § 180-66V.
(e) Temporary use or structure, other than a construction trailer,
model home or sales office.
(f) Truck and heavy equipment rental, sales and service, subject
to § 180-66KK.
(2) Accessory uses.
(a) Communications antenna mounted on an approved
communications tower, subject to § 180-66J.
106. Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former Subsection
B(1)(e) through (i) as Subsection B(1)(f) through (j), respectively.
§ 180-48 WATER § 180-48
178:503
§ 180-49. Area and bulk regulations.
In the I-1 Industrial District, all uses shall be subject to the following
regulations, except as they may be modified by the express standards
and criteria for the specific conditions uses and uses by special exception
contained in Article XI:
(b) Personal wind energy system. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord.
No. 423]
A. Minimum lot area:
(1) Planned industrial park: five acres (217,800 square feet).
(2) All other uses: one acre (43,560 square feet).
B. Minimum lot width: 200 feet.
C. Distance between buildings (where two or more buildings occupy the
same lot): 20 feet.
D. Minimum front yard: 50 feet.
E. Minimum rear yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 75 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 40 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 20 feet.
F. Minimum side yard:
(1) Principal structures:
(a) Adjoining any R District: 75 feet.
(b) Adjoining all other districts: 20 feet.
(2) Accessory structures: 20 feet.
G. Special yard requirements: See § 180-70.
H. Permitted projections into required yards: See § 180-71.
I. Maximum height:
(1) All principal structures: three stories, but no more than 45 feet.
(2) All accessory structures: one story, but no more than 20 feet.
J. Height exceptions: See § 180-72.
§ 180-48 ECONOMY CODE § 180-50
178:504
§ 180-50. Off-street parking and loading.
See Article XIII.
§ 180-51. Signs.
See Article XIV.
§ 180-52. Buffer areas and landscaping.
See § 180-69.
§ 180-53. Storage.
See § 180-76.
§ 180-50 WATER § 180-53
178:505

ARTICLE X
Planned Residential Development
§ 180-54. Purpose.
§ 180-55. Applicability and relationship to other ordinances.
The provisions of this article for approval of a planned residential
development (PRD) shall be a modification to and in lieu of procedures and
criteria for approvals otherwise required in this chapter and Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code. Failure to comply
with the provisions of this article with respect to a recorded development
plan shall be deemed to constitute a violation of this chapter.
§ 180-56. Site area, ownership, use and density requirements.
A. The purpose of these planned residential development (PRD)
regulations is to permit residential development that is more creative
and imaginative than is generally possible under conventional zoning
district controls and subdivision requirements. Further, these
regulations are intended to promote more economical and efficient use
of the land while providing a compatible blend of housing types,
amenities and community facilities of high quality, oriented to the
specific development site and preserving the natural scenic qualities of
open space.
B. Each planned residential development (PRD) should be designed to
accomplish the following:
(1) A maximum choice in the types of living environments.
(2) Open space and recreation areas directly related to the intended
users.
(3) A pattern of development that preserves trees, outstanding natural
topography and geological features and prevents soil erosion.
(4) A creative approach to the use of land and related physical
development.
(5) An efficient use of land, resulting in smaller networks of utilities
and streets and lower housing costs.
(6) An environment of stable character in harmony with surrounding
development.
(7) A more desirable environment than would be possible through the
strict application of other articles of this Chapter 180, Zoning.
A. Site area. In all cases, the minimum site required for a planned
residential development (PRD) shall be 25 contiguous acres. Public
easements or rights-of-way and public or private streets shall not be
§ 180-54 WATER § 180-56
178:507
construed as an interruption or division of a site for the purposes of a
planned residential development (PRD).
B. Site ownership. The site proposed for a planned residential
development (PRD) shall be under single ownership and control. Prior
to submitting an application for tentative approval, the applicant shall
demonstrate that he is the landowner, as defined by this chapter. Legal,
as well as equitable, ownership shall be demonstrated coincident with
approval of the final development plan.
C. Dwelling units authorized.
(1) R-2 District.
(a) In the R-2 District, the following dwelling types may be
included in a planned residential development (PRD):
[1] Single-family detached dwellings.
[2] Two-family dwellings.
[3] Triplexes.
[4] Fourplexes.
[5] Townhouses.
(b) In the R-2 Zoning District, a minimum of 30% of the total
number of dwelling units in the planned residential
development (PRD) shall be single-family detached dwellings.
In the case where a planned residential development (PRD)
adjoins an established neighborhood of existing single-family
detached dwellings, the single-family detached dwellings
proposed in the planned residential development (PRD) shall
be located along all common property lines with the
established neighborhood.
(2) C-1 District.
(a) In the C-1 District, the following dwelling types may be
included in a planned residential development (PRD):
[1] Single-family detached dwellings.
[2] Duplex dwellings.
[3] Triplexes.
[4] Fourplexes.
[5] Townhouses.
[6] Garden apartments.
§ 180-56 ECONOMY CODE § 180-56
178:508
(b) The planned residential development (PRD) may include one or
more of the above-listed dwelling types and there shall be no
minimum percentage of single-family dwellings required.
D. Recreational and other common facilities for the residents. In addition
to the residential uses permitted in a planned residential development
(PRD), recreation facilities designed for the use of the residents of the
planned residential development (PRD) shall be required but shall not
be limited to hiking, biking or exercise trails; tennis, paddle tennis,
basketball, volleyball or other playing courts; swimming pool and
related facilities; golf course or putting greens; community building for
meetings and social activities; picnic pavilions; other passive and lowimpact
active recreational uses. Borough Council shall determine
whether the proposed facilities are appropriate to the leisure and
recreational needs and interests of the proposed residents of the
planned residential development (PRD) based on the types of dwelling
units proposed.
E. Maximum dwelling unit density. Regardless of whether a planned
residential development (PRD) is comprised of a mix of dwelling unit
types or a single type of dwelling unit, the maximum dwelling unit
density authorized in the R-2 District shall be four units per acre, and in
the C-1 District, the maximum dwelling unit density authorized shall be
six units per acre.
F. Minimum lot area. There shall be no minimum lot area required for
individual dwelling units, provided the dwelling unit density for the
planned residential development (PRD) site does not exceed the
maximum dwelling unit density authorized by this article and all other
applicable requirements of this article are met.
G. Minimum building setback on the perimeter of the planned residential
development (PRD) site. All principal and accessory structures and offstreet
parking shall be located at least 50 feet from the perimeter
boundary of the planned residential development (PRD) site.
H. Distance between buildings.
R-2 Districts
(feet)
C-1 Districts
(feet)
Front to front 60 50
Front to side 40 30
Side to side 15 10
Rear to rear 50 40
Front to rear 60 40
I. Modifications to otherwise applicable zoning and subdivision
regulations.
§ 180-56 WATER § 180-56
178:509
§ 180-57. Access and availability of public services.
(1) The Design and Construction Standards of Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, shall apply to all public
improvements proposed in a planned residential development
(PRD) unless a waiver or modification is granted by Borough
Council in accordance with the procedure for granting waivers and
modifications specified in Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development.
(2) Except for maximum dwelling unit density, perimeter setback and
maximum building height, any of the other requirements of this
article and the underlying zoning district classification may be
modified by Borough Council in granting tentative approval to a
planned residential development (PRD), if Borough Council
determines that the requested modification or modifications will
contribute to a more beneficial use of the site, will not be contrary
to the public interest and are warranted owing to physical
circumstances or conditions unique to the particular property.
(3) All requests for modification shall be in writing and shall
accompany and be a part of the application for tentative and/or
final approval. Such written request shall specify the ordinance
section from which a modification is requested and shall state the
grounds for the request, the justification for the request and
whether it is the minimum modification necessary to carry out the
proposed plan.
(4) Whenever a request for modification is granted or denied, the
reasons for such grant or denial shall be stated within the official
written communication to the landowner. The grant of a
modification request may be subject to reasonable conditions
designed to protect the public interest and to promote the purposes
set forth in this article.
A. Access and traffic control.
(1) The principal entrance to the site of a planned residential
development (PRD) shall connect directly to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter. In every planned residential
development (PRD), a secondary means of access shall be provided
that may connect to a local street.
(2) The projected traffic volumes associated with the proposed planned
residential development (PRD) shall be capable of being
accommodated by the adjacent street network. The developer shall
demonstrate, by submission of a traffic impact study, as defined
herein, that the projected traffic from the planned residential
development (PRD) shall not materially increase congestion and
impair safety on adjacent public streets.
§ 180-56 ECONOMY CODE § 180-57
178:510
§ 180-58. Common open space.
(3) Ingress and egress to and from the site shall be designed to comply
with the minimum requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Borough Code. Private streets within the
planned residential development (PRD) site shall be constructed to
Borough specifications for public streets. Internal access driveways
serving the dwelling units shall not be considered private streets
and shall not be subject to Borough construction specifications.
B. Public water and sewer service. All dwelling units and other principal
structures in a planned residential development (PRD) shall be
connected to a public water supply and public sanitary sewer service.
C. Sidewalks and streetlighting.
(1) The developer shall provide sidewalks on at least one side of every
street, whether public or private, within the planned residential
development (PRD) site. Sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with the Borough construction specifications in
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough
Code.
(2) The developer shall provide streetlights at all public street
intersections and at other locations deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer for public safety. Streetlights shall be installed
in accordance with the requirements specified in Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code.
D. Storm drainage.
(1) The developer shall provide a storm drainage system within a
planned residential development (PRD) that shall be of sufficient
size and design to collect, carry off and dispose of all predictable
surface water runoff within the planned residential development
(PRD) and shall be so constructed to conform with the statutes,
ordinances and regulations of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and the stormwater management regulations contained in Chapter
163, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code.
(2) All stormwater management facilities shall be owned and
maintained by the homeowners' association or similar organization
created to own and maintain the common open space within the
planned residential development (PRD). The homeowners'
association documents shall contain provisions assigning the
maintenance schedule that is reviewed and approved by the
Borough Engineer.
A. Areas required.
(1) Common open space shall comprise at least 20% of the total gross
site area of the planned residential development (PRD).
§ 180-57 WATER § 180-58
178:511
(2) Of the required open space area, not more than 50% may be
covered by water.
(3) Recreational facilities or structures and their accessory uses
located in common open space areas shall be considered improved
open space as long as the total impervious surface area constitutes
no more than 5% of the total common open space.
(4) To the extent feasible, steep slopes, streams, lakes, ponds,
woodlands and other environmentally sensitive areas shall be
incorporated into the common open space; however, no more than
50% of the open space area provided shall be in excess of a twentyfive-
percent slope.
(5) Required buffer areas shall be included in the common open space
and shall be maintained in perpetuity by the organization created
to own and maintain the common open space. Restrictive
covenants and/or provisions in the organization's bylaws shall
specify this responsibility.
(6) In the case of three or more dwelling units on a single lot, the open
area surrounding the dwelling units, excluding any open space
within 15 feet of the building walls, may be included in the
calculation of common open space, provided the lot is not proposed
to be further subdivided for fee simple ownership of the individual
units.
B. Protection of common open space. Common open space in a planned
residential development (PRD) shall be protected by adequate
covenants running with the land or by conveyances or dedications. Said
covenants shall restrict the further subdivision of the common open
space. A planned residential development (PRD) shall be approved
subject to the submission of a legal instrument or instruments setting
forth a plan for the permanent preservation, care and maintenance of
such common open space, recreational areas and other facilities owned
in common by an organization established for such purposes. No such
instrument shall be acceptable until approved by Borough Council,
upon recommendation of the Township Solicitor, as to legal form and
effect. In cases where the Borough will not be accepting dedications of
streets, recreation areas or common open spaces, the developer shall
create an organization or trust for ownership and maintenance of the
common open space and common facilities.
C. Common open space maintenance. In the event that the organization
established to own and maintain the common open space, or any
successor thereto, shall at any time after establishment of the final
development plan fail to maintain the common open space, including all
streets, driveways and recreational facilities, in reasonable order and
condition in accordance with the development plan granted final
approval, the Borough may take remedial action to cause the common
open space and common facilities to be properly maintained, as
§ 180-58 ECONOMY CODE § 180-58
178:512
§ 180-59. Buffer areas.
provided for in Section 705(f) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.107
A. Along any perimeter property line separating triplexes, fourplexes,
townhouses or garden apartments in a planned residential development
(PRD) from single-family lots or undeveloped property outside the
planned residential development (PRD) site located in the R-A, R-1, R-2
or R-3 District, a buffer area at least 25 feet in depth as measured from
the property line shall be provided. Within this buffer area, one row of
planting shall be established consisting of a mixture of 70% evergreen
and 30% deciduous trees spaced within a row a minimum of 15 feet
apart measured from the vertical center lines of adjacent trees.
B. Along any perimeter property line of the planned residential
development (PRD) site adjoining property in the C-1 or I-1 District, a
buffer area at least 35 feet in depth as measured from the property line
shall be provided. Within this buffer area, two rows of planting shall be
established consisting of a mixture of 70% evergreen and 30%
deciduous trees spaced within a row a minimum of 15 feet apart
measured from the vertical center lines of adjacent trees. The two rows
shall be staggered in a manner that results in adjacent trees in two
different rows being no more than 10 feet apart measured from the
vertical center lines of the trees.
C. Buffer areas shall not be required along public street rights-of-way.
D. No structures or uses, including but not limited to buildings, accessory
structures, parking spaces, access driveways and lighting devices, shall
be located in the required buffer area, except that fences, active or
passive recreation facilities and stormwater management facilities may
be located in the required buffer area, provided these structures or
uses do not interfere with the spacing of plantings required in the
buffer area and further provided that all plantings are located outside
any stormwater management facility.
E. In the event that existing vegetation and/or existing topography
provides screening that is adequate to meet the intent of the required
buffer area, Borough Council, upon recommendation by the Planning
Commission, may determine that the existing topography and/or
vegetation constitutes all or part of the required buffer area. If such a
determination is made, the applicant may be required to record a
conservation easement of the depth, specified by Borough Council to
guarantee that the existing topography and/or vegetation will not be
disturbed or removed from the approved buffer area.
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10705(f).
§ 180-58 WATER § 180-60
178:513
§ 180-60. Administration and procedure.
The planned residential development (PRD) provisions of this chapter shall
be administered by Borough Council. The Planning Commission shall review
all applications on the basis of the standards specified in this article and
make a recommendation to Borough Council. Borough Council shall
conduct the public hearings required by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code108 and shall have the final authority to approve, approve with
conditions or disapprove a planned residential development (PRD).
A. Preapplication conference.
(1) Prior to filing an application for tentative approval, the applicant or
his representative may meet with Borough staff to obtain
application forms and to discuss application procedures and
applicable ordinance requirements.
(2) In addition, the developer may request a preapplication conference
with the Planning Commission to discuss the conceptual design for
the development of the property and the feasibility and timing of
the application. The applicant shall contact the Borough Zoning
Officer or his or her designated representative at least five
calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission to request a preapplication conference with the
Planning Commission.
(3) The preapplication conference with the Planning Commission is
voluntary, and no formal application or fee is required. This
opportunity is afforded to the developer to obtain information and
guidance before entering into binding commitments or incurring
substantial expenses for plan preparation.
(4) While no formal application is required for a preapplication
conference, the applicant should provide one copy of readily
available information with the request for a preapplication
conference, which information shows the location of the property
and any special features such as streams, floodplains or other
conditions that may affect the development of the property. Readily
available resources that may be used include the deed for the
property, a property survey, the Tax Parcel Maps prepared by the
Beaver County Assessor's Office, USGS Quadrangle Map showing
natural features and topography, the National Flood Insurance
Administration (NFIA) Flood Hazard Boundary Maps, Natural
Resources Conservation Service Maps of soil types and the U.S.
Bureau of Mines coal mine maps.
(5) A preapplication conference shall not constitute formal filing of any
application for approval of a planned residential development
(PRD), shall not bind the Planning Commission to approve any
concept presented in the preapplication conference and shall not
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-60 ECONOMY CODE § 180-60
178:514
protect the application from any subsequent changes in ordinance
provisions adopted between the preapplication conference and the
official date of filing of an application for tentative approval of
a planned residential development (PRD) that may affect the
proposed development under the terms of this chapter.
B. Application for tentative approval. At least 21 calendar days prior to the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission, 13 copies of an
application for tentative approval shall be submitted. The application
shall be in sufficient detail for the Planning Commission to determine
compliance with the standards of this article and shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(1) A legal description of the total tract proposed for development,
including a statement of present and proposed ownership.
(2) A written statement of planning objectives to be achieved by the
planned residential development (PRD) through the particular
approach proposed by the developer. The statement shall include a
description of the character of the proposed development and its
relationship to the immediate area in which it is to be located.
(3) A written statement setting forth the reasons why the proposed
planned residential development (PRD) would be in the public
interest and would be consistent with the Borough's
Comprehensive Plan.
(4) A written statement of the requested modifications to Chapter 192,
Zoning, of the Borough Code and Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development, of the Borough Code otherwise applicable to
the property, if any.
(5) A check made payable to the Beaver County Planning Commission
for the fee required to cover the costs of reviewing the application.
(6) Application filing and review fees, as required by § 180-116 of this
chapter.
(7) A location map that clearly shows the location and area of the site
proposed for development with relation to all lands, buildings and
structures within 200 feet of its boundaries, the location and
distance to existing streets and highways and the names of
landowners of adjacent properties.
(8) A traffic impact study, as defined herein.
(9) A written report from a qualified soils engineer addressing the
site's soil stability and subsurface conditions and the probable
measures necessary, if any, to be considered in the design of the
development and infrastructure, the location of the structures and
the design of the foundations.
§ 180-60 WATER § 180-60
178:515
(10) A set of development plans prepared at a minimum scale of one
inch equals 100 feet or a maximum scale of one inch equals 50 feet,
whichever is practical depending on the size of the site, showing
the following information:
(a) Existing contours at intervals of five feet; watercourses;
floodplains; wetlands; woodlands; soils; steep slopes; and other
natural features.
(b) Proposed lot lines and subdivision plat, if any.
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures
and other improvements, including maximum heights, dwelling
unit types and dwelling unit density. Preliminary building
elevations and architectural renderings for all structures,
other than single-family detached dwellings, shall be provided.
(d) The location and size in acres or square feet of all areas to be
conveyed, dedicated or reserved as common open space.
(e) A tabulation of zoning requirements, including area in steep
slopes, density calculation, setbacks, distance between
buildings, percentage of open space and other applicable
requirements of this article.
(f) The existing and proposed vehicular circulation system of local
and collector streets, including off-street parking areas
required by Article XIII, service areas, loading areas and major
points of access from the planned residential development
(PRD) to public rights-of-way.
(g) The existing and proposed pedestrian circulation system,
including its interrelationship with the vehicular circulation
system and proposed treatment for any points of conflict
between the two systems.
(h) Streetlighting plan, as required by Chapter 163, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Borough Code.
(i) The existing and proposed utility systems, including sanitary
sewers, storm sewers and water, electric, gas and telephone
lines.
(j) A plan showing existing and proposed contours and their
relationship to proposed buildings, structures, highways,
streets, parking areas, walkways and existing woodlands.
(k) A general landscaping plan indicating the treatment and
materials proposed to be used in buffer areas and common
areas on the site.
(l) Any additional information required by Chapter 163,
Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code for a
§ 180-60 ECONOMY CODE § 180-60
178:516
preliminary plat, including application filing and application
review fees.
(11) In the case of development plans that call for development over a
period of years, a schedule for phasing the development shall be
provided. This phasing schedule shall be reviewed annually with
the Planning Commission on the anniversary of tentative approval
or as each phase is completed, whichever occurs first.
C. Review of application.
(1) The planning consultant shall review the application to determine
whether it is complete and properly filed in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter. If the planning consultant determines
that the application is not complete and properly filed, written
notice shall be provided to the applicant within 10 days of the date
of submission specifying the defects in the application and
returning the application to the applicant for resubmission. If a
revised application is resubmitted within 60 days of the date of the
written notice from the planning consultant, another application
filing fee shall not be required. Any application submitted after 60
days shall be considered a new application and shall be
accompanied by the required application filing fee and application
review fee.
(2) If the planning consultant determines that the application is
complete and properly filed, the date that the application is first
reviewed by the Planning Commission at its next regular meeting
shall constitute the official date of filing. Within 15 days of receipt
of a complete and properly filed application, the Borough Secretary
shall transmit a copy to the Beaver County Planning Commission
for review and comment and shall refer the application to the
Borough Planning Commission for review and recommendation.
(3) If, during review by the Planning Commission, the applicant revises
the application to address comments from the Planning
Commission or to demonstrate compliance with this chapter, a new
application shall not be required. If, during review by the Planning
Commission, the applicant initiates substantial revisions to the
application that are not the result of Planning Commission
comments and that are not mandated to demonstrate compliance
with this chapter, the applicant shall withdraw the application and
submit a new application that shall be subject to the payment of the
required application filing fee and application review fee.
(4) In the event that the Planning Commission tables the application to
allow the applicant to address comments or demonstrate
compliance with this chapter, the Planning Commission may
request that the applicant grant Borough Council an extension of
the sixty-day deadline required by § 180-60D to hold the public
hearing, if necessary. If the applicant fails to grant such an
§ 180-60 WATER § 180-60
178:517
extension, the Planning Commission may recommend disapproval
of the application based on the deficiencies identified. In the case of
a recommendation for disapproval, the Planning Commission shall
cite the specific requirements of this chapter that have not been
met.
(5) The Planning Commission shall forward a written recommendation
on the application for tentative approval to Borough Council in time
for Borough Council's public hearing required by § 180-60D of this
chapter.
D. Public hearing.
(1) Within 60 days following the official date of filing of an application
for tentative approval of a planned residential development (PRD)
that contains all of the required documentation, a public hearing
pursuant to public notice shall be held by Borough Council.
(2) In addition to the public notice, the Borough shall send notices of
the public hearing by regular mail at least 14 days, but no more
than 21 days, prior to the public hearing to all residents and/or
landowners within 300 feet of the site for which the application for
tentative approval of a planned residential development (PRD) has
been submitted. It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to
provide the names and addresses of said residents and/or
landowners with the application for tentative approval.
(3) The public hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed in
Article IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,109 and
all references to the Zoning Hearing Board in Article IX shall apply
to Borough Council. The public hearing or hearings shall be
concluded within 60 days of the first hearing.
(4) The Borough may offer mediation as an aid in completing these
proceedings, provided that, in exercising such an option, the
Borough and the mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and
follow the procedures set forth in § 180-104 of this chapter.
E. Tentative approval.
(1) Within 60 days following the conclusion of the public hearing, or
within one 180 days after the official date of filing, whichever
occurs first, Borough Council shall, by official written
communication, either:
(a) Grant tentative approval of the development plan, as
submitted;
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10901 through 10918.
§ 180-60 ECONOMY CODE § 180-60
178:518
§ 180-61. Criteria for tentative approval.
Borough Council shall grant tentative approval if, and only if, all applicable
requirements of this article are met and all of the following criteria are met:
(b) Grant tentative approval of the development plan, subject to
specified conditions not included in the development plan as
submitted; or
(c) Deny tentative approval.
(2) Failure to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. In the
event, however, that tentative approval is granted subject to
conditions, the landowner may, within 30 days after receiving a
copy of the official written communication of Borough Council,
notify Borough Council of his refusal to accept all said conditions,
in which case Borough Council shall be deemed to have denied
tentative approval of the development plan. In the event that the
landowner does not, within said period, notify Borough Council of
his refusal to accept all said conditions, tentative approval of the
development plan, with all said conditions, shall stand as granted.
A. Compatibility. The proposed application for tentative approval complies
with all standards, restrictions, criteria, requirements, regulations and
procedures of this article; preserves the community development
objectives of this chapter; and is found by Borough Council to be
compatible with the public interest and consistent with the Borough's
Comprehensive Plan.
B. Modifications proposed. Where the proposed application for tentative
approval provides standards that vary from this chapter and Chapter
163, Subdivision and Land Development, otherwise applicable to the
subject property, such departure shall promote protection of the
environment and public health, safety and welfare and shall be in the
public interest.
C. Common open space. The proposals for the maintenance and
conservation of any proposed common open space are reliable and
meet the standards of this chapter and the amount and extent of
improvements within the common open space are appropriate with
respect to the purpose, use and type of the residential development
proposed.
D. Physical design. The physical design of the proposed development plan
adequately provides for public services, traffic facilities and parking,
light, air, recreation and visual enjoyment.
E. Relationship to surrounding area. The proposed development plan is
beneficially related to the immediate area in which it is proposed to be
located.
§ 180-60 WATER § 180-61
178:519
§ 180-62. Application for final approval.
Unless extended by Borough Council for good cause shown, the developer
shall submit 13 copies of the application for final approval within one
year after the development plan is granted tentative approval by Borough
Council. The final application shall consist of detailed plans for any phase
or section of the development plan. No building permit shall be issued
until final approval has been granted by Borough Council for the phase or
section in which the proposed development is located. final approval for any
phase or section shall expire if construction is not initiated for the phase or
section within one year of the date of final approval of the phase or section
by Borough Council, unless extended by Borough Council for good cause
shown.
F. Environmental protection. The proposed development plan will afford
adequate protection of natural watercourses, wetlands, topsoil,
woodlands, steep slopes and other natural features and will prevent
erosion, landslides, siltation and flooding.
G. Phasing. In the case of a development plan that proposes development
over a period of years, the terms and conditions thereof are sufficient to
protect the interests of the public and of the residents of the planned
residential development (PRD) in the integrity of the final development
plan.
A. Review of application by planning consultant and Planning Commission.
(1) The planning consultant shall review the application to determine
whether it is complete and properly filed in accordance with all
requirements of this chapter. If the planning consultant determines
that the application is not complete and properly filed, written
notice shall be provided to the applicant within 10 days of the date
of submission specifying the defects in the application and
returning the application to the applicant for resubmission.
(2) If the planning consultant determines that the application is
complete and properly filed, the date that the application is
received by the Borough shall constitute the official date of filing.
Within 15 days of receipt of a complete and properly filed
application, the Borough Secretary shall refer the application to
the Borough Planning Commission for review and recommendation
and to the Beaver County Planning Commission for review and
comment subject to payment of the required fee.
(3) Within 30 days of receipt of a complete and properly filed
application for final approval, the Planning Commission shall
forward a written recommendation to Borough Council.
(4) A public hearing on an application for final approval shall not be
required, provided the development plan is in compliance with the
§ 180-61 ECONOMY CODE § 180-62
178:520
development plan given tentative approval and with any specified
conditions attached thereto.
B. Action by Borough Council. In the event that an application for final
approval has been filed, together with all drawings, specifications and
other documentation in support thereof, in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter and the official written communication
granting tentative approval, Borough Council shall, within 45 days of
the official date of filing, grant final approval to the development plan.
C. Variations from the plan granted tentative approval.
(1) In the event that the development plan submitted contains
variations from the development plan granted tentative approval,
Borough Council may refuse to grant final approval and may, within
45 days of the official date of filing of the application for final
approval, advise the applicant, in writing, of said refusal, setting
forth in said notice the reasons why one or more of the variations
are not in the public interest. In the event of such refusal, the
landowner may either:
(a) Refile the application for final approval without the variations
objected; or
(b) File a written request with Borough Council that it hold a
public hearing on the application for final approval.
(2) If the landowner wishes to take either alternate action, he may do
so at any time within which he shall be entitled to apply for final
approval or within 30 additional days, if the time for applying for
final approval shall have already passed at the time when the
landowner was advised that the development plan was not in
substantial compliance.
(3) If the landowner fails to take either of these alternate actions
within said time, he shall be deemed to have abandoned the
development plan.
D. Optional public hearing on final application that varies from plan
granted tentative approval.
(1) Any public hearing held on an application for final approval shall be
held pursuant to public notice within 30 days after the request for
the hearing is made by the landowner, and the hearing shall be
conducted in the manner prescribed in this article for public
hearings on an application for tentative approval.
(2) Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, Borough
Council shall, by official written communication, either grant or
deny final approval. The grant or denial of final approval of the
development plan shall, in cases where a public hearing is
§ 180-62 WATER § 180-62
178:521
required, be in the form and contain the findings required for an
application for tentative approval.
E. Changes in the approved plan. Changes in the location and siting of
buildings and structures deemed minor by Borough Council may be
authorized without additional public hearings, if required by
engineering or other circumstances not foreseen at the time of
tentative approval. However, gross density and/or any increase in the
total number of townhouses or garden apartments or any major change
in the points of ingress and egress to the development site or the
internal traffic circulation pattern established at the time of tentative
approval shall not be changed without a public hearing.
F. Application for final approval. The application for final approval shall
comply with all applicable ordinance provisions, and the development
plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information:
(1) All data required by Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, for a final plan, including application filing,
application review and inspection fees.
(2) Accurately dimensioned locations for all proposed buildings,
structures, parking areas and common open space.
(3) The number of dwelling units in each residential building and the
intended use of each nonresidential building or structure.
(4) Building elevation drawings for all principal structures, other than
single-family dwellings.
(5) A lighting plan, showing the location, height and type of any
exterior lighting fixtures proposed and a photometric plan for all
lighting other than streetlights or yard post lamps showing the
distribution of lighting on the site and at the site boundaries.
(6) A landscaping plan, as defined by this chapter, including the
location and types of plant materials, sidewalks, trails and
recreation facilities authorized by this chapter.
(7) Supplementary data, including any covenants, grants of easements
or other restrictions to be imposed on the use of the land, building
and structures and the organization proposed to own, maintain and
operate the common open space facilities.
(8) An engineering report that shall include the following data,
wherever applicable:
(a) Profiles and specifications for proposed public and private
streets.
(b) Profiles and other explanatory data concerning installation of
water distribution systems, storm sewers and sanitary sewers.
§ 180-62 ECONOMY CODE § 180-62
178:522
(c) Feasibility of the sanitary sewerage system in terms of capacity
to serve the proposed development.
(9) A grading plan subject to review and approval by the Borough
Engineer.
(10) A copy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan as submitted
to the Beaver County Conservation District.
G. Performance bond and developer's agreement. As a condition of final
approval of a planned residential development (PRD), the performance
bond and developer's agreement required by Chapter 163, Subdivision
and Land Development, of the Borough Code shall be required.
H. Recording. A final development plan, or any part thereof, that has been
granted final approval shall be so certified without delay by Borough
Council and shall be filed of record in the Office of the Beaver County
Recorder of Deeds before any development shall take place in
accordance therewith. Approval for recording shall be subject to
execution of the developer's agreement and posting of the financial
security required by Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development,
for public and private improvements in the development plan.
I. Revocation of final approval. In the event that a development plan, or
section thereof, is given final approval and thereafter the landowner
shall abandon such plan, or section thereof, that has been finally
approved and shall so notify Borough Council in writing, or in the event
that the landowner shall fail to commence and carry out the planned
residential development (PRD) in accordance with the time provisions
stated in Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code110 after final approval has been granted, no further development
shall take place on the property included in the development plan until
a new application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development (PRD) is submitted for said property or the property is
developed in accordance with the then applicable zoning district
regulations.
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 180-62 WATER § 180-62
178:523

ARTICLE XI
Express Standards and Criteria for Granting Conditional Uses and
Uses by Special Exception
§ 180-63. Applicability.
The following procedures shall apply to all applicants for approval of a
conditional use or use by special exception in all zoning districts.
§ 180-64. Procedure for approval.
A. Approval of conditional use. Borough Council shall hear and decide
requests for conditional uses; however, Borough Council shall not
approve a conditional use application unless and until:
(1) A written application for conditional use approval is submitted to
the Zoning Officer or his/her designated representative no less
than 21 calendar days prior to the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission. The application shall indicate the section of this
chapter under which conditional use approval is sought and shall
state the grounds upon which it is requested. The application shall
include the following:
(a) A preliminary land development plan, if required by Chapter
163, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough Code
or, if a land development plan is not required, a current
property survey indicating all existing and proposed structures
and all proposed construction, additions or alterations on the
site in sufficient detail to determine the feasibility of the
proposed development and compliance with all applicable
requirements of this chapter.
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this article for the proposed
use.
(c) A traffic impact study, as defined herein, for any use that,
according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, will generate 75 or
more additional trips during the adjacent street's peak hours.
(d) The applicable fee required by § 180-116 of this chapter.
(2) A written recommendation is received from the Borough Planning
Commission or 45 days have passed from the date of the Planning
Commission meeting at which the application is first considered as
complete and properly filed for approval.
(3) A public hearing is conducted by Borough Council pursuant to
public notice and said hearing is scheduled no more than 60 days
following the date of submission of a complete and properly filed
§ 180-63 WATER § 180-64
178:525
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time.
(4) Each subsequent hearing before Borough Council shall be held
within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise agreed to by
the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant shall
complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of
the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, Borough
Council shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours
of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons
opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of their
opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. And the
applicant may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to
complete his case-in-chief, provided the persons opposed to the
application are granted an equal number of additional hearings.
Persons opposed to the application may, upon the written consent
or consent on the record by the applicant and the Borough, be
granted additional hearings to complete their opposition to the
application, provided the applicant is granted an equal number of
additional hearings for rebuttal.
(5) Borough Council shall render a written decision within 45 days
after the last public hearing. Where the application is contested or
denied, the decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon. Conclusions based on any provision of
this chapter or any other applicable rule or regulation shall contain
a reference to the provision relied upon and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in light of the facts found.
(6) Where Borough Council fails to render a decision within the
required 45 days or fails to commence, conduct or complete the
required hearings as specified in Subsection A(3) and (4), above,
the decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant, unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the
record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered
in favor of the applicant because of the failure of Borough Council
to meet or render a decision as provided herein, Borough Council
shall give public notice, as defined herein, of said deemed approval
within 10 days from the last day it could have met to render a
decision. If Borough Council shall fail to provide such notice, the
applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection shall prejudice the
right of any party opposing the application to appeal the decision to
a court of competent jurisdiction.
(7) In considering an application for conditional use approval, Borough
Council may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in
conformity with the spirit and intent of this article. A violation of
such conditions and safeguards, when made a part of the terms and
conditions under which conditional use approval is granted, shall
§ 180-64 ECONOMY CODE § 180-64
178:526
be deemed a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement provisions of § 180-109 of this chapter.
B. Expiration of conditional use approval. Conditional use approval shall
expire automatically without written notice to the applicant, if no
application for a grading permit, a building permit or an occupancy
permit to undertake the construction or authorize the occupancy
described in the application for conditional use approval is submitted
within 12 months of said approval, unless Borough Council, in its sole
discretion, extends conditional use approval upon written request of the
applicant received prior to its expiration. The maximum extension
permitted shall be one twelve-month extension.
C. Approval of uses by special exception. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
hear and decide requests for uses by special exception. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall not approve an application for a use by special
exception unless and until:
(1) A written application for approval of a use by special exception is
submitted to the Zoning Officer or his/her designated
representative at least 21 calendar days prior to the Zoning
Hearing Board meeting at which the appeal is to be heard. The
application shall indicate the section of this chapter under which
approval of the use by special exception is sought and shall state
the grounds upon which it is requested. The application shall
include the following:
(a) A current property survey indicating all existing and proposed
structures and all proposed construction, additions or
alterations on the site in sufficient detail to determine the
feasibility of the proposed development and compliance with
all applicable requirements of this chapter.
(b) A written statement showing compliance with the applicable
express standards and criteria of this article for the proposed
use.
(c) A traffic impact study, as defined herein, for any use that,
according to the latest edition of the Institute of Transportation
Engineers (ITE) Trip Generation Manual, will generate 75 or
more additional trips during the adjacent street's peak hours.
(d) The application fee required by § 180-105 of this chapter.
(2) A public hearing pursuant to public notice is conducted by the
Zoning Hearing Board within 60 days of submission of a complete
and properly filed application, unless the applicant has agreed in
writing to an extension of time. Said hearing shall be conducted in
accordance with the procedures specified by § 180-102 of this
chapter.
§ 180-64 WATER § 180-64
178:527
§ 180-65. General standards.
In addition to the specific standards and criteria listed for each use in
§ 180-66, below, all applications for conditional uses and uses by special
exception listed in each zoning district shall demonstrate compliance with
all of the following general standards and criteria:
(3) In considering an application for approval of a use by special
exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may prescribe appropriate
conditions and safeguards in conformity with the spirit and intent
of this article. A violation of such conditions and safeguards, when
made a part of the terms and conditions under which approval of a
use by special exception is granted, shall be deemed a violation of
this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of
§ 180-109 of this chapter.
(4) If land development approval is required for the use by special
exception, the application for approval of a land development
required by Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, of
the Borough Code shall be submitted to the Borough Planning
Commission following approval of the use by special exception by
the Zoning Hearing Board.
D. Expiration of approval of a use by special exception. Approval of a use
by special exception shall expire automatically without written notice to
the applicant, if no application for a land development plan, a grading
permit, a building permit or an occupancy permit to undertake the
construction or authorize the occupancy described in the application
for approval of the use by special exception is submitted within 12
months of said approval, unless the Zoning Hearing Board, in its sole
discretion, extends approval of the use by special exception, upon
written request of the applicant, received prior to its expiration. The
maximum extension permitted shall be one twelve-month extension.
A. The use shall not endanger the public health, safety or welfare nor
deteriorate the environment as a result of being located on the property
where it is proposed.
B. The use shall comply with the performance standards of § 180-68 of this
chapter.
C. The use shall comply with all applicable requirements of Article XII
providing supplementary regulations, Article XIII governing parking
and loading, Article XIV governing signs and all other applicable
provisions of this chapter.
D. Ingress, egress and traffic circulation on the property shall be designed
to ensure safety and access by emergency vehicles and to minimize
congestion and the impact on local streets.
E. Outdoor lighting, if proposed, shall be designed with cutoff luminaires
that direct and cut off the light at a cutoff angle of 60° or less. (See the
§ 180-64 ECONOMY CODE § 180-65
178:528
§ 180-66. Standards for specific uses.
In addition to the general standards and criteria for all conditional uses and
uses by special exception listed in § 180-65, above, an application for any of
the following uses that are listed in any zoning district as a conditional use
or use by special exception shall comply with the applicable standards and
criteria specified below for that use.
illustration in Appendix B.)111 Spillover illumination shall not exceed 0.2
footcandle at the property line.
F. For all uses that are subject to the requirements of the Americans with
Disabilities Act (ADA), the applicant shall certify that all applicable ADA
requirements have been met in the design.
A. Active recreation, low-impact and high-impact, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required for low-impact active recreation where
only one activity is proposed shall be one acre.
(2) The minimum site required for low-impact active recreation where
more than one activity is proposed shall be five acres.
(3) The minimum site required for high-impact active recreation with
fewer than 200 participants and/or spectators shall be 10 acres.
(4) The minimum site required for high-impact active recreation with
200 or more participants and/or spectators shall be 50 acres.
(5) The site proposed for high-impact active recreation shall have
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter, or the nearest site boundary shall
be located no more than 1,000 feet, measured along public street
rights-of-way, of an intersection with an arterial or collector street.
(6) The minimum setback for principal and accessory structures
proposed for low-impact active recreation shall comply with the
setback requirements of the district in which they are located.
(7) The minimum setback for all principal and accessory structures for
high-impact active recreation shall be 300 feet from any property
line adjoining an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District and shall be 100 feet
from any property line adjoining any other zoning district.
(8) Along all property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District, Buffer Area C, as described in § 180-69A, shall be
provided for an adequate distance along the property line to screen
all parking areas, principal structures and intensively used
facilities such as playing fields or courts, bleachers, pavilions,
concession stands and similar facilities associated with low-impact
active recreation.
111. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-65 WATER § 180-66
178:529
(9) Along all property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District, Buffer Area A, as described in § 180-69A, shall be
provided for an adequate distance along the property line to screen
all parking areas, principal structures and intensively used areas
associated with high-impact active recreation.
(10) The uses shall comply with the performance standards of § 180-68
of this chapter.
(11) All lighting shall be shielded away from adjoining streets and
properties.
(12) Any outdoor facilities shall cease operations at 11:00 p.m.
(13) If outdoor loudspeakers are proposed, the applicant shall present a
plan for noise attenuation.
(14) For high-impact active recreation uses, a plan for security and
traffic control during events shall be presented.
(15) Adequate security shall be provided when the site is not in use.
B. Adult business, subject to:
(1) Adult businesses, as defined by this chapter, shall not be permitted
in any zoning district other than the I-1 Industrial District.
(2) An adult business shall not be located within 500 feet of any of the
following uses: a church; public or private pre-elementary,
elementary or secondary school; hospital; public library; day-care
center or preschool facility; public park; nursing home; personalcare
boarding home; residential dwelling; or any establishment
licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. The distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the nearest portion of the building
or structure containing the adult business to the nearest property
line of the premises of any of the above-listed uses.
(3) Any adult business, other than an adult motel, that exhibits on the
premises in a viewing room (a separate compartment or cubicle) of
less than 150 square feet of floor space a film or videocassette or
other video or image production or reproduction that depicts
nudity or sexual conduct shall comply with the following:
(a) At least one employee shall be on duty and shall be situated in
each manager's station at all times that any patron is present
inside the premises.
(b) View from manager's station.
[1] The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a
manner that there is an unobstructed view from the
manager's station of every area of the premises to which
any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:530
rest rooms. Rest rooms shall not contain video
reproduction or viewing equipment.
[2] If the premises has two or more manager's stations
designated, then the interior of the premises shall be
configured in such a manner that there is unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any person is
permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required by this subsection
shall be by direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(c) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and any agents
and employees present on the premises to ensure that the
viewing area remains unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials at all times and
to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the
premises that has been designated in the application submitted
to the Borough as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
(d) No viewing room shall be occupied by more than one person at
a time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing
room shall be permitted.
(e) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures
of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place in which
patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than
one footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the
duty of the owners and operators and any agents and
employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
(f) If live performances are to be given, the premises in which
such live performances are to be offered shall contain a stage
separated from the viewing area and the viewing area shall not
be accessible to the performers.
(4) If the adult business involves live performances, the performers
shall not have easy access to the viewers present.
(5) The owner and operator of any adult nightclub shall provide
security officers, licensed under the laws of the commonwealth, if
the maximum permitted occupancy exceeds 50 persons.
(6) No stock-in-trade that depicts nudity or sexual conduct shall be
permitted to be viewed from the sidewalk, street or highway.
(7) No signs or other displays of products, entertainment or services
shall be permitted in any window or other area that is visible from
the street or sidewalk.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:531
(8) Windows shall not be covered or made opaque in any way.
(9) Notice shall be given at the entrance stating the hours of operation
and restricting admittance to adults only. The term "adult" shall
have the meaning provided by applicable statutory law.
(10) Alcoholic beverages shall not be permitted on the premises of any
adult business.
(11) Owners and operators of adult businesses shall obtain a license to
operate from the Borough. In addition, such owners or operators
shall be subject to an investigation fee established from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council and shall supply to the
Borough such information regarding ownership and financing of
the proposed business as is required by the Borough's licensing
application. Applications for licensing shall be filed with the
Borough Manager.
(12) The adult business shall be initially licensed upon compliance with
all requirements of this section and provisions of the required
licensing application. For each year thereafter that the adult
business intends to continue, the owner or operator shall seek a
renewal of the license. The application for renewal shall be
submitted to the Borough Manager by November 1 of the year
preceding the year for which renewal is sought. The lack of license
or failure to renew such license in a timely manner shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be grounds for denial or
revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the adult business.
C. Assisted-living facility; independent-living facility, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required shall be five acres.
(2) The maximum dwelling unit density shall be 12 units per acre.
(3) An assisted-living facility shall include the following supporting
uses:
(a) Common leisure and/or recreational areas.
(b) Common dining area.
(4) In addition, an assisted-living facility or independent living facility
may include one or more of the following supporting uses, subject
to approval by the Borough:
(a) Postal station for use of the residents and staff only.
(b) Banking facility for use of the residents and staff only.
(c) Pharmacy and/or medical offices for use of the residents only.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:532
(d) Personal services for the use of the residents only, including
beauty shop, barbershop, common laundry facilities, drycleaning
valet.
(e) Ice cream parlor and/or florist/gift shop for the use of residents
and their invited guests only.
(f) Elderly day-care center licensed by the commonwealth.
(g) Taxi, van or similar transportation services for the residents.
(5) Buffer Area B, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjacent to property in an R-A,
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(6) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
§ 180-81, except that additional parking for the supporting uses
intended for the residents and their invited guests shall not be
required.
D. Bed-and-breakfast, subject to:
(1) The operator of the bed-and-breakfast shall be a full-time resident
of the dwelling in which the bed-and-breakfast is located.
(2) The lot shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter, or the
nearest site boundary shall be located no more than 1,000 feet,
measured along public street rights-of-way, of an intersection with
an arterial or collector street.
(3) The minimum lot area required shall be one acre.
(4) No meals, other than breakfast, shall be served on the premises.
Food may be prepared on the premises for consumption off the
premises by overnight guests. Food shall not be served to any
customers who are not overnight guests.
(5) The maximum length of stay for any guest shall be 14 days in any
calendar year.
(6) One identification sign shall be permitted, and such sign may either
be attached to the wall of the building or may be freestanding in the
front yard, provided the surface area of the sign shall not exceed
six square feet. The height of the freestanding sign shall not exceed
four feet and the freestanding sign shall be located at least five feet
from any property line.
(7) The identification sign shall contain no information other than one
or more of the following items:
(a) The street address.
(b) The name of the establishment.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:533
(c) The name of the proprietor.
(d) A small logo or other decorative symbol.
(8) In addition to the parking required for the dwelling, one parking
space shall be provided for each sleeping room offered to overnight
guests.
(9) Off-street parking shall not be located in any required front or side
yard. Parking located in the rear yard shall be screened from
adjoining properties by a compact six-foot-high evergreen hedge.
E. Billboards, subject to:
(1) All billboards shall be subject to the express standards and criteria
contained in § 180-89 of this chapter.
F. Boarding stable; riding academy, subject to:
(1) The minimum site shall be 10 acres.
(2) The site proposed for a riding academy where invitational shows or
competitions will be held shall have frontage on an arterial or
collector street or shall have direct vehicular access to an arterial
or collector street within 2,000 feet of a property boundary.
(3) The applicant for a riding academy where invitational shows or
competitions will be held shall submit a traffic impact study, as
defined in § 180-7.
(4) Adequate parking areas with a dust-free, all-weather surface shall
be provided to accommodate vehicles and horse trailers
anticipated during peak use of the facility.
(5) Parking areas shall be located at least 50 feet from any property
line.
(6) Outdoor lighting, if any, shall be limited to security lighting for the
parking areas and the building perimeter.
(7) Indoor riding arenas and outdoor riding rings or riding arenas shall
be located at least 300 feet from any property line.
(8) Bridle paths shall be located at least 50 feet from any property line.
(9) No camping or other overnight accommodations shall be permitted
on the site.
(10) There shall be no retail sales area on the site and no display of
merchandise offered for sale on the premises; however, retail sales
of riding equipment and clothing may be offered to participants
using catalogs or samples, provided orders are delivered direct to
the purchaser.
(11) The use shall be subject to the requirements of § 180-75.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:534
G. Car wash, subject to:
(1) All automated washing facilities shall be in a completely enclosed
building, as defined by this chapter. All other car-washing facilities
shall be under a roofed structure that has at least two walls.
(2) Coin-operated self-service establishments shall have an attendant
on duty at all times when the facility is open for business.
(3) Drainage water from the washing operation shall be controlled so
that it does not flow or drain onto berms, streets or other property.
(4) Standing spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements specified in § 180-73 for drive-through facilities.
(5) The facility shall be connected to public water and public storm
sewers.
(6) Driveway entrances shall be located at least 30 feet from the rightof-
way line of the intersection of any public streets.
H. Cemetery, subject to:
(1) A minimum site of 10 acres is required.
(2) A drainage plan shall be submitted with the application for the use
showing existing and proposed runoff characteristics.
(3) A groundwater study prepared by a hydrologist or registered
engineer qualified to perform such studies shall be submitted with
the application.
(4) Plans for ingress/egress to the site shall be referred to the Borough
Police Department for comments regarding public safety.112
(5) All property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
(6) All maintenance equipment shall be properly stored in a completely
enclosed building, as defined herein, when not is use.
(7) In-ground burial sites shall comply with the setbacks required for
principal structures in the zoning district. All mausoleums, chapels
and other structures shall not be located within 100 feet of any
property line adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
I. Churches, schools (public and private) and public buildings, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required for a secondary or postsecondary
school shall be 10 acres. The minimum lot area required for all
other uses shall be two acres.
112. Editor's Note: As to the Police Department generally, see Ch. 29 in this Code.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:535
(2) The site proposed for a postsecondary school shall have frontage on
and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as
defined by this chapter.
(3) If a residential facility (such as a convent or monastery) is proposed
as part of a church, no more than 10 persons shall be housed.
(4) A dwelling (such as a manse or parsonage) may be located on the
same lot with a church, provided all requirements of this chapter
for single-family dwellings in the zoning district can be met in
addition to the minimum lot area, lot width and yard requirements
applicable to the church.
(5) Dormitories, if proposed, shall be accessible on all sides of the
building by fire-fighting equipment.
(6) If dormitories are proposed, they shall be set back at least 500 feet
from any property line adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
Zoning District and at least 200 feet from any other property line.
(7) In addition to dormitories, other supporting facilities may include a
dining hall, a student union and a library. Passive recreation and
indoor entertainment, as defined herein, may also be included.
(8) All uses shall be landscaped along any property line adjoining
property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District by Buffer Area B, as
described in § 180-69A of this chapter.
(9) Ingress and egress to and from churches, police stations and
municipal maintenance facilities shall be located so as to maximize
sight distance along adjacent public streets and enhance safety for
vehicles exiting the property.
(10) Police stations and municipal maintenance facilities shall be
located on the property so that vehicles and equipment can be
maneuvered on the property without interrupting traffic flow or
blocking public streets.
(11) All buildings shall be designed to provide convenient access for
emergency vehicles and access to all sides of the building by firefighting
equipment.
(12) All outside storage, including trash dumpsters, shall be completely
enclosed by a six-foot-high hedge or solid fence.
(13) The proposed use shall have direct access to a public street with
sufficient capacity to accommodate the traffic generated by the
proposed use.
(14) Pedestrian walkways shall be provided to connect buildings,
parking areas and other supporting facilities.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:536
(15) Any proposed low-impact active recreation or high-impact active
recreation, as defined herein, shall be further subject to
compliance with the applicable standards and criteria of § 180-66A.
J. Communications antennas and distributed antenna systems (DAS)
mounted on an existing building or existing public utility storage or
transmission structure or on an approved communications tower,
subject to: [Amended 4-12-2016 by Ord. No. 454]
(1) Building-mounted antennas and DAS shall not be permitted on any
dwelling.
(2) The applicant shall demonstrate that the electromagnetic fields
associated with the proposed antennas comply with safety
standards now or hereafter established by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC).
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate compliance with all applicable
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and any applicable airport
zoning regulations.
(4) Building-mounted antennas or DAS shall be permitted to exceed
the height limitations of the district by no more than 20 feet.
Antennas mounted on an existing public utility or transmission
structure shall not project more than 20 feet above the height of
the structure.
(5) Omnidirectional or whip antennas or DAS shall not exceed 20 feet
in height or seven inches in diameter.
(6) Directional or panel antennas shall not exceed five feet in height or
two feet in width.
(7) Satellite and microwave dish antennas mounted on the roof of a
building shall not exceed six feet in diameter.
(8) Satellite and microwave dish antennas mounted on an existing
public utility storage or transmission structure shall not exceed two
feet in diameter.
(9) The height and location of the proposed antennas or DAS shall be
designed so that, in the event of collapse, the antennas will fall
within the boundaries of the property on which they are to be
located.
(10) The applicant proposing a building-mounted antenna or DAS shall
submit evidence from a structural engineer certifying that the
proposed installation will not exceed the structural capacity of the
building considering wind and other loads associated with the
antenna's location.
(11) Evidence of lease agreements and easements necessary to provide
access to the building or structure for installation and maintenance
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:537
of the antennas or DAS and placement of the equipment cabinet or
equipment building shall be provided to the Borough.
(12) The placement of the equipment cabinet or equipment building
shall not obstruct the free flow of traffic on the site, shall not
reduce any parking required or available for other uses on the site
and shall not obstruct any right-of-way or easement without the
permission of the owner or grantor of the right-of-way or easement.
(13) Unless located within a secured building, the equipment cabinet or
equipment building shall be fenced by a ten-foot-high chain-link
security fence with locking gate. If the equipment cabinet or
equipment building is visible from any public street or adjoining
property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District, the equipment cabinet
or equipment building shall be screened by a minimum six-foothigh
compact evergreen hedge.
(14) If vehicular access to the equipment cabinet or equipment building
is not provided from a public street or paved driveway or parking
area, an easement or right-of-way shall be provided that has a
minimum width of 20 feet and that shall be improved with a dustfree,
all-weather surface for its entire length.
(15) At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on the site
within a reasonable walking distance of the equipment cabinet or
equipment building to facilitate periodic visits by maintenance
workers.
(16)No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the
exception of identification signage. No sign or other structure shall
be mounted on the antenna or DAS, except as may be required or
approved by the FCC, FAA or other governmental agency.
(17) Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a
wireless telecommunications antenna shall be in writing and
supported by evidence contained in a written record of the
proceedings of the Planning Commission and Borough Council.
(18) All applications for new antennas or DAS shall receive approval or
denial within 150 days.
(19) All antennas or DAS structures shall be fitted with anticlimbing
devices as approved by the manufacturer for the type of installation
proposed.
(20)No antennas or DAS shall be illuminated, except as may be
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) or the
Federal Communications Commission (FCC).
(21) All antennas or DAS shall include signage at the base of the
structure providing the owner's name and contact information.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:538
(22) The antenna or DAS shall be screened in a manner that renders it
minimally visible to the casual observer. Such methods include, but
are not limited to, architecturally screened, roof-mounted
antennas, building-mounted antennas painted to match the existing
structure and facilities constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, and
light poles.
K. Communications tower, subject to:
(1) The applicant shall demonstrate that it is licensed by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) to operate a communications
tower.
(2) Any applicant proposing a new freestanding communications tower
shall demonstrate that a good faith effort has been made to obtain
permission to mount the antenna on an existing building or other
structure or an existing communications tower. A good faith effort
shall require that all owners within a one-quarter-mile radius of the
proposed site be contacted and that one or more of the following
reasons for not selecting an alternative existing building or
communications tower or other structure apply:
(a) The proposed equipment would exceed the structural capacity
of the existing building, communications tower or other
structure, and reinforcement of the existing building, tower or
other structure cannot be accomplished at a reasonable cost.
(b) The proposed equipment would cause RF (radio frequency)
interference with other existing or proposed equipment for
that building, tower or other structure, and the interference
cannot be prevented at a reasonable cost.
(c) Existing buildings, communications towers or other structures
do not have adequate space to accommodate the proposed
equipment.
(d) Addition of the proposed equipment would result in NIER
(nonionizing electromagnetic radiation) levels that exceed any
adopted local, federal or state emission standards.
(3) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed communications
tower and the electromagnetic fields associated with the antennas
proposed to be mounted thereon comply with safety standards now
or hereafter established by the Federal Communications
Commission (FCC).
(4) The applicant for the communications tower shall demonstrate
compliance with all applicable Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) and any applicable airport zoning regulations.
(5) The maximum height of a communications tower shall be 195 feet.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:539
(6) The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed height of the
communications tower is the minimum height necessary to function
effectively.
(7) The setback from all property lines (excluding lease lines) required
for the communications tower shall be 110% of the height of the
tower.
(8) The height of the communications tower shall be measured from
the ground level to the top point of the tower or top point of the
highest communications antenna, whichever is higher.
(9) Communications towers shall be set back from all overhead
electrical transmission or other aboveground lines a distance equal
to the height of the tower.
(10) A communications tower shall not be located on any property that
is listed on an historic register or in an official designated state or
federal historic district.
(11) Communications towers shall not be located closer than 2,500 feet
to another communications tower measured as a horizontal
straight-line distance between the towers.
(12) The communications tower shall be designed and constructed to all
applicable standards of the American National Standards Institute
ANSI/EIA-222-Manual, as amended.
(13) A soils report complying with the standards of Appendix I,
Geotechnical Investigations, ANSI/EIA-222-E-Manual, as amended,
shall be submitted to the Borough to document and verify design
specifications of the foundation of the communications tower and
anchors for the guy wires, if used. The soils report shall be signed
and sealed by an engineer registered in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(14) The communications tower and all appurtenances, including guy
wires, if any, and the equipment cabinet or equipment building
shall be enclosed by a minimum ten-foot-high chain link security
fence with locking gate.
(15) The applicant shall submit evidence that the communications tower
and its method of installation has been designed by a registered
engineer and is certified by that registered engineer to be
structurally sound and able to withstand wind and other loads in
accordance with the Uniform Construction Code (UCC) and
accepted engineering practice.
(16) Equipment cabinets and equipment buildings shall comply with the
height and yard requirements of the zoning district for accessory
structures. Setbacks shall be measured from the lease lines.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:540
(17) Access shall be provided to the communications tower and
equipment cabinet or equipment building by means of a public
street or right-of-way to a public street. The right-of-way shall be a
minimum of 20 feet in width and shall be improved with a dust-free,
all-weather surface for its entire length.
(18) Recording of a plat of subdivision shall not be required for the lease
parcel on which the communications tower is proposed to be
constructed, provided the equipment building is proposed to be
unmanned and the required easement agreement for access to the
lease parcel is submitted for approval by the Borough.
(19) Approval of a land development plan, prepared in accordance with
the requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land
Development, of the Borough Code, shall be required for all
communications towers.
(20) The owner of the communications tower shall be responsible for
maintaining the parcel on which the tower is located, as well as the
means of access to the tower, including clearing and cutting of
vegetation, snow removal and maintenance of the access driveway
surface.
(21) The owner of any communications tower that exceeds 50 feet in
height shall submit to the Borough proof of an annual inspection
conducted by a structural engineer at the owner's expense and an
updated tower maintenance program based on the results of the
inspection. Any structural faults shall be corrected immediately
and reinspected and certified to the Borough by a structural
engineer at the owner's expense.
(22) The owner of the communications tower shall notify the Borough
immediately upon cessation or abandonment of the operation. The
owner of the communications tower shall enter into an agreement
with the Borough guaranteeing that the tower shall be dismantled
and removed within six months of the cessation of operations, if
there is no intention to continue operations, evidenced by the lack
of an application to the Borough to install antennas on the existing
tower. If the owner of the communications tower fails to remove the
tower, then, the landowner shall be responsible for its immediate
removal. Failure to remove an abandoned communications tower
shall be subject to the enforcement provisions of § 180-109 of this
chapter.
(23) All communications tower structures shall be fitted with
anticlimbing devices as approved by the manufacturer for the type
of installation proposed.
(24) All antennas and communications tower structures shall be subject
to all applicable Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Airport
Zoning regulations.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:541
(25)No sign or other structure shall be mounted on the
communications tower structure, except as may be required or
approved by the FCC, FAA or other governmental agency.
(26) The exterior finish of the communications tower shall be
compatible with the immediate surroundings. The tower, the
equipment cabinet or equipment building and the immediate
surroundings shall be properly maintained.
(27) The base of the communications tower shall be landscaped suitable
to the proposed location of the tower, if the base of the tower is
visible from adjoining streets or residential properties.
(28) At least one off-street parking space shall be provided on the site to
facilitate periodic visits by maintenance workers.
(29)No antenna or communications tower structure shall be
illuminated, except as may be required by the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) or the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC).
L. Community club or community swimming pool, subject to:
(1) The community club or community swimming pool shall be limited
to use by the residents or members and their invited guests. Rental
of the facilities to nonresidents or nonmembers shall not be
permitted.
(2) The pool and bathing area shall be completely enclosed by a wall or
fence so as to prevent uncontrolled access by children from the
street or adjacent properties. The area immediately outside the
enclosure shall be suitably landscaped with grass, hardy shrubs
and trees and shall be maintained in good condition.
(3) All pools shall have permanent access to a public street.
(4) The pool shall be constructed in accordance with all applicable
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC).
(5) No direct or sky-reflected glare, whether from floodlights or any
other kind of lights, shall be visible from adjoining public streets or
adjacent lots when viewed by a person standing on ground level.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 180-81C of this chapter for swimming pools or
community clubs.
(7) Parking areas that adjoin property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
(8) Activities on the site shall comply with the noise standards
specified in § 180-68C. Doors and windows in the building shall
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:542
remain closed during any entertainment involving a speaker
system and/or amplification. Outdoor speakers shall not be
permitted.
M. Comparable uses not specifically listed, subject to:
(1) Uses of the same general character as any of the uses authorized as
permitted uses by right, conditional uses or uses by special
exception in the zoning district in which the property is located
shall be allowed, if the Zoning Hearing Board determines that the
impact of the proposed use on the environment and adjacent
streets and properties is equal to or less than any comparable use
specifically listed in the zoning district. In making such
determination, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider the
following characteristics of the proposed use:
(a) The number of employees;
(b) The floor area of the building or gross area of the lot devoted to
the proposed use;
(c) The type of products, materials and equipment and/or
processes involved in the proposed use;
(d) The magnitude of walk-in trade;
(e) Hours of operation;
(f) The traffic and environmental impacts and the ability of the
proposed use to comply with the performance standards of
§ 180-68 of this chapter; and
(g) For those uses included in the most recent edition of the
Standard Industrial Classification Manual published by the
Office of Management and Budget, whether the proposed use
shares the same SIC code or major group number as one or
more uses that are specifically listed in the zoning district.
(2) The proposed use shall comply with all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) The proposed use shall comply with any applicable express
standards and criteria specified in this article for the most nearly
comparable use by special exception or conditional use listed in the
zoning district in which the comparable use is proposed.
(4) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose statement
for the zoning district in which it is proposed and shall be
consistent with the community development objectives of this
chapter.
N. Day-care center or preschool facility, subject to:
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:543
(1) The facility shall be licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. All licensing requirements of the commonwealth
shall be maintained throughout the operation of the facility.
Evidence of the license shall be a condition precedent to granting a
certificate of occupancy under this chapter. Failure to maintain the
required license shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
subject to the enforcement provisions of § 180-109.
(2) In the R-A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Zoning Districts, the facility shall be
permitted to be located only in a church or school. In the C-1
Zoning District, this restriction shall not apply.
(3) Outdoor play areas shall be provided that shall have a minimum
area of 65 square feet per child and that shall be secured by a fence
with a self-latching gate. The location of the outdoor play area shall
take into account the relationship of the play area to adjoining
properties.
(4) Outdoor play areas shall be screened from adjoining properties by
Buffer Area C, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter.
(5) The general safety of the property proposed for a day-care center
or preschool facility shall meet the needs of small children. There
shall be no potential hazards in the outdoor play area.
(6) There shall be a safe and accessible area for dropping off and
picking up the children or elderly or handicapped clients.
(7) Off-street parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
(8) The facility shall not provide overnight care.
(9) In the R-A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the facility shall cease
operations between 9:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., prevailing time.
(10) The facility shall comply with the Uniform Construction Code
(UCC), the International Fire Code, as adopted by the Borough and
the local requirements of the Borough Fire Marshal.
O. Equipment storage yard, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required for an equipment storage yard shall be
five acres.
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
(3) All areas used for storage and movement of equipment shall be
improved with a dust-free, all-weather surface. Any areas not paved
with hard surface shall have a dust control plan that is submitted to
the Borough Engineer for review and approval.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:544
(4) Buffer Area B, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District.
(5) No repair of vehicles or equipment shall be permitted outside a
completely enclosed building, as defined herein.
(6) All operations shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 180-68 of this chapter.
(7) Engines shall not be started or kept running before 6:30 a.m. or
after 8:00 p.m. if the site is located within 500 feet of an existing
dwelling, measured from any site boundary to any wall of an
existing dwelling.
(8) All lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from streets and
any adjoining residential properties.
(9) A stormwater management plan to control runoff of surface water
shall be submitted for review and approval by the Borough
Engineer.
P. Family day-care home, subject to:
(1) All of the applicable criteria for a home occupation specified in
§ 180-66T shall be met.
(2) Evidence shall be submitted that all applicable requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Public Welfare have been met and
continuing compliance shall be maintained.
(3) An adequate and safe off-street area shall be provided for dropping
off and picking up children.
(4) An adequate outdoor play area shall be provided and shall be
secured by a fence with a self-latching gate. Such play area shall be
screened from adjoining residential properties by a minimum fourfoot-
high compact, dense evergreen hedge or opaque fence.
(5) Outdoor play areas shall have a minimum area of 400 square feet.
Q. Fire and emergency medical services, subject to:
(1) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined herein.
(2) The minimum lot area required shall be one acre.
(3) Ingress and egress from the site shall be designed so as to
maximize sight distance along the adjacent public streets and
enhance safety for vehicles exiting the site, as well as those
traveling on the streets.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:545
(4) Buildings shall be located so that vehicles and equipment can be
maneuvered on the property without interrupting traffic flow on or
blocking any public street.
(5) If a fire service building includes a rental hall or banquet facilities,
the following criteria shall be met:
(a) Any rental of the facility to nonmembers shall require on-site
management and/or security personnel during the event.
(b) Off-street parking for the facility or rental hall shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of § 180-81C for
restaurants.
(c) Activities on the site and within the building shall comply with
the noise standards specified in § 180-68C.
(d) If entertainment is presented, doors and windows shall remain
closed during any entertainment involving a speaker system
and/or amplification.
(6) Parking areas adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
shall be screened by Buffer Area C, as described in § 180-69A.
R. Golf course; golf or country club, subject to:
(1) Golf courses and golf or country clubs shall have a minimum site of
50 acres; driving ranges and putting courses shall have a minimum
site of 20 acres.
(2) Clubhouses shall be located at least 100 feet from any property line
adjoining property in any R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning District and at
least 50 feet from all other property lines.
(3) The clubhouse and all parking areas shall be screened from any
adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Zoning District by
Buffer Area B, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter.
(4) Where eating and/or drinking facilities are provided, parking
requirements for restaurants shall apply in addition to the parking
requirements for golf courses.
(5) Where a swimming pool is provided, parking requirements for
swimming pools shall apply in addition to the parking requirements
for golf courses.
(6) Outdoor operations shall be discontinued between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
(7) Any driving range that is proposed to be illuminated shall provide a
photometric plan and cross sections showing impacts on adjoining
properties and shall be subject to testing after installation to show
compliance with § 180-68G.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:546
(8) The backstop for any driving range shall be buffered from adjacent
residential properties using a combination of landscaping, earthen
mounding and natural materials to minimize the visual impact.
S. Group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional
dwelling, subject to:
(1) The minimum area and bulk regulations for a group-care facility,
personal-care boarding home or transitional dwelling shall be the
same as those required for all other principal uses in the zoning
district in which the facility is located.
(2) In the R-A District, a group-care facility, personal-care boarding
home or transitional dwelling shall only be located on a lot that has
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter.
(3) In the R-A District, the maximum number of residents housed in a
group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional
dwelling shall be 10.
(4) In the R-3 District, a personal-care boarding home shall have
frontage on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter.
(5) In the R-3 District, the maximum number of residents housed in a
personal-care boarding home shall be 10.
(6) No group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or transitional
dwelling shall be located within 500 feet of another existing or
proposed group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or
transitional dwelling.
(7) Adequate provisions shall be made for access for emergency
medical and fire-fighting vehicles.
(8) Twenty-four-hour supervision shall be provided by staff qualified by
the sponsoring agency.
(9) Adequate open space opportunities for recreation shall be provided
on the lot for the residents consistent with their needs, and the
area shall be secured by a fence with self-latching gate.
(10) Where applicable, licensing or certification by the sponsoring
agency shall be prerequisite to obtaining a certificate of occupancy,
and a copy of the annual report with evidence of continuing
certification shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer in January of
each year.
T. Home occupation, subject to:
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:547
(1) The home occupation shall be carried on by a member of the family
residing in the dwelling unit. No more than one person who is not a
resident of the dwelling unit shall be employed in the dwelling unit.
(2) No more than 15% of the gross floor area of the principal dwelling
shall be devoted to the conduct of the home occupation.
(3) In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the home occupation shall be
carried on wholly within the principal dwelling. The home
occupation shall not be conducted in any accessory structure. In
the R-A District, the home occupation may be carried on in an
accessory structure, provided the gross floor area of the accessory
structure devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed 15% of
the gross floor area of the principal dwelling.
(4) There shall be no mass production of products that involves
processing of raw materials on the premises of the home
occupation. Assembly of products from finished materials may be
accomplished on the premises.
(5) A limited number of samples of articles produced on the premises
may be displayed for the purposes of accepting orders. Articles
produced on the premises shall be displayed in quantity only off the
premises at a retail outlet, consignment shop or product or craft
show.
(6) There shall be no display on the premises of merchandise available
for sale that has been produced off the premises; however,
merchandise may be stored on the premises for delivery off the
premises, such as Amway, Tupperware or similar products stored
for distribution to customers or salespersons at their residence or
place of business. In addition, small amounts of products may be
sold as an accessory use to the principal use, such as sale of beauty
products accessory to a beauty shop and similar situations.
(7) There shall be no exterior displays or signs, either on or off the
premises, other than a small identification sign no more than one
square foot in surface area containing only the name of the resident
and the nature of the home occupation which may be attached to
the wall of the dwelling or to the mailbox.
(8) The use shall not require internal or external alterations or
construction features that are not customary to a dwelling or that
change the fire rating of the structure.
(9) Objectionable noise, vibration, smoke, dust, electrical disturbance,
odors, heat or glare shall not be produced. The use shall comply
with the performance standards of § 180-68 of this chapter.
(10) The use shall not significantly intensify vehicular or pedestrian
traffic beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:548
(11) There shall be no use of materials or equipment except that of
similar power and type normally used in a residential dwelling for
domestic or household purposes.
(12) The use shall not cause an increase in the use of water, sewage,
electricity, garbage, public safety or any other municipal services
beyond that which is normal for the residences in the
neighborhood.
(13) In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the home occupation shall not
involve the use of commercial vehicles for regular delivery of
materials to or from the premises, and commercial vehicles shall
not be parked on the premises.
(14) Materials or equipment used in the home occupation shall not be
stored outside.
(15) Any home occupation where customers, clients or students
routinely visit the premises shall provide a paved off-street parking
area in accordance with the requirements of Article XIII for the
specific use in addition to the spaces required for the dwelling.
(16) The following are examples of permitted home occupations,
provided all of the foregoing criteria are met:
(a) Artist, photographer or handicrafts studio.
(b) Beauty shop or barbershop containing no more than two
chairs.
(c) Catering off the premises.
(d) Contracting business, as defined herein, excluding landscaping
contractor.
(e) Computer programmer, data processor, writer.
(f) Consultant, clergy, counselor, bookkeeping, graphics or
drafting services.
(g) Dressmaker, tailor.
(h) Professional offices that involve routine visitation by customers
or clients.
(i) Housekeeping or custodial services.
(j) Interior designer.
(k) Jewelry and/or watch repair, not including wholesale or retail
sales.
(l) Locksmith.
(m) Mail order business.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:549
(n) Manufacturer's representative.
(o) Repair shop, as defined herein, only in the R-A District.
(p) Telemarketing.
(q) Travel agent.
(r) Tutoring or any other instruction to no more than five students
at any one time.
(s) Word processing, typing; secretarial services.
(17) The following uses shall not be considered home occupations and
shall be restricted to the zoning districts in which they are
specifically authorized as permitted uses, conditional uses or uses
by special exception, including, but not limited to:
(a) Beauty shops or barbershops containing more than two chairs.
(b) Blacksmith or metalworking.
(c) Boarding stables or riding academies.
(d) Contractor's Yard.
(e) Funeral homes.
(f) Group-care facility, personal-care boarding home or
transitional dwelling.
(g) Kennels.
(h) Landscaping contractor.
(i) Medical clinics, hospitals or nursing homes.
(j) Private clubs.
(k) Tutoring or any other instruction to more than five students at
a time.
(l) Restaurants or tea rooms.
(m) Retail or wholesale sales; flea markets.
(n) Sale of guns, firearms and ammunition.
(o) Tanning or massage salon.
(p) Tourist or boarding home, other than bed-and-breakfast.
(q) Vehicle or equipment rental, repair or sales.
(r) Vehicle repair garages.
(s) Veterinary clinic.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:550
(18) The acceptability of any proposed home occupation not specifically
listed above shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards of this § 180-66T and the applicable
criteria for comparable uses not specifically listed in § 180-66M.
U. Hospital; nursing home, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required for a hospital shall be 10 acres. The
minimum lot area required for a nursing home shall be five acre.
(2) The property shall be served by public water and public storm and
sanitary sewers.
(3) All hospitals and nursing homes shall be licensed by the
commonwealth.
(4) Water pressure and volume shall be adequate for fire protection.
(5) Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure access by emergency vehicles.
(6) The parking and circulation plan shall be referred to the local
Police Department and fire company for comments regarding
traffic safety and emergency access.
(7) Nursing homes shall have a bed capacity of at least 20 beds but no
more than 200 beds.
(8) All property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
(9) Disposal of medical waste shall be in accordance with all applicable
permits and handling requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) and the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
(10) A private use helipad for air ambulances shall be permitted as part
of a hospital, provided all of the criteria in § 180-66EE are met:
V. Junkyard, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required shall be 20 acres.
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
(3) The premises shall be maintained so as to not constitute a nuisance
or menace to public health and safety.
(4) No garbage, hazardous materials or hazardous waste, as defined by
federal statute, or other organic waste shall be stored on the
premises.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:551
(5) The handling and disposal of motor oil, battery acid and other
substances regulated by federal statute and the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) shall be in
accordance with all permits and requirements of that agency. Any
suspension, revocation or violation of the PA DEP permits shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the enforcement
provisions of § 180-109 of this chapter.
(6) The manner of storage of junk or other materials or equipment on
the site shall facilitate access for firefighting, shall prevent hazards
from fire or explosion and shall prevent the accumulation of
stagnant water.
(7) The junkyard operation shall comply with the performance
standards of § 180-68 of this chapter.
(8) No junk shall be stored or accumulated and no structure shall be
located within 300 feet of any dwelling or within 100 feet of any
property line or public street.
(9) The premises shall be enclosed by a metal chain link fence not less
than eight feet in height supported on steel posts with a selflatching
gate. The fence shall be located on the inside of the buffer
area required by Subsection V(11), below, and shall be maintained
in good condition.
(10) The fence shall be supplemented with screening material that
creates a visual barrier that is at least eighty-percent opaque.
(11) Buffer Area A, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining property in an R-A, R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District.
(12) The site shall be designed utilizing natural topography and/or
constructed earthen mounds so as to obstruct visibility from
adjacent public streets and properties.
(13) The operator shall submit a stormwater management plan to
control runoff for review and approval by the Borough Engineer.
(14) The operator shall obtain a license from the Borough prior to
initiating operations that shall be renewable annually upon
payment of the required license fee established from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council and subject to inspection by the
Zoning Officer to determine continuing compliance with these
standards.
W. Kennel; animal shelter, subject to:
(1) In the R-A District, kennels shall be accessory to a farm or, when
proposed as a principal use, shall have a minimum site area of five
acres.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:552
(2) The kennel shall be licensed by the commonwealth. Animal shelters
shall obtain a kennel license, if required by the commonwealth.
(3) Outdoor kennels, outdoor runs or other outdoor shelter facilities
shall be located at least 300 feet from any occupied dwelling on an
adjacent lot and at least 200 feet from any property line adjoining
property in an R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(4) Outdoor runs, outdoor shelter facilities and similar facilities shall
be constructed for easy cleaning, shall be adequately secured by a
minimum six-foot-high fence with self-latching gate and shall be
screened by Buffer Area C, as described in § 180-69A of this
chapter.
(5) The operator shall submit an animal waste management and
disposal plan to the Borough.
(6) Domestic pets kept in an outdoor kennel or outdoor animal shelter
shall be limited to a maximum of 10 animals on the first five acres,
plus two animals for each additional acre or portion thereof, up to
10 acres or more. There shall be no limit on the number of animals
kept on properties of 10 acres or more.
X. Life-care community, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required for a life-care community shall be 25
acres.
(2) The site proposed for a life-care community, as defined herein, shall
have frontage on and direct vehicular access to a street defined by
this chapter as an "arterial street" or a "collector street." Access to
local Borough streets shall not be permitted, except that a
secondary controlled "emergency only" access may be provided
from a local Borough street, if approved by the Borough.
(3) A life-care community shall include one or more of the following
dwelling types:
(a) Single-family dwellings.
(b) Two-family dwellings.
(c) Triplexes; quadraplexes.
(d) Townhouse buildings containing no more than eight dwelling
units per building.
(e) Garden apartment buildings.
(4) In addition to the foregoing dwelling types, a life-care community
shall include the following supporting uses:
(a) Common leisure and/or recreational areas.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:553
(b) Common dining area.
(c) Nursing home, licensed by the commonwealth, and/or
personal-care boarding home, licensed by the commonwealth,
and/or assisted-living facility and/or independent-living facility.
(5) In addition, a life-care community may include one or more of the
following supporting uses, subject to approval by the Borough:
(a) Postal station for use of the residents and staff only.
(b) Banking facility for use of the residents only.
(c) Pharmacy and/or medical offices for use of the residents only.
(d) Personal services for the use of the residents only, including
beauty shop, barbershop, common laundry facilities, drycleaning
valet.
(e) Ice cream parlor and/or florist/gift shop for the use of residents
and their invited guests only.
(f) Adult day-care center licensed by the commonwealth.
(g) Taxi, van or similar transportation services for the residents.
(6) The maximum dwelling unit density permitted in a life-care
community shall be 12 dwelling units per acre. The calculation of
dwelling unit density shall not include beds in a nursing home or
personal-care boarding home.
(7) All principal and accessory structures shall be located at least 75
feet from any property line adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District. Along all other property lines, all principal and
accessory structures shall be located at least 50 feet from the
boundaries of the life-care community development site.
(8) Where two or more principal buildings occupy the same lot, the
minimum distance between the buildings shall be 20 feet.
(9) Minimum lot area, lot width and setbacks for recorded lots
proposed for dwellings within the life-care community development
shall comply with the following requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area:
[1] Single-family, two-family, triplex or quadraplex: 6,000
square feet per dwelling unit.
[2] Townhouse: 3,000 square feet per dwelling unit.
[3] Garden apartment: one acre.
(b) Minimum lot width:
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:554
[1] Single-family, two-family, triplex or quadraplex: 50 feet.
[2] Townhouse: 25 feet.
[3] Garden apartment: 150 feet.
(c) Front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Side yard: 10 feet, unless attached to another unit.
(e) Rear yard: 20 feet.
(10) Buffer Area B, as described in § 180-69A of this chapter, shall be
provided along all property lines adjoining property in any R-A, R-1,
R-2 or R-3 District. The buffer area shall be located in the common
areas and shall not be included in any individual lot containing a
dwelling.
(11) There shall be a minimum of two parking spaces for each singlefamily
dwelling and one parking space for each other type of
dwelling unit, plus one parking space for each employee on peak
shift. In the event that a nursing home or personal-care boarding
home is proposed, parking shall be provided in accordance with the
requirements of § 180-81 of this chapter for those uses. Additional
parking for the supporting uses intended for the residents and their
invited guests shall not be required.
(12) Sidewalks shall be provided to connect buildings, common outdoor
areas and parking areas.
(13) The site design shall include outdoor common areas, gathering
places and passive or active recreation facilities appropriate to the
needs of the residents. Common outdoor areas shall be attractively
landscaped.
Y. Mineral removal, subject to:
(1) Removal of minerals encountered during the routine grading of a
site for the purposes of an approved land development or for the
construction of public improvements shall be excluded from these
regulations and from the requirement to obtain approval of a
conditional use application, provided evidence is presented to the
Borough that all applicable requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) are met.
(2) There shall be no removal of minerals or vegetative cover within
100 feet of the bank of any stream or natural watercourse identified
on maps prepared by the United States Geological Survey (USGS).
(3) Mineral removal shall be prohibited in watersheds or rivers or
streams now or hereafter designated by the Pennsylvania Fish
Commission as a "wilderness trout stream," by the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection as part of the Scenic
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:555
Rivers System or designated under the Federal Wild and Scenic
Rivers Act.
(4) No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of the
property line of any public building, school, church, community or
institutional building, commercial building, public park or private
recreational area.
(5) No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of the
outside right-of-way line of any public street, except where access
roads or haulage roads join the right-of-way line and where the
appropriate state or federal agency having jurisdiction over the
conduct of mineral removal operations shall permit it in accordance
with law.
(6) No mineral removal shall be conducted that will adversely affect
any publicly owned park or places included in the National Register
of Historic Sites, unless approved by the governmental agency with
jurisdiction over the park or historic site.
(7) No mineral removal shall be conducted within 100 feet of the
property line of a cemetery.
(8) No mineral removal shall be conducted within 300 feet of the
property line of an occupied dwelling, unless the consent of the
owner has been obtained in advance of the filing of the application
for conditional use approval.
(9) The applicant shall submit to the Borough a copy of all materials
provided to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP) with the permit application.
(10) The applicant shall show the proposed routes of all trucks to be
utilized for hauling and the estimated weights of those trucks. The
applicant shall show evidence of compliance with designated
weight limits on Borough streets and shall design the hauling
routes for the mineral removal operation to minimize the impact on
local streets within the Borough.
(11) The operator shall post a bond in favor of the Borough and in a
form acceptable to the Borough prior to beginning operations in
the amount of $100,000 for each mile of Borough street or portion
thereof proposed to be traversed for removing minerals from the
site. The term of the bond shall begin on the date the zoning
certificate is issued. The bond shall be returned to the operator
upon completion of all operations, any backfilling and any
reconstruction of a damaged roadway due to excess weight in
excess of the posted weight for the street. Any failure to complete
the reconstruction required by this chapter shall result in forfeiture
of the required bond. Those portions of the Borough streets that
have been damaged shall be determined by inspection of the
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:556
Borough Engineer and shall be reconstructed to current Borough
specifications for street construction.
(12) Portions of the site where mineral removal operations are
conducted may be required to be fenced or screened, as necessary,
to provide security and protect adjacent properties.
(13)No top-of-slope or quarry wall shall be located closer than 100 feet
to any property or street line. The perimeter surrounding the area
of operation shall be fenced with a chain link fence of a minimum
height of six feet to prevent access by both animals and children.
(14)No rock crusher, cement plant or other crushing, grinding,
polishing or cutting machinery or other physical or chemical
process for treating such products shall be permitted.
(15) The applicant shall comply with all applicable state and federal
regulations and shall show evidence of obtaining the required state
and federal permits, including proof of insurability, before initiating
any work and shall maintain the required permits throughout the
duration of all operations. Any suspension or revocation of the
required state or federal permits shall constitute a violation of
zoning approval and will result in the suspension or revocation of
zoning approval and/or enforcement of the penalty provisions of
this chapter.
(16) If blasting is proposed, it shall be subject to approval by Borough
Council. Applications for approval of blasting shall include the
following information:
(a) A site survey documenting the land uses on the perimeter of
the site.
(b) Photographs of preexisting conditions on immediately adjacent
properties.
(c) Credentials, certifications and experience of the contractor
selected to perform the blasting.
(d) References from previous projects of similar size and nature.
(e) A geotechnical report prepared by a qualified geotechnical
engineer documenting subsurface conditions on the site and
the potential impacts on adjoining properties and
recommendations to mitigate negative impacts.
(17) If blasting is approved, a seismograph shall be placed on the site
during all times when blasting is performed. Seismograph readings
shall be monitored by an independent engineering consultant
whose credentials are acceptable to the Borough and whose fee is
paid by the applicant.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:557
(18) The applicant shall provide reclamation plans for the site that
demonstrate that the condition of the land after the operation is
completed will allow economically and ecologically productive uses
of the type permitted in the district in which the site is located.
Acceptance of the reclamation plan shall not constitute approval of
any aspect of any future development plan.
(19) Approval of the conditional use shall expire if work authorized in
the application for the conditional use is not commenced within six
months of the date of approval of the conditional use application by
Borough Council, unless the applicant submits a written request for
an extension prior to the expiration of the six months after the date
of approval.
(20) Once work is initiated under an approved application for
conditional use, zoning approval shall be valid for a period of one
year from the date of conditional use approval by Borough Council.
An application for renewal of zoning approval shall be submitted
prior to the expiration of zoning approval and shall be approved by
the Zoning Officer upon demonstration by the applicant that all
conditions of approval of the conditional use and the required
federal and state permits remain in full force and effect and that
the applicant is diligently pursuing the completion of the mineral
removal operation.
(21) During the mineral removal operation, the Borough Engineer may
inspect the site at the request of Borough Council to determine
continuing compliance with these standards and criteria and any
conditions of approval. The cost of inspection by the Borough
Engineer shall be borne by the operator.
Z. Mini warehouse or self-storage building, subject to:
(1) The minimum site area required shall be five acres.
(2) The site shall have direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector
street, as defined by this chapter.
(3) Vehicular access to the site shall be limited to one two-way or two
one-way driveways from each arterial or collector street on which
the site has frontage.
(4) All one-way driveways shall have a minimum of one ten-foot
parking lane, plus one eighteen-foot travel lane.
(5) All two-way driveways shall provide a minimum of one ten-foot
parking lane, plus two twelve-foot travel lanes. Parking lanes may
be eliminated where the driveway does not serve storage units.
(6) Each storage unit shall be adjacent to a parking lane.
(7) All interior driveways shall be paved with an asphalt or similar
surface sufficient for the loads the driveways are expected to bear.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:558
(8) Parking shall be provided in accordance with the following
requirements:
(a) Two spaces for manager's quarters, if proposed.
(b) One space for each 50 storage units, which spaces shall be
located near the manager's quarters or office to be used by
prospective clients.
(9) Buffer Area A, as described in § 180-69A, shall be provided along all
property lines that adjoin property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District.
(10) The perimeter of the site shall be fenced with a minimum eightfoot-
high fence with self-latching gate. The fence shall be
supplemented with screening material that creates a visual barrier
that is at least 80% opaque. The buffer area, if required by
Subsection Z(9) above, shall be located outside the perimeter
fence.
(11) The maximum building height shall be 20 feet.
(12) The minimum distance between separate freestanding storage
buildings shall be 20 feet.
(13) The maximum length of any storage building shall be 200 feet.
(14) The maximum size of any storage unit shall be 14 feet wide, 40 feet
deep and one story and no more than 20 feet in height. If storage
units are placed back-to-back, the maximum width of the building
shall not exceed 40 feet.
(15) The maximum lot coverage by all buildings shall be 40%.
(16)Office space may be provided which shall not exceed 5% of the total
area devoted to storage.
(17) No storage shall take place outside of an enclosed building.
(18) Storage units shall not be equipped with water or sanitary sewer
service.
(19)No business activity other than rental of storage units shall be
conducted on the premises.
(20) Operations shall be regulated so that nuisances such as visual
blight, glare, noise, blowing debris and dust shall not be created.
(21) Exterior finishes of the storage units shall be compatible with the
character of development on adjoining properties.
(22) The design of the storage buildings shall be sealed by a
Pennsylvania-registered architect.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:559
(23)No sign shall be placed on the buildings or on their rooftops. One
freestanding business identification sign shall be permitted that
complies with the requirements of Article XIV of this chapter for
the zoning district in which the use is located.
(24)No hazardous materials or substances shall be permitted to be
stored in the storage buildings other than those permitted by the
Borough Fire Code. Both the landlord and the tenants of the
storage buildings shall be responsible for the prevention of the
storage of hazardous materials or substances in the storage
buildings that would be beyond the allowance of the Borough Fire
Code.
(25) A minimum of one fire hydrant shall be provided on the site subject
to the approval of the number and location of hydrants by the
Borough Fire Marshal. The facility shall comply with all local fire
codes.
AA. Mobile home park, subject to:
(1) The application shall comply with all applicable requirements of
Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Borough
Code governing mobile home parks.
(2) The minimum site required for a mobile home park shall be 10
contiguous acres.
(3) The site shall be served by public water and public sanitary sewers.
(4) The minimum mobile home lot shall be 6,000 square feet in area.
The minimum lot width shall be 60 feet.
(5) Minimum setbacks and distances between mobile homes shall
comply with the requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development.
(6) Every mobile home slab shall have direct vehicular access to a
public or private street constructed in accordance with the
requirements of Chapter 163, Subdivision and Land Development.
(7) Each mobile home lot shall provide two off-street parking spaces.
BB. Oil and gas operations and impoundments used exclusively for oil and
gas operations, subject to: [Amended 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(1) Procedure.
(a) Drilling rigs shall be exempt from the height limitations of the
zoning district in which they are located. If the well site is
located in an area that is subject to airport zoning regulations,
the applicant shall present a letter from the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) indicating that the height of the rig
complies.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:560
(b) Seismic testing shall be exempt from obtaining zoning
approval provided the testing is conducted on property in a
zoning district where oil and gas operations is an authorized
use.
(c) Where conditional use approval is required for oil and gas
operations, conditional use approval shall be required for each
well site; however, if multiple well heads are proposed to be
located at the well site, separate approval is not required for
each well head if the original conditional use application
indicates that multiple well heads are proposed.
(d) Where conditional use approval is required for impoundments,
impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas operations
which are on a well site shall be reviewed as part of the
conditional use application for oil and gas operations at that
location. Impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas
operations which are a principal use on a site other than a well
site shall require conditional use approval subject to
compliance with all applicable conditions of this § 180-66BB.
(e) In those districts where oil and gas operations and
impoundments used exclusively for oil and gas operations are
authorized as a permitted use by right, the uses shall be
subject to all applicable requirements of this § 180-66BB
except that the conditional use procedure, including a public
hearing, shall not be required.
(f) Zoning approval shall not be required for in-ground or
aboveground gathering or transmission lines; however,
permits for crossing or disturbance of any state or Borough
street shall be required.
(2) Content of application for conditional use approval.
(a) A narrative describing the proposed use, including:
[1] The approximate number of acres to be disturbed and the
associated equipment to be used in developing the well
site and/or impoundment;
[2] The proposed number of wells, including the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection permit number
for all proposed wells if available at the time of application
or provided when issued later;
[3] A map showing the planned access route to the well site
and/or impoundment on public streets and a general plan
indicating the type, number and weight of vehicles used
for transportation of materials and equipment;
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:561
[4] A description of how potential damage to public roads
adjacent to the tract will be addressed;
[5] A general schedule of anticipated beginning and ending
dates of construction of the impoundment and/or well site
preparation, drilling, perforating, hydraulic fracturing and
production measured in weeks or months from the date of
conditional use approval;
[6] An accurate legal description of the surface lease property
and a list of property owners with tax parcel numbers.
(b) The well survey plat submitted to the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection (PA DEP) showing the planned
surface location of the well(s) and/or impoundments.
(c) A site plan prepared by a licensed engineer showing
compliance with these express standards and criteria of
conditional use approval.
(d) The well site emergency address.
(e) A copy of the operator's preparedness prevention and
contingency (PPC) plan as required by the PA DEP.
(f) A statement that the development and operation of the well
site and/or impoundment will comply with all applicable
federal and state permitting requirements.
(g) A copy of any state and federal permits already obtained at the
time of conditional use application submission.
(h) A noise management plan documenting how noise impacts will
be mitigated.
(i) Copies of all permits issued by the PA DEP for water
withdrawal and disposal identifying the source of the water,
proposed truck routes and/or temporary water lines, on-site
storage and treatment and disposal facilities.
(3) Prior to development of the well site or impoundment.
(a) The operator shall meet with representatives of the school
district and public safety officials to develop a traffic
management plan to ensure safety of pedestrians, students and
drivers on public streets, school crossings, pedestrian
crossings and school bus or transit stops during times of
anticipated heavy or frequent truck traffic associated with site
development, drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
(b) The operator shall invite residents of properties within 1,000
feet of the well site to a meeting to be held at least 30 days
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:562
prior to the initiation of drilling, to present the operator's plans
for the well and to allow for questions and answers.
(c) At the meeting with the residents, the operator shall provide
the following information to each resident within 1,000 feet of
the planned surface location of the well or wells.
[1] A copy of the well survey plat showing the location of the
planned well;
[2] A general description of the planned operations at the
planned well and associated equipment to be used in the
development of the well; and
[3] The contact information for the operator and the well site
supervisor.
(d) The Borough shall be provided with the name of the person
supervising the drilling operation and a phone number where
such person can be reached 24 hours a day.
(e) Upon request from the Borough, the operator shall, prior to
drilling of its first oil and gas well in the Borough, make
available with at least 30 days' notice, at its sole cost and
expense, one appropriate group training program of up to five
hours for first responders. Such training shall be made
available at least annually during the period when the operator
anticipates drilling activities in the Borough. First responders
shall have a minimum of five hours of training per year to meet
this standard. This requirement can be met through
participation in training programs administered by the
Pennsylvania State Fire Marshal.
(f) No later than 30 days prior to beginning any work on an
approved well site or impoundment, the applicant shall submit
to the Borough a true and correct copy of all permits (General
ESCGP-1) issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection (PA DEP). In addition, the Borough
shall be provided copies of all plans (erosion and sedimentation
control, grading, etc.) required by the PA DEP. All required
permits shall be maintained throughout the duration of the
drilling operation. Any suspension or revocation of permits by
the PA DEP shall be reported to the Borough and shall
constitute a violation of Borough zoning approval and may
result in the suspension or revocation of zoning approval.
(g) Access directly to state roads shall require Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation (Penn DOT) highway occupancy
permit approval. Prior to initiating any work at a well site, the
Borough shall be provided a copy of the highway occupancy
permit.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:563
(h) The operator shall execute a maintenance agreement with the
Borough and post a bond in favor of the Borough in a form
acceptable to the Borough and in an amount to be determined
by the Borough Engineer in accordance with limits provided by
law prior to beginning any work at a well site to guarantee
restoration of weight-restricted Borough streets damaged as a
result of hauling associated with the drilling operation.
(4) Development of the well site or impoundment.
(a) No construction activities involving excavation, alteration or
repair work on any access road or well site shall be performed
between sunrise and sunset. These time restrictions shall not
apply to drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
(b) The operator shall take all necessary safeguards as directed by
the Borough to ensure that the Borough roads utilized remain
free of dirt, mud and debris resulting from development
activities and/or shall ensure such roads are promptly swept or
cleaned if dirt, mud and debris occur, as directed by the
Borough.
(c) Driveways shall be of sufficient length so that there will be no
stacking of vehicles on public streets.
(d) The access driveway off the public street to the well site shall
be gated at the entrance to prevent illegal access into the well
site. The well site assigned address shall be clearly visible on
the access gate for emergency 911 purposes. In addition, the
sign shall include the well name and number, the name of the
operator and the telephone number for a person responsible
who may be contacted in case of emergency.
(e) Any on-site freshwater impoundments, retention ponds or
wastewater pits shall be fenced to restrict access by
unauthorized persons or animals. Wastewater pits shall be
equipped with bird netting.
(5) Drilling and hydraulic fracturing.
(a) At least 30 days prior to the commencement of drilling, the
operator shall provide a copy of the drilling permit issued by
the PA DEP to the Borough Zoning Officer.
(b) Drilling shall not be permitted within any floodway identified in
the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) prepared and approved by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).
(c) Oil and gas drilling activities shall comply with all applicable
federal and state safety regulations.
(d) During drilling and hydraulic fracturing, clearly visible
warning signage shall be posted at the well site.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:564
(e) During drilling and hydraulic fracturing, all equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by
unauthorized persons; however, a guard station with twentyfour-
hour staffing, seven days a week, at the entrance to the
well site may be provided in lieu of fencing the site.
(f) The operator shall implement the traffic management plan
developed after consultation with school district and public
safety officials to ensure safety of pedestrians, students and
drivers on public streets and at crosswalks, school bus stops
and transit stops during times of heavy truck traffic traveling
to and from the site.
(g) Recognizing that adequate and appropriate lighting is
essential to the safety of those involved in oil and gas drilling,
the operator shall take steps, to the extent practicable, to
direct site lighting downward and inward toward the well site,
well head or other area being developed so as to attempt to
minimize glare on public streets and adjacent buildings within
300 feet of the well site, well head or other area being
developed.
(h) All operations, including drilling and hydraulic fracturing, shall
comply with the noise standards in the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
(i) If, after initiation of drilling and/or hydraulic fracturing
activities, a complaint is received by the Borough from any
persons, whether a resident or otherwise, occupying a
protected structure, as defined herein, regarding noise
generated during drilling or hydraulic fracturing activities, the
operator shall, within 24 hours of receipt of the complaint from
the Borough, continuously monitor for a forty-eight-hour
period at a point which is the closer to the complainant's
building of:
[1] The complainant's protected structure property line
nearest to the well site or equipment generating the noise;
or
[2] One hundred feet from the protected structure.
(j) If the operator of any oil and gas operations engages in any
noise testing as required by this chapter, the operator shall
provide preliminary data to the Borough no later than 10
business days following completion of the noise testing. Once
the monitoring is complete, the operator shall meet with
representatives of the Borough and affected residents to
discuss whether possible noise abatement measures are
warranted to comply with the noise standards of § 180-68C of
the Zoning Ordinance.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:565
(k) In the case of oil and gas operations, the Borough may require
acoustical blankets, sound walls, mufflers or other alternative
methods to ensure compliance with the noise standards,
depending on the location of a proposed well site with respect
to protected structures and the results of noise monitoring.
(l) Only essential supervisory, safety, emergency and operational
personnel working on the well site shall be permitted to occupy
any trailer or temporary living quarters on the well site
overnight. Within 30 days of completion of drilling and
hydraulic fracturing on the well site, the trailers or temporary
living quarters shall be removed from the well site.
(6) Production.
(a) Prior to initiating production at a well site, a plan for the
transmission of gas from the well site to an off-site pipeline, or
a statement that there is no off-site pipeline. The plan shall
identify gathering lines and compressor stations that serve the
well site and which are located within the Borough or within
1,000 feet beyond the Borough boundary. Borough approval
shall be required to utilize any public rights-of-way. Contact
information for the pipeline owner and compressor station
operator shall also be included.
(b) Remediation of the well site shall be accomplished in
accordance with the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PA DEP).
(c) The completed well pad shall be enclosed by an eight-foot-high
chain link fence with a locking gate.
(d) All permanent equipment, including, but not limited to, well
heads, tanks, meters and piping, shall be screened by a sixfoot-
high vegetative screen on any side of the well pad that is
reasonably necessary to block the line of sight from any
protected structure, as defined herein, that is located 750 feet
or less from the well pad, provided the vegetative screen does
not block access to the well pad.
CC. Planned industrial park, subject to:
(1) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
(2) The minimum site area required shall be 10 acres.
(3) Once the improvements are completed in an approved planned
industrial park, lots within an approved and recorded plan maybe
sold and developed as independent entities for any authorized use
in the zoning district in which it is located.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:566
(4) Only the uses permitted by right or authorized as conditional uses
or uses by special exception in the zoning district in which the
planned industrial park is located shall be permitted in the planned
industrial park.
(5) The site plan shall be designed to minimize points of access to the
public street. Shared driveways shall be utilized where feasible,
and cross easements shall be dedicated for common access, where
necessary.
(6) The site shall be planned as a unit, and uniform signage and
landscaping and common parking and loading areas shall be
proposed to promote efficiency and preserve a common design
theme.
(7) A perimeter setback of 100 feet shall be maintained along the side
and rear property lines of the planned industrial park development
site.
(8) The perimeter of the site shall be screened by Buffer Area A, as
described in § 180-69A of this chapter, along all property lines that
adjoin property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(9) All proposed uses hall comply with the performance standards of
§ 180-68 of this chapter.
DD. Private club, subject to:
(1) Any establishment that includes a restaurant shall further be
subject to the off-street parking requirements of Article XIII for the
portion of the building devoted to restaurant use.
(2) Any rental of the facility to nonmembers shall require on-site
management and/or security personnel during the event.
(3) Activities on the site and within the building shall comply with the
noise standards specified in § 180-68 of this chapter.
(4) Doors and windows in the building shall remain closed during any
entertainment involving a speaker system and/or amplification.
Outdoor speakers shall not be permitted.
(5) All off-street parking that adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District shall be screened by a Buffer Area C, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
EE. Private use helipad, subject to:
(1) Only one private use helipad shall be permitted on a lot or parcel.
(2) Private use helipads shall be located at least 250 feet from any
property line or public street, except for helipads accessory to a
hospital that may be located so as to maximize accessibility to
existing emergency facilities.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:567
(3) Evidence of compliance with all applicable regulations of the
Federal Aviation Administration and Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, Bureau of Aviation, shall be submitted.
(4) The helicopter landing pad shall be paved, level and maintained
dirt free. Rooftop pads shall be free of all loose stone and
aggregate.
(5) An application for a helipad on a roof shall be accompanied by a
certification by a registered engineer that the loads imposed by the
helicopter will be supported by the structure.
(6) Maintenance of aircraft shall be prohibited, except for maintenance
of an emergency nature.
(7) There shall be no storage of fuel at the helipad.
(8) There shall be no basing of aircraft at the helipad.
(9) The helipad shall be fenced and secured at all times to preclude
access by the general public.
(10) Clear areas for emergency landings of the helicopter in the event of
mechanical failure shall be provided. These emergency landing
areas shall be located within the normal glide range of the
helicopter with one engine off when operating in the approved
takeoff or landing lane from the helipad.
(11) Lighting shall be shielded away from adjacent properties and shall
comply with the provisions of § 180-68G governing glare.
FF. Public parking lot or public parking garage, subject to:
(1) All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed
to have direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as
defined by this chapter, unless they are located within the site of an
approved planned industrial park.
(2) All public parking lots or public parking garages shall be designed
to minimize traffic congestion on the site or within the garage and
for traffic entering or leaving the site or parking lot or parking
garage.
(3) The design of any parking garage proposed to be located on
property that adjoins property in any R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
shall take into account the height, visual, light and air impacts on
adjoining residences and shall utilize architectural materials for
the exterior walls facing those residential areas that are compatible
with the residential character of adjoining properties.
(4) Any public parking garage, whether proposed as a principal
structure or an accessory structure, shall comply with the yard
requirements for a principal structure.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:568
(5) Any public parking lot that is reserved, in part, for the customers or
employees of a specific use shall be located within 500 feet of the
specific use that it is intended to serve.
GG. Public utility building or structure, subject to:
(1) The minimum lot area required for buildings intended for human
occupancy or storage of equipment shall be one acre. There shall
be no minimum lot area required for all other structures.
(2) Maintenance vehicles shall be stored within a completely enclosed
building, as defined herein.
(3) Outdoor storage of materials or equipment, other than
maintenance vehicles, shall be permitted only if the storage area is
completely enclosed by a minimum eight-foot-high fence with
locking gate and is screened by one-hundred-percent-opaque
screening material placed in the fencing or by a six-foot-high dense,
compact evergreen hedge located on the exterior of the fence.
(4) Any area of the building that is used for business offices shall
comply with the parking requirements of Article XIII of this chapter
for that use. Any area of the building that is used for storage of
material, vehicles or other equipment shall provide one parking
space for each 1,500 feet of gross floor area devoted to that use.
HH. Sportsmen's club, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required shall be 20 acres.
(2) Any outdoor lighting shall be shielded and reflected away from
streets and adjoining properties.
(3) If an outdoor shooting range is proposed, the use shall comply with
all of the following standards:
(a) The discharging of firearms and archery shall not be permitted
within 1,000 feet of any existing residence.
(b) The outdoor discharging of firearms shall not be permitted
between the hours of dusk and 8:00 a.m.
(c) An adequate backstop shall be provided to prevent bullets and
arrows from ricocheting.
(d) The firing of weapons shall be under the supervision of a
qualified range officer and in conformance with regulations
recommended by the National Rifle Association (NRA).
(e) All shooting areas shall be enclosed with a fence to keep people
out of the line of fire and the target area.
(f) Sound levels at the property lines shall not exceed 100
decibels.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:569
(g) Two parking spaces shall be provided for each shooting
position or station.
(4) All outdoor activities, other than an outdoor shooting range, shall
be located at least 300 feet from any existing residence and shall
cease operations at sunset.
(5) Except for the noise limits authorized in Subsection HH(3)(f),
above, for an outdoor shooting range, the use shall comply with the
performance standards of § 180-68 of this chapter.
(6) All properties adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
shall be screened by Buffer Area B, as described in § 180-69A of
this chapter.
II. Temporary use or structure other than a construction trailer, model
home or sales office, subject to:
(1) A transient merchant license, if required by Borough ordinance,
shall be obtained.
(2) The proposed temporary use or structure shall be limited to those
uses or structures otherwise authorized in the zoning district.
(3) In the C-1 and I-1 Districts, preparation and/or serving of food in an
outdoor setting shall be permitted only if all of the following
requirements are met:
(a) The preparation and serving of food that is part of a special
event that does not exceed 72 consecutive hours in duration
shall be exempt from the requirement to obtain approval of a
use by special exception under this section; however, a
certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the Borough
Zoning Officer subject to the applicant demonstrating
compliance with the standards and criteria of this § 180-66II.
(b) Evidence of an approved permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture, Bureau of Food Safety and
Laboratory Services, or its successor agency.
(c) The preparation and serving of food shall not be permitted on
any vacant lot and shall only be permitted on the site of an
existing business.
(d) The area used for preparing and serving the food shall not
obstruct any sidewalk or public right-of-way, nor shall it
obstruct the free flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on the
site or adjoining the site. On any sidewalk, there shall be
maintained a minimum of five feet unobstructed width for the
passage of pedestrians, and in the case where there is parallel
parking permitted along such sidewalk, a minimum of four feet
adjacent to the curb to permit the discharging of passengers
shall be provided. These required unobstructed areas on the
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:570
sidewalk may be combined into one area at least five feet wide
along the curb.
(e) No noise or odor shall emanate from such outdoor area where
food is prepared and/or served that adversely affects any
adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District within 300
feet of the outdoor area.
(f) The area used for preparing and serving food shall not
eliminate the availability of any existing parking spaces on the
site.
(g) The activity shall comply with all applicable Borough codes and
ordinances.
(h) The site intended to be used for the preparation and/or serving
of food shall provide rest room facilities available to the public,
unless the existing business on the site has rest room facilities
that will be available to the public visiting the temporary use.
(i) The owner of the existing business or the operator of the
temporary use involving the preparation and/or serving of food
in an outdoor setting shall provide the Borough with a
certificate of insurance, in an amount at least equal to
$2,000,000 per occurrence and $3,000,000 aggregate,
indemnifying the Borough against any liability resulting from
such use.
(4) Approval of temporary uses or structures shall be granted for a
specific time period not to exceed six months. If the Zoning Hearing
Board determines that the need for the proposed use will occur on
an annual basis, the Board may authorize the Zoning Officer to
issue the temporary use permit on an annual basis subject to
continued compliance with these criteria and any conditions
attached to approval of the use by special exception.
(5) All temporary uses or structures shall be removed within 10 days of
the expiration of the specific period for which the structure or use
is approved. Temporary uses or structures that are authorized only
for the duration of a particular event shall be removed within 48
hours after the completion of the event.
(6) All temporary uses or structures that are proposed to be accessible
to the public shall provide off-street parking in accordance with the
requirements of § 180-81C for the proposed use.
(7) Vehicular access for all temporary uses or structures that are
proposed to be accessible to the public shall be designed to
minimize congestion on the lot and not impede the free flow of
traffic for any other permanent use or structure on the lot.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:571
(8) All temporary uses or structures proposed to be used as principal
uses or structures shall comply with all area and bulk regulations of
the zoning district in which they are located. All temporary uses or
structures that are proposed to be used as accessory uses or
structures shall comply with the requirements of the zoning district
for accessory uses.
(9) Temporary uses or structures that are authorized as principal uses
or structures and that are accessible to the public shall provide
sanitary facilities, unless such facilities already exist on the lot.
JJ. Transitional development, subject to:
(1) For properties in the R-2 District that have frontage on an arterial
or collector street and also have at least one property line that is
located within 1,000 feet of the boundary of a property that is
zoned C-1, measured along the right-of-way of that arterial or
collector street, one or more of the following uses may be
established on the property:
(a) Apartment in combination with business.
(b) Bank or financial institution.
(c) Bed-and-breakfast.
(d) Bed-and-breakfast inn.
(e) Business or professional offices.
(f) Conversion apartments.
(g) Day-care center.
(h) Delicatessen.
(i) Personal services.
(j) Restaurant, carry-out.
(k) Restaurant, sit-down.
(l) Specialty food store.
(m) Specialty retail store.
(n) Tea room.
(o) Comparable uses not specifically listed above, subject to the
criteria contained in § 180-66M.
(2) The foregoing uses may be established in an existing dwelling or
may be located in a newly constructed building, provided the gross
floor area of the newly constructed building shall not exceed 3,500
square feet.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:572
(3) The minimum lot area required to construct a new building to
house any of the uses authorized by Subsection JJ(1), above, shall
be one acre. Existing single-family dwellings shall not be
demolished in order to create a vacant lot eligible for construction
of a new building to accommodate the uses authorized by
Subsection JJ(1), above.
(4) Conversion apartments or apartments in combination with
business may be established in an existing single-family dwelling
subject to the following:
(a) Each dwelling unit shall have a minimum habitable floor area
of 800 square feet.
(b) Dwelling units in basements or accessory garages shall not be
permitted.
(c) Dwelling units in combination with a business shall have a
separate entrance that does not require passing through any
area devoted to office, service or retail use.
(d) Shared parking for residential and business uses shall not be
permitted.
(5) Conversion of an existing dwelling to any of the uses listed in
Subsection JJ(1), above, shall be subject to all of the following
regulations:
(a) Exterior alterations of the dwelling shall be permitted to
comply with handicapped accessibility or firesafety regulations
or to modify entrances or enclose porches. Any other
alterations to enlarge the floor area devoted to office or
customer use shall be limited so that the maximum gross floor
area of the structure, including basement and garage, shall not
exceed 3,500 square feet.
(b) No conversion of accessory structures to house a principal use
shall be permitted; however, existing accessory structures may
be used for parking or storage.
(6) Off-street parking shall be provided based on the ratio of one
parking space for each 200 square feet of net floor area devoted to
office or customer use. In the case of a bed-and-breakfast or bedand-
breakfast inn, one space shall be provided for each sleeping
room. In the case of a conversion apartment or apartment in
combination with business, two parking spaces shall be provided
for each dwelling unit.
(7) Parking shall not be located in any minimum required side yard;
however, access driveways may be constructed in the minimum
required side yard, provided the paving is at least five feet from the
property line.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:573
(8) A landscaped area at least five feet in depth shall be maintained
along all property lines adjoining an existing dwelling. The
landscaped area shall be planted with a continuous evergreen
hedge at least six feet in height.
(9) Adequate area shall be provided on the lot for vehicles to turn
around so that vehicles will not be required to back onto a public
street.
(10) A minimum of 10% of the area of the front yard shall be landscaped
with ground cover, trees and shrubs in accordance with a
landscaping plan approved by the Borough. The clear sight triangle
required by § 180-70D shall be maintained.
(11) In the event that two or more adjacent lots are converted to any
authorized nonresidential use, either simultaneously or in
sequence, the feasibility of sharing a common driveway shall be
submitted for review by Penn DOT as part of an application for a
highway occupancy permit. If a shared driveway is permitted, cross
easements and a maintenance agreement executed by the parties
shall be submitted to the Borough.
(12) Sidewalks shall be constructed along the full frontage of the lot
along the arterial or collector street. The minimum width of the
sidewalk shall be four feet. Sidewalks shall be constructed in
accordance with Borough construction specifications.
(13) One freestanding ground sign shall be permitted on each lot,
regardless of the number of businesses on the lot. The maximum
surface area of the sign shall be 12 square feet. The maximum
height of the sign shall be four feet. The sign shall be located at
least 10 feet from any side or rear property line and at least three
feet from the public street right-of-way.
(14) Each business shall be permitted to have one wall sign, provided
the total surface area of the wall signs for any building shall not
exceed one square foot for each lineal foot of the front wall of the
building, regardless of the number of businesses in the building.
KK. Truck and heavy equipment rental, sales and service, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required shall be five acres.
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter.
(3) No part of any truck or heavy equipment or accessories displayed
outdoors shall be located less than 35 feet from the property line
adjoining any property located in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District
nor less than 20 feet from any other property line.
(4) No vehicle or equipment shall be parked on adjacent property or in
any public street right-of-way.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:574
(5) No vehicle shall be displayed or offered for sale that does not have
all of the mechanical and body components necessary for its safe
and lawful operation.
(6) A permanent structure for office administration, sales, rental and/
or servicing shall be provided.
(7) All property lines adjoining property located in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District shall be screened by Buffer Area A, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
LL. Truck terminal, subject to:
(1) The minimum site required shall be 10 acres.
(2) The site shall have frontage on and direct vehicular access to an
arterial or collector street, as defined by this chapter. Access to a
local street, as defined by this chapter, shall not be permitted.
(3) No point on the site boundary shall be located within 300 feet of
any property line of a property containing a residential dwelling.
(4) Ingress, egress and internal traffic circulation shall be designed to
ensure safety and minimize congestion.
(5) Site lighting shall be designed with cutoff luminaires that have a
maximum cutoff angle of 60°. (See the illustration in Appendix
B.113) The maximum illumination at any property line shall be 0.2
footcandle.
(6) All property lines adjoining property located in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District shall be screened by Buffer Area A, as described in
§ 180-69A of this chapter.
(7) In the front yard, an earthen mound shall be provided along the
entire public street frontage, and Buffer Area A shall be planted on
the earthen mound. All landscaping shall comply with the
provisions of § 180-70D regarding visibility at driveway entrances.
(8) Off-street parking and loading shall be provided in accordance with
the requirements of Article XIII of this chapter.
(9) All material and equipment shall be stored within a completely
enclosed building, as defined herein.
(10)No repair of vehicles shall be permitted outside a completely
enclosed building, as defined herein.
(11) All operations shall comply with the performance standards of
§ 180-68 of this chapter.
MM.Veterinary clinic, subject to:
113. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:575
(1) The minimum lot area required for a veterinary clinic shall be one
acre.
(2) Outdoor kennels or runs shall not be permitted in the C-1 District.
(3) Overnight boarding of animals, other than for medical supervision,
shall be permitted, if the animals are housed overnight within a
completely enclosed building, as defined herein.
(4) Kennels associated with veterinary clinics shall be licensed by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and shall continue to maintain a
valid license throughout their operation. Any suspension of the
license shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
the enforcement provisions of § 180-109 of this chapter.
(5) Kennels shall comply with the standards of § 180-66W.
(6) Odors shall be controlled so as to comply with the performance
standards of § 180-68 of this chapter.
(7) The veterinary clinic shall not be located within 300 feet of an
occupied dwelling on adjacent property unless the building is
soundproofed.
NN. Personal wind energy systems shall be subject to all of the following
requirements. [Added 11-24-2009 by Ord. No. 423]
(1) The personal wind energy system shall be accessory to an existing
principal structure located on the same lot.
(2) Only one personal wind energy system shall be permitted on a lot.
(3) The minimum lot area required to install a personal wind energy
system shall be one acre.
(4) Personal wind energy systems shall not be located within the
minimum required front yard.
(5) Roof-mounted personal wind energy systems shall not be
permitted.
(6) The personal wind energy system shall be set back from all
property lines, public street rights-of-way and aboveground utility
lines a distance equal to 100% of the height of the wind energy
system, as defined herein.
(7) The maximum height of the wind energy system, as defined by this
chapter, shall be 60 feet.
(8) The applicant shall provide evidence that the proposed height of
the personal wind energy system does not exceed the height
recommended by the manufacturer or distributor of the system.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:576
(9) The applicant shall provide a site-specific wind assessment to
document that the proposed location will be effective in providing
adequate quality and quantities of wind.
(10) All personal wind energy systems shall be self-supporting. No guywire-
supported structures shall be permitted.
(11) Standard installation drawings shall be submitted showing the
wind turbine structure, including the tower, the base and the
footings. An engineering analysis of the tower showing compliance
with the Uniform Construction Code and certified by a licensed
professional engineer shall be provided. This analysis may be
provided by the manufacturer.
(12) The application shall be accompanied by a line drawing of the
electrical components in sufficient detail to determine compliance
with the National Electrical Code. This information may be
supplied by the manufacturer
(13) The applicant shall comply with all applicable regulations of the
Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission governing generation of
electricity for private use and shall provide evidence that they have
notified the applicable utility company of their intent to install a
personal wind energy system.
(14) The personal wind energy system generators and alternators shall
be constructed so as to prevent the emission of radio and television
signals. The applicant shall correct any signal disturbance problem
identified after initiation of the operation within 90 days of
identification.
(15) The minimum clearance between the ground and any protruding
blades utilized on a personal wind energy system shall be 25 feet
measured at the lowest point of the arc of the blades.
(16) The lowest point of the arc of the blades utilized on a personal wind
energy system shall be 25 feet above the height of any structure or
the height at maturity of any tree located within 150 feet of the
base of the personal wind energy system.
(17) The personal wind energy system supporting tower and any related
equipment shall be enclosed by an eight-foot high fence. Fencing of
the entire property on which the personal wind energy system is
located shall not be acceptable to demonstrate compliance with
this requirement.
(18) The applicant shall submit evidence of certification of the proposed
personal wind energy system by the Small Wind Certification
Council. The installer shall be certified by the North American
Board of Certified Practitioners (NABCP).
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:577
(19) Personal wind energy systems shall comply with all applicable
requirements of the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(20) Personal wind energy systems shall not be artificially lighted unless
required by the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA).
(21)No tower shall have any sign, writing or picture that may be
construed as advertising.
(22) Appropriate warning signage regarding electrical or other hazards
shall be placed on the wind turbine towers and electrical
equipment.
(23) All wind turbines shall have an automatic braking, governing or
feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over-speeding
or excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades and
turbine components.
(24) Personal wind energy systems shall have a nonreflective, painted
steel finish in a neutral color to reduce the visual impact.
(25) Personal wind energy system towers shall not be climbable for a
distance up to 15 feet above ground level.
(26) All wiring shall be underground.
(27) Personal wind energy systems shall not exceed 60 dB(A), as
measured from the property line closest to the personal wind
energy system, except during short-term emergencies such as
utility outages and/or severe windstorms.
(28) A personal wind energy system that is not used for 12 successive
months shall be deemed abandoned and shall be dismantled and
removed from the property at the expense of the property owner
pursuant to an enforcement notice issued by the Zoning Officer.
OO. Compressor stations and natural gas processing plants, subject to:
[Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No. 440]
(1) The minimum site required for a natural gas processing plant shall
be 25 acres. The minimum site required for a compressor station
shall be one acre.
(2) All facilities and structures, whether principal or accessory, shall be
set back the greater of at least 750 feet from any occupied
structure or at least 200 feet from the nearest lot line, unless
waived by the owner of the structure or adjoining lot.
(3) If necessary to meet the noise requirements of this chapter,
compressors shall be located within a completely enclosed
building. During periods of normal operation, doors, windows and
similar openings shall remain closed to ensure maximum noise
suppression.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:578
(4) The buildings housing engines and compressors shall be
soundproofed if necessary to meet the maximum allowed noise at
the property line specified in § 180-68C of the Borough Zoning
Ordinance.
(5) All equipment and facilities shall comply with the noise standards
of § 180-68C of the Borough Zoning Ordinance. If the equipment
and facilities exceed the noise limits established by the Borough
Zoning Ordinance, the Borough may require acoustical blankets,
sound walls or other alternative methods to mitigate excessive
noise and ensure compliance with the noise standards.
(6) The developed portion of the site which contains buildings,
structures, equipment, storage areas and parking areas shall be
screened by a buffer area as described in § 180-69 of this chapter
for the distance necessary to screen the buildings, structures,
equipment, storage areas and parking areas along any property
line that adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District. In the
case of a compressor station, buffer area "B" shall be required. In
the case of a natural gas processing facility, buffer area "A" shall be
required. If the developed portion of the site is fenced, the buffer
area shall be located along the outside perimeter of the fence.
(7) The operator shall provide a site orientation for the Borough's
emergency first responders regarding operations, equipment and
chemicals present at the facility prior to occupying the facility.
(8) Heavy truck traffic to and from the site shall be restricted to
daylight hours. Emergency vehicles and field maintenance vehicles
are exempted from this limitation.
(9) Tracking of mud, dirt and debris onto Borough streets shall be
minimized. Measures shall be taken to clean any mud, dirt and
debris from Borough streets within a reasonable time.
(10) The operator shall demonstrate continuing compliance with all
applicable local, state and federal permits and regulations.
(11) The site shall be secured by a minimum eight-foot-high chain link
fence with a locking gate that shall be kept locked when employees
are not on the premises.
(12) Exterior lighting shall be shielded and directed away from adjacent
streets and properties. To the extent permitted by safety
considerations, exterior lighting shall be turned off between dusk
and dawn.
(13) For a natural gas compressor station, a minimum of five parking
spaces shall be provided on the site to accommodate service and
maintenance workers or visitors to the site. The parking spaces
shall not be required to meet the paving requirements of § 180-80,
§ 180-66 WATER § 180-66
178:579
provided that a dust-free all-weather surface is provided. All other
design requirements of § 180-80 shall apply.
(14) Natural gas processing facilities shall be subject to the design
requirements of § 180-80 for off-street parking facilities and the
parking requirements of § 180-80 for industrial and manufacturing
uses.
PP. Accessory structures in excess of 15 feet in height, subject to: [Added
6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
(1) The minimum lot area required for constructing an accessory
structure that exceeds 15 feet in height shall be one acre.
(2) For each foot of height in excess of 15 feet, the minimum required
side and rear setbacks for the accessory structure shall be
increased by one foot.
(3) In no case shall the accessory structure exceed the height of the
principal structure, nor shall it exceed 35 feet in height.
(4) No office shall be maintained in, nor shall any business be
conducted from the accessory structure.
(5) No apartment or other residential occupancy shall be permitted in
the accessory structure.
§ 180-66 ECONOMY CODE § 180-66
178:580
ARTICLE XII
Supplemental Regulations
§ 180-67. Applicability.
The supplemental regulations in this article supplement the requirements
of Articles IV through X governing each zoning district and shall apply to all
uses in all zoning districts.
§ 180-68. Performance standards.
All permitted uses, conditional uses and uses by special exception in all
districts shall comply with the requirements of this section. The method
of determining compliance at the time of application and continuing
compliance by an established use shall be subject to § 180-68J and
§ 180-68K.
A. Fire protection. Fire-prevention and fire-fighting equipment acceptable
to the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
materials is carried on.
B. Electrical disturbance. No activity shall cause electrical disturbance
adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
C. Noise. Steady-state noise emanating from stationary equipment or
sources which will persist during indefinite or periodic intervals of time
for a period of more than seven consecutive days onto adjacent real
properties or to a receiving property within any district within the
Borough shall not exceed the maximum noise levels prescribed in this
§ 180-68C.
(1) No person shall cause or permit steady-state sound to emanate
from a source property which exceeds the levels set forth in
Subsection C(2) below when measured at the following locations:
(a) Within 25 feet of any receiving building located in any district;
or
(b) At any point along the boundary line between the source
property and the receiving property in the R-1 and R-2
Districts.
(2) Maximum permissible noise levels are:
(a) Daytime (7:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m.): 75 dBA.
(b) Nighttime (10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.): 70 dBA.
(3) Sound measurements made to determine compliance with the
conditions and standards of this § 180-68C shall be made using a
sound level meter which conforms to Type 1 or Type 2 as specified
in ANSI Specifications S1, 4-1971.
§ 180-67 WATER § 180-68
178:581
(4) The following uses or activities shall be exempted from the noise
regulations:
(a) Noises emanating from construction or maintenance activities
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(b) Noises caused by safety signals, warning devices and other
emergency-related activities or uses.
(c) Noises emanating from public or private recreational uses
between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
(5) In addition to the above regulations, all uses and activities within
the Borough shall conform to all applicable county, state and
federal regulations. Whenever the regulations contained herein are
at variance with any other lawfully adopted rules or requirements,
the more restrictive shall govern.
D. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
property in any zoning district shall be prohibited.
E. Odors. Except for legal farm operations carried on in any district as a
permitted use or a nonconforming use, no use shall emit odorous gas or
other odorous matter in such quantities as to be offensive at any point
on or beyond the lot lines. The guide for determining such quantities
shall be the fifty-percent response level of Table I (Odor Thresholds in
Air), "Research on Chemical Odors: Part I — Odor Thresholds for 53
Commercial Chemicals," October 1, 1968, Manufacturing Chemists
Association, Inc., Washington, D.C.
F. Smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors and gases. There shall be no emission
at any point for longer than five minutes in any hour of visible gray or
other color smoke, ash, dust, fumes, vapors or gases with a shade
darker than No. 3 on the Standard Ringlemann Chart issued by the U.S.
Bureau of Mines, nor shall there be any emission at any point from any
source that can cause damage to health, to animals or vegetation or
other forms of property or which can cause excessive soiling at any
point.
G. Glare. All lighting devices shall be designed with shields, reflectors or
refractor panels that direct and cut off light at a cutoff angle that is less
than 60°. (See the illustration of a cutoff angle in Appendix B.114) In no
case shall there be spillover lighting on any adjacent residential
property in excess of 0.2 footcandle.
H. Erosion. No runoff of water or erosion of land by wind or water shall be
permitted onto adjacent properties. Measures satisfactory to the
Borough shall be installed to control runoff and/or erosion.
114. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-68 ECONOMY CODE § 180-68
178:582
§ 180-69. Buffer areas and landscaping.
I. Water pollution. Water quality shall be subject to the standards
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection (PA DEP).
J. Determination of compliance with performance standards. During the
review of an application for zoning approval, the applicant may be
required to submit data and evidence documenting that the proposed
activity, facility or use will comply with the provisions of this section. In
reviewing such documentation, the Borough may seek the assistance of
any public agency having jurisdiction or interest in the particular
issues, and the Borough may seek advice from a qualified technical
expert. All costs of the expert's review and report shall be paid by the
applicant. A negative report by the technical expert and the applicant's
refusal or inability to make alterations to ensure compliance with this
section shall be a basis for denying approval of the application.
K. Continuing enforcement.
(1) The Zoning Officer shall investigate any purported violation of the
performance standards and, subject to the approval of Borough
Council, may employ qualified technical experts to assist in the
determination of a violation. Costs of the services of such experts
shall be paid by the owner or operator of the facility or use accused
of the violation if the facility or use is found to be in violation. If the
facility or use is found to be in compliance with the performance
standards, said costs shall be borne by the Borough.
(2) If the facility or use is found to be in violation, the owner or
operator shall be given written notice of violation in accordance
with § 180-109 of this chapter and a reasonable length of time to
correct the violation. Failure to correct the violation shall be
subject to the penalty provisions of this chapter and shall result in
the revocation of the certificate of occupancy for the facility or use.
A. Buffer areas described. Buffer areas, as defined by this chapter and
required by § 180-69B, shall meet all of the following criteria. (See
Appendix C115 for illustrations of buffer areas.)
(1) Buffer Area A shall contain two rows of plantings. Each row shall
consist of a mixture of thirty-percent deciduous and seventypercent
evergreen plantings spaced within the row a minimum of
15 feet apart, measured from the vertical center lines of adjacent
trees. The two rows shall be staggered in a manner which shall
result in adjacent trees on two different rows being no more than
10 feet apart, measured from the vertical center lines of the trees.
The depth of Buffer Area A shall be 35 feet as measured from the
property line.
115. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-68 WATER § 180-69
178:583
(2) Buffer Area B shall contain one row of plantings that shall consist of
a mixture of thirty-percent deciduous and seventy-percent
evergreen spaced within the row a minimum of 10 feet apart,
measured from the vertical center lines of adjacent trees. The
depth of Buffer Area B shall be 25 feet as measured from the
property line.
(3) Buffer Area C shall be comprised of a continuous, compact
evergreen hedge or line of evergreen trees that will grow together
when mature and that are a minimum of six feet in height at the
time of planting. The depth of Buffer Area C shall be 15 feet as
measured from the property line.
(4) None of the required plantings shall encroach across any property
line. All plantings shall be located so that, at maturity, all parts of
the tree shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 feet from any public street
right-of-way or any property line that constitutes the exterior
boundary of the buffer area.
(5) In the event that existing vegetation and/or existing topography
provides screening that is adequate to meet the intent of the
required buffer area to screen the buildings, activities and parking
areas from adjoining residential properties, Borough Council, upon
recommendation by the Planning Commission, may determine that
the existing topography and/or vegetation constitutes all or part of
the required buffer area. If such a determination is made, the
applicant may be required to record a conservation easement of the
depth specified by Borough Council to guarantee that the existing
topography and/or vegetation will not be disturbed or removed
from the approved buffer area.
(6) When there are substantial differences in elevation between the
first-floor elevation of the proposed construction and the elevation
of the property line along which the buffer area is required, the
buffer area may be relocated to the top of the slope or the toe of the
slope, whichever provides the more effective visual screen.
(7) In the event that a public street right-of-way, dedicated and
accepted by the Borough, separates the two dissimilar uses
specified, the buffer area shall not be required.
(8) In the case of a lot that is deeper than 400 feet, the requirement to
provide the buffer area along the entire perimeter of the lot may be
waived by Borough Council, provided the required buffer area is
installed along the side property lines and across the rear yard for a
distance sufficient to screen the buildings and parking areas from
adjacent properties.
(9) Openings for driveways shall be permitted to cross a required
buffer area. Plantings in required buffer areas shall be located so as
to not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the site and
§ 180-69 ECONOMY CODE § 180-69
178:584
shall be subject to the clear sight triangle requirements of
§ 180-70D of this chapter.
(10)No structures or uses shall be permitted in the required buffer
area, other than fences, active or passive recreation facilities and
stormwater management facilities, provided the structures or uses
do not interfere with the required plantings in the buffer area and
provided all plantings are located outside any stormwater
management structure. Structures or uses not permitted within the
required buffer area include, but are not limited to, buildings,
accessory structures, parking spaces, access drives and lighting
devices.
(11) When common open space is provided on a development site, the
required buffer area shall be located within the common open
space and shall not be located on any individual residential lot.
B. Buffer areas required. Buffer Areas A, B and C listed in § 180-69A above
shall be required under the following circumstances:
(1) Buffer Area A. Buffer Area A shall be required:
(a) Along all property lines where any development in the I-1
District adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(b) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 180-66 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area A is required.
(c) Along all property lines where a planned residential
development (PRD) adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District.
(d) Along all property lines where multifamily dwellings adjoin
property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(2) Buffer Area B. Buffer Area B shall be required:
(a) Along all property lines where any development in the C-1
District adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(b) Along all property lines where the expansion of a legal
nonconforming use in any C-1, I-1 or R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(c) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 180-66 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area B is required.
(3) Buffer area C. Buffer Area C shall be required:
(a) Where the express standards and criteria for a conditional use
or use by special exception in § 180-66 of this chapter specify
that Buffer Area C is required.
§ 180-69 WATER § 180-69
178:585
(b) On developed nonresidential properties in the C-1 District
where existing conditions such as building location and
existing paving of the parking lot make it impossible to meet
the requirements for Buffer Area B along a property line that
adjoins property in the R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
(c) On developed nonresidential properties in the I-1 District
where existing conditions such as building location and
existing paving of the parking lot make it impossible to meet
the requirements for Buffer Area A along a property line that
adjoins property in the R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
C. Conflict between buffer area and yard requirements. When the width of
a required buffer area is in conflict with the minimum yard
requirements of Articles IV through IX, the greater distance shall apply.
The buffer area planting requirement shall be adhered to regardless of
the yard requirement.
D. Existing structures in buffer areas. In instances where an existing
structure is located within any required buffer area, the buffer area may
be reduced, provided the buffer area is not less than the minimum
distance between the existing structure and the property line. This
reduced buffer area width shall apply only to the side of the existing
structure that encroaches on the required buffer area. The required
buffer area, as determined by § 180-69B, shall apply on all other sides
of the existing structure.
E. Existing trees in buffer areas.
(1) Where trees already exist within the required buffer area, these
trees shall remain undisturbed, except that diseased or dead
material may be removed. If it is determined that some healthy
trees must be removed in conjunction with development, a written
request to remove such trees must be submitted to the Borough,
along with an explanation detailing the rationale for the request.
These trees shall not be removed until the Borough has given
written authorization permitting said removal. This permission will
not be unreasonably denied; however, those who violate this
section shall be subject to the maximum penalties authorized by
this chapter.
(2) When any trees, regardless of their physical condition, are
removed, they shall be replaced by trees suitable to the
environment. (See Appendix D for a suggested list of plant
materials.116) All such replacement planting shall be in accordance
with accepted conservation practices.
F. Size of trees in required buffer areas.
116. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-69 ECONOMY CODE § 180-69
178:586
(1) Any existing trees within the required buffer area that are a
minimum of four inches in diameter at a point one foot above the
ground shall be preserved and shall count as a required tree within
the buffer area. At no point, however, shall any existing trees and
required trees be separated at a distance greater than the distance
specified in the description of the required buffer area in
§ 180-69A.
(2) All trees required to be planted within the buffer area shall be a
minimum of two inches in diameter at a point one foot above the
ground measured along the trunk of the planted tree, which tree
shall be planted in accordance with accepted conservation
practices. All required trees shall be a minimum of six feet in height
at time of planting measured from the ground adjacent to the
planted tree to the top of the tree.
G. Responsibility for maintenance. It shall be the responsibility of the
landowner or lessee to assure the continued growth of all required
landscaping and/or to replace the same in the event of frost, vandalism,
disease or other reasons for the discontinued growth of the required
trees, shrubs and bushes. The landowner shall record a restrictive
covenant on the land guaranteeing perpetual maintenance and
preservation of the required buffer area. Upon inspection by the
Borough and issuance of an enforcement notice in accordance with
§ 180-109B of this chapter, the landowner or lessee shall replace
required landscaping materials with like type and size if the required
plant materials do not survive for any reason at any time after
occupancy of the property.
H. Stormwater management facilities in buffer areas. Stormwater
management facilities and structures may be maintained within a
buffer area, but the existence of such facilities or structures shall not be
a basis for a failure to meet the planting requirements.
I. Landscaping of open areas. All yard areas not utilized for parking
facilities, driveways, gardens, the planting of trees or shrubs, flower,
vegetable or herb beds or similar uses shall be seeded, sodded or
landscaped within a reasonable period of time. The phrase "a
reasonable period of time" shall be interpreted to be within two weeks
after construction activities are completed, unless those activities are
completed between a November 1 through April 1 time period. In such
case, the required sodding or seeding shall occur by May 1. Erosion and
sedimentation controls acceptable to the Borough Engineer shall be
installed during the winter months and until such landscaping is
completed.
J. Additional landscaping specifications. Landscaping shall be provided in
accordance with the following specifications:
(1) Planting required in buffer areas as outlined in § 180-69B shall not
be substituted for any required planting mandated in this section.
§ 180-69 WATER § 180-69
178:587
(2) Plant materials shall be selected from the List of Suggested Plant
Materials in Appendix D or equivalent materials.117
(3) The landscaping plan required by Chapter 163, Subdivision and
Land Development, shall contain the following information to
demonstrate compliance with this § 180-69:
(a) All required buffer areas with proposed plantings (identifying
each proposed tree, bush or shrub) drawn to scale and
identifying the height and width of any proposed mounds.
(b) All required planting independent of any buffer area
requirements (identifying each tree, bush, shrub, the use of
sod or seeding, etc.) drawn to scale.
(c) Any planting in excess of the requirements in § 180-69B and
§ 180-69J of this chapter.
(d) Any existing trees or vegetation that are to be preserved,
accurately identifying their relative location.
(e) Any existing trees or vegetation that will be removed,
accurately identifying their relative location.
(4) Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with the
requirements of § 180-80J.
(5) Required deciduous trees in nonresidential development.
(a) In any nonresidential development, deciduous trees shall be
planted in accordance with the following schedule. These trees
shall be in addition to the trees provided in any required buffer
area or parking area.
Building Footprint
(square feet) Requirement
1,000 to 30,000 1 tree for each 1,000 square feet of
building footprint
30,001 to 75,000 A minimum of 30 trees, plus 1 tree for
each 3,000 square feet of building
footprint in excess of 30,000 square
feet
Over 75,000 A minimum of 45 trees, plus 1 tree for
each 5,000 square feet of building
footprint over 75,000 square feet
(b) The required trees shall be planted in clusters on the site and
shall be distributed throughout the site to enhance the open
space on the site. The final location of the plantings shall be
117. Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-69 ECONOMY CODE § 180-69
178:588
subject to approval by the Borough depending on the size of
the site, the magnitude of the required buffer area and the
amount of paving and building coverage proposed.
(6) Required deciduous trees in developments with multifamily
dwellings.
(a) In any development that contains multifamily dwellings,
deciduous trees shall be planted in accordance with the
following schedule. These trees shall be in addition to the trees
provided in any required buffer area or parking area.
Number of
Multifamily
Dwellings Required Trees
First 25 1 tree for each dwelling unit
26 to 100 25 trees, plus 1 tree for each 2 dwelling units in
excess of 25 dwelling units
101 to 200 62 trees, plus 1 tree for each 3 dwelling units in
excess of 100 dwelling units
201 and
over
95 trees, plus 1 tree for each 4 dwelling units in
excess of 200 dwelling units
(b) The required trees shall be planted as front yard trees or may
be clustered in groups around the multifamily dwelling units
and shall not be located within any public street right-of-way.
(7) All trees that are required to be planted as per the regulations of
this § 180-69J shall be a minimum of two inches in diameter at a
point one foot above the ground at the time of planting measured
along the trunk of the planted tree, which tree shall be planted in
accordance with accepted conservation practices.
(8) In conjunction with the development of property for any use, the
applicant shall show that the removal of any trees or natural
vegetation is necessary for the imminent and orderly development
of the property. Imminent development shall mean development
that is reasonably expected to commence, and for which there are
realistic plans to commence, on a minimum eight-hours-per-day,
forty-hours-per-week basis (utilizing a five-day-on, two-day-off,
standard workweek basis) within 30 days of the removal of trees or
vegetation and for which a land development plan and landscaping
plan have been submitted and approved by the Borough.
(9) Any existing trees that are not disturbed and are not located within
a required buffer area and are a minimum of four inches in
diameter at a point one foot above the ground shall count toward
the required number of trees to be planted outside of the buffer
area.
§ 180-69 WATER § 180-69
178:589
§ 180-70. Special yard requirements.
In addition to the yard requirements specified in each zoning district,
the following yard requirements shall apply in all zoning districts to the
applicable circumstances described below:
(10) Landscaping required under this § 180-69J shall be installed in
accordance with the time provisions and requirements for erosion
and sedimentation control specified in § 180-69I.
K. Posting of bond for landscaping. A maintenance bond in the form of
cash, certified check or letter of credit shall be posted with the Borough
in the amount of 15% of the total cost of landscaping shown on the
approved landscaping plan for a period of 18 months from the date of
installation of the landscaping materials. The maintenance bond shall
guarantee replacement of the required landscaping materials during
the term of the bond.
A. Corner lots. Corner lots shall provide front yards on each street
frontage. The remaining two yards shall constitute side yards.
B. Nonconforming lots of record. See § 180-93 of this chapter.
C. Accessory structures. In all zoning districts the following regulations
shall apply to accessory structures:
(1) Private swimming pools and associated decks and patios accessory
to a dwelling.
(a) Swimming pools accessory to a dwelling shall be located at
least 15 feet from the rear property line. Swimming pools
accessory to a dwelling shall not be permitted in the minimum
required front yard or in the minimum required side yard.
(b) All swimming pools shall be enclosed by a continuous fence or
wall not less than four feet in height with a self-closing, selflatching
gate designed to prevent access to the pool when it is
not in use. The dwelling may be part of the enclosure.
(c) In the case of an aboveground pool, when any point on the top
circumference of the pool is less than four feet above the
adjacent ground level, the entire pool shall be enclosed by a
continuous fence or wall not less than four feet in height with a
self-closing, self-latching gate. Any aboveground pool that is at
least four feet above the adjacent ground level around the
entire top circumference of the pool shall not be required to be
fenced, provided the pool has a retractable ladder or steps that
are kept retracted when the pool is not in use.
(2) Private sports courts accessory to a dwelling. Sports courts
accessory to a dwelling shall be located only in a side or rear yard
and shall be no closer to the side or rear property line than 15 feet.
§ 180-69 ECONOMY CODE § 180-70
178:590
Lighting of the sports court shall not be permitted. All sports courts
shall be enclosed by a fence that is a minimum of 10 feet in height
and a maximum of 12 feet in height and that shall contain openings
equal to 50% or more of the surface area of the fence. The area
of the sports court shall not exceed 50% of the total area of the
lot defined by the side lot lines, rear lot line and rear wall of the
dwelling.
(3) Fences. [Amended 6-11-2013 by Ord. No. 442]
(a) No fence in any zoning district shall be constructed in any
public street right-of-way. Fences accessory to a single-family
dwelling shall be constructed so that the finished side faces the
adjoining property.
(b) Fences accessory to a farm shall be permitted in any required
yard, provided that the maximum height shall not exceed six
feet. A permit shall not be required for farm fences.
(c) In the R-A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, a fence may be erected in
the minimum required side or rear yard, provided that the
maximum height of the fence shall not exceed six feet.
(d) In the R-A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, a fence may be in the
minimum required front yard, provided that the maximum
height of the fence shall not exceed four feet.
(e) In the C-1 Commercial District, the maximum height of a fence
shall be eight feet. Solid screening fences shall be provided as
required by this chapter to screen dumpsters, loading berths
and outside storage areas.
(f) In the I-1 District, the maximum height of a fence or wall shall
be 10 feet. Solid screening fences shall be provided as required
by this chapter to screen dumpsters, loading berths and
outside storage areas.
(4) Fences and buffer areas. All fences and buffer areas or landscaping
material shall be located so as to not obstruct pedestrian access,
visibility for traffic on adjacent streets or traffic entering or leaving
the property or adjacent properties and shall comply with the clear
sight triangle required by § 180-70D.
(5) Satellite dish antennas. Satellite dish antennas, for personal use by
private citizens, not including communications antennas, as
defined by this chapter, shall be permitted as an accessory use
subject to the following requirements:
(a) Satellite dish antennas that have a diameter of one meter or
less shall be exempted from these regulations.
(b) In the case of satellite dish antennas greater than one meter in
diameter, only one satellite dish antenna shall be permitted on
§ 180-70 WATER § 180-70
178:591
a residential lot. In all zoning districts, satellite dish antennas
shall not be permitted in front yards. In the R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
Districts, the maximum diameter of any satellite dish antenna
installed on any lot or on any roof or above any building shall
be 12 feet.
(c) In zoning districts other than the R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 Districts,
any satellite dish antenna greater than one meter in diameter
that is installed on any lot or on any roof or above any building
shall not exceed 20 feet in diameter. In all zoning districts, the
maximum height of any freestanding satellite dish antenna
shall be 25 feet and, in the case of satellite dish antennas
mounted on a roof or above a building, the maximum height
shall be no greater than 25 feet above the highest point on the
roof.
(d) In all zoning districts, no part of any satellite dish antenna shall
be located closer than 10 feet to any property line.
(6) Radio or television antennas. A radio or television antenna for
personal use by private citizens shall be permitted as an accessory
use, subject to the following requirements, except as these
provisions may be superseded by any applicable Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) ruling:
(a) A radio or television antenna structure may be mounted on a
roof or installed in a rear yard only, provided that no such
structure shall be located within 20 feet of any property line.
(b) The maximum height for such structure shall not exceed that
otherwise allowed in the zoning district in which it is located
by more than 20 feet. If placed on a roof, any antenna structure
exceeding eight feet in height shall be mounted with guide
wires.
(c) Any such structure shall comply with applicable airport zoning
and Federal Communications Commission (FCC) regulations.
(d) Radio or television antenna structures located on the ground
shall be screened from adjacent properties by evergreen trees
or other suitable material, as approved by the Borough.
(7) Canopies and similar structures. Canopies and similar permanent
freestanding roofed structures without walls shall be permitted to
cover outdoor seasonal display and sales areas or fuel-dispensing
areas accessory to authorized uses in the C-1, Commercial, District,
provided that:
(a) Such structure shall not be attached to the principal building;
(b) Such structure shall be located at least 10 feet from any
property line or street right-of-way;
§ 180-70 ECONOMY CODE § 180-70
178:592
(c) Such structure shall not be enclosed; and
(d) Such structure shall be removed immediately, once the
principal use or the use of the accessory structure is
discontinued.
(8) Residential accessory storage structures and detached garages.
(a) No detached garage or storage structure accessory to a
dwelling shall be located in the minimum required front yard.
In the R-A District, detached garages and storage structures
accessory to a dwelling shall be located at least 7 1/2 feet from
any side or rear property line. In all other districts, detached
garages and storage structures accessory to a dwelling shall be
located at least 10 feet from any side or rear property line if the
floor area of the structure is 500 square feet or less. If the floor
area of the structure is more than 500 square feet, the
structure shall be located at least 15 feet from any side or rear
yard.
(b) In the R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts, the maximum floor area of any
detached garage or residential accessory storage structure
shall be related to the size of the residential lot, in accordance
with the following:
Size of Lot
(square feet)
Maximum Floor Area of
Accessory Structure
(square feet)
Up to 21,780 500
21,780 to 43,560 1,000
Over 43,560 1,500
(9) Structures accessory to nonresidential structures and buildings.
(a) No structure accessory to a nonresidential building or
structure, other than a sign or off-street parking area, shall be
located in the front yard. Off-street parking areas and signs
shall be subject to the requirements of Articles XIII and XIV.
(b) Structures accessory to nonresidential buildings or structures
shall not be located within any required buffer area. Where a
buffer area is not required, setbacks for accessory structures
shall comply with the requirements specified in each zoning
district.
(10) Distance from principal buildings. All accessory storage structures
and garages shall be located at least 10 feet from any principal
building, except that if a detached garage accessory to a dwelling is
connected to the dwelling by contiguous side walls, breezeways or
§ 180-70 WATER § 180-70
178:593
§ 180-71. Permitted projections into required yards.
The following shall be permitted to project into any required yard in any
zoning district:
§ 180-72. Height exceptions.
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to the following
structures, provided they do not exceed the height limitations of the district
by more than 15 feet: church spires, chimneys, elevator bulkheads and
other mechanical equipment that is part of the principal structure,
conveyors, flagpoles, silos, standpipes, elevated water tanks, derricks,
public utility structures and other structures not intended for human
habitation. The foregoing exceptions shall not apply to communications
towers, communications antennas and their facilities.
§ 180-73. Drive-through facilities.
All businesses that propose drive-through facilities, as defined by this
chapter, as accessory uses or principal uses shall meet all of the following
requirements:
similar connections, the distance between the dwelling and the
connected garage may be less than 10 feet.
D. Visibility at intersections. No object, including, without limitation,
fences, landscaping rocks, hedges, trees and other plantings, buildings,
structures, walls, signs and motor vehicles, exceeding a height of three
feet as measured from the lowest elevation of the center line of any
abutting street, shall be temporarily or permanently placed, erected,
installed or parked within the clear sight triangle required at the
intersection of two streets or the intersection of a driveway or private
lane with a public street. The required clear sight triangle is illustrated
in Appendix A.118
A. Typical architectural features of the principal structure, including, but
not limited to: Bay windows, window sills, chimneys, cornices and eaves
shall be permitted to project into required yards no more than 18
inches.
B. Decks and their stairs, stoops and unenclosed porches without enclosed
habitable foundation or space and without a roof or walls shall be
permitted to project into required front, side and rear yards no more
than three feet. Porches that have a roof or walls or that are enclosed or
have enclosed habitable foundations shall be subject to the yard
requirements for the principal structure.
C. Steps attached to the principal building and open fire escapes shall be
permitted to project into required yards no more than three feet.
118. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-70 ECONOMY CODE § 180-73
178:594
§ 180-74. Temporary construction trailers, model homes or sales
offices.
Temporary construction trailers, model homes or sales offices shall be
permitted in any zoning district, subject to the following conditions:
A. Drive-through facilities proposed on parcels within a shopping center
shall have access only from the interior circulation system within the
planned shopping center site. All other properties shall have frontage
on and direct vehicular access to an arterial or collector street, as
defined by this chapter.
B. In addition to the parking spaces required for the principal use, a
minimum of five standing spaces, in one lane, with a total length of 100
feet, in direct line with each service position shall be provided for
vehicles to wait in line. The standing space shall not interfere with the
use of any required parking spaces and shall not inhibit the free flow of
traffic on the property. The standing spaces shall be designed so that
waiting vehicles shall not stand in any right-of-way or overflow onto
adjacent properties, streets or berms.
C. Entrances, exits and standing spaces shall be adequately indicated with
pavement markings and/or directional signs.
D. Parking areas and circulation patterns shall be adequately striped and
marked to facilitate traffic circulation on the property.
A. Temporary construction trailers shall be permitted only during the
period that the construction work is in progress under a valid building
permit or under Borough approval to install public improvements. The
temporary construction trailer shall be removed upon completion of the
construction authorized under a building permit or upon completion of
the installation of the public improvements in a plan of subdivision. In
the event that construction is phased, the temporary construction
trailer shall be moved from the completed phase to the next phase when
90% of the required improvements in the completed phase have been
installed as determined by the Borough Engineer, provided a valid
grading permit or building permit has been issued for the next phase.
B. Model homes or sales offices shall be permitted only until 90% of the
lots or dwelling units in the development are sold. In the case of a
phased development, the use of a model home or sales office shall be
permitted to continue only if the subsequent phase is initiated within six
months of the completion of 90% of the lots or dwelling units in the
prior phase.
C. A temporary use permit for the temporary structure or use shall be
obtained from the Zoning Officer in accordance with the requirements
of § 180-113 of this chapter prior to the commencement of construction
and shall be renewed every six months, if necessary, until the project is
completed.
§ 180-73 WATER § 180-74
178:595
§ 180-75. Agriculture and related activities.
In the R-A District, agriculture, as defined herein, conducted on a farm
and related activities conducted on a farm or on other properties, when
authorized by this chapter, including animal grooming, boarding stables,
commercial greenhouses, commercial riding academies, kennels,
noncommercial riding academies, private stables and specialized animal
raising, shall be subject to the following requirements:
D. Temporary construction trailers shall be located on the lot on which the
construction is progressing and shall not be located within 25 feet of
any property line adjoining residential use.
E. Temporary construction trailers shall be used only as temporary field
offices and for storage of incidental equipment and supplies and shall
not be used for any dwelling use, whatsoever.
F. No signs or other advertising materials for the project shall be attached
to the temporary construction trailer; however, the name of the
construction company may appear on the trailer.
G. "Class 3" materials, as classified by the National Fire Prevention
Association (NFPA), shall not be stored in temporary construction
trailers.
H. Model homes shall be located on a separate lot and shall meet all the
requirements for permanent dwellings in the zoning district in which
they are located. Sales offices may be located in a model home or may
be located in a trailer located on a vacant lot in the plan or on the site of
construction. If the sales office is located in a trailer, the trailer shall not
be located within 25 feet of any property line. No signs or other
advertising information shall be located on the outside of the trailer or
sales office.
I. Model homes or sales offices located in a trailer shall not be utilized for
any dwelling use, whatsoever, during the time they are approved as a
temporary use or structure in accordance with the provisions of this
section.
J. Model homes or sales offices shall be used primarily for sales
associated with the development in which they are located and shall not
be used as the only place of business for the listing realtor.
A. Storage of manure, odor or dust-producing substances shall be located
at least 200 feet from any property line.
B. Any stable or other building used for the sheltering, keeping, raising or
feeding of horses, livestock and poultry shall be located at least 200 feet
from any property line on properties of 10 acres or more. Such
buildings shall be located at least 75 feet from any property line on
properties having at least five acres but less than 10 acres.
§ 180-74 ECONOMY CODE § 180-75
178:596
C. A commercial greenhouse heating plants shall be at least 100 feet from
any property line.
D. All grazing and pasture areas shall be adequately fenced to properly
enclose the animals and to protect adjacent property.
E. Private stables on properties of five acres or more, but less than 10
acres, shall be accessory to the stable owner's dwelling.
F. The number of horses maintained in a private stable shall be limited to
one animal for the first five acres, plus one for each additional acre or
portion thereof up to 10 acres, not to exceed a total of six horses. There
shall be no limit on the number of horses on properties of 10 acres or
more.
G. Private stables shall be subject to all other applicable regulations of this
§ 180-75.
H. Agricultural sales, as defined herein, shall be permitted accessory to a
farm, as defined herein, in the R-A District only, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) All sales shall be conducted on the premises of a farm, as defined
and regulated by this chapter.
(2) Products sold shall include only products raised, grown or
produced on the farm.
(3) All permanent structures shall comply with the yard requirements
for principal structures in the district in which the property is
located.
(4) Seasonal roadside stands shall be located no closer than 15 feet to
any street right-of-way or property line and shall be removed at the
end of each growing season.
(5) Buildings used for retail sales of agricultural products shall not
exceed 1,000 square feet of sales floor area for every 10 acres of
land farmed. No building used for agricultural products shall
exceed 5,000 square feet in sales area.
(6) Off-street parking for permanent structures shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 180-81 for retail businesses.
Off-street parking for permanent structures shall be designed in
accordance with the requirements of § 180-80.
(7) Off-street parking for seasonal roadside stands shall be designed in
accordance with § 180-80; however, the requirements for
surfacing, marking, screening and landscaping shall not apply.
(8) Off-street parking for seasonal roadside stands shall be provided in
accordance with the requirements of § 180-81 for retail businesses;
however, in no case shall less than five spaces be provided.
§ 180-75 WATER § 180-75
178:597
§ 180-76. Storage.
(9) Adequate ingress, egress and traffic circulation shall be provided
so that vehicles do not back onto the street right-of-way and do not
park or stand on any street or berm.
(10) Signs shall comply with the requirements of Article XIV. Signs shall
be located on the property and shall be removed at the end of the
growing season.
I. Seasonal activities such as hay rides, spring and fall festivals and
similar activities related to the farm shall be subject to all applicable
requirements of § 180-113 for temporary uses, provided adequate
parking is provided in a temporary parking area based on the ratio
specified in § 180-81C for "all other uses."
A. Outdoor storage in commercial and industrial districts.
(1) In the C-1 Commercial District, storage of materials outside a
completely enclosed structure shall not be permitted, except for
convenience stores, vehicle sales, nurseries, garden supply,
building supply, custom crafting and similar businesses that
require outside storage of products offered for sale. In the case of
nurseries, garden supply, building supply, custom crafting and
similar businesses, outside storage areas larger than 1,000 square
feet shall be completely enclosed by a security fence and shall be
screened by an opaque fence or hedge that is at least six feet in
height.
(2) In the I-1 Industrial District, any material or equipment stored
outside an enclosed building shall be incidental to the principal use
of the lot and shall be stored to the rear of the building or an
alternative location that screens the storage area from public view
from the street or adjacent residential property located at similar
elevations within 500 feet of the property. If existing buildings do
not screen the storage area from public view from the street or
adjacent residential property located at similar elevations within
500 feet of the property, the area shall be screened by a hedge or
opaque fence at least eight feet in height.
B. Refuse collection and waste disposal. In all districts, all organic rubbish
and discarded materials shall be placed in tight verminproof containers
on the property and shall be secured in side or rear yards screened
from public view by means of a solid-face fence or wall at least six feet
in height. Containers shall be emptied once a week. On properties
where food is served in paper containers, covered waste receptacles
shall be conspicuously located on the premises for use by patrons. The
management shall be responsible for maintaining the property free of
litter. All nonresidential uses shall provide trash receptacles that are
completely enclosed by a screening fence secured by a self-latching
gate.
§ 180-75 ECONOMY CODE § 180-76
178:598
§ 180-77. Forestry.
Forestry, as defined herein, shall be conducted in accordance with the
following provisions. Proof of compliance with all requirements shall be
submitted with the application for a zoning certificate.
C. Storage of recreational vehicles. The parking or storage of recreational
vehicles shall not be permitted in any front yard in any R-1, R-2 or R-3
District. Recreational vehicles with a current license or registration and
a valid inspection sticker may be parked or stored in the side or rear
yard of property in any R-1, R-2 or R-3 District. At no time shall any
parked or stored recreational vehicle be occupied or used as a dwelling.
D. Parking of commercial vehicles and equipment. Commercial vehicles
and equipment, including trucks in excess of one ton capacity, tandems,
tractor-trailers, tractors or other commercial or construction or cargomoving
vehicles or equipment shall not, under any conditions, be stored
outside a completely enclosed building or parked outside overnight
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any R-1, R-2 or R-3
District, other than on construction sites for an approved subdivision or
land development, on sites for which a valid grading permit, zoning
permit or building permit is in effect; or on farms that are being used
for agriculture, as defined by this chapter.
A. All operations shall be located at least 300 feet from any existing
dwelling.
B. All operations shall be discontinued between 7:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.;
provided, further, that such operations shall not take place during any
hours on Sundays or legal government holidays.
C. Routes to be used by the hauling trucks shall be approved by the
Borough, and the operator shall demonstrate that there shall be no
negative impact on Borough roads from the proposed operation.
D. The operator shall provide the Borough with a copy of a videotape of the
condition of all roads to be utilized in the forestry operation prior to
commencing operations.
E. A performance bond shall be posted in favor of and in the amount
required by the Borough to guarantee restoration of Borough roads
used as hauling routes.
F. The operator shall be responsible for cleaning dirt and debris from
public streets daily during the operation.
G. The applicant shall submit a copy of the state and/or county permit for
hauling on state and/or county roads.
H. The applicant shall supply the Borough with the name of an on-site
contact person.
I. Compliance.
§ 180-76 WATER § 180-77
178:599
(1) The applicant shall show compliance with the following laws and
regulations of the commonwealth, and all necessary permits shall
be maintained during the operation:
(a) Erosion and sedimentation control regulations contained in
Chapter 102, issued pursuant to the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Law.119
(b) Stream-crossing and wetlands protection regulations
contained in Chapter 105, issued pursuant to the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act.120
(c) Stormwater management plans and regulations issued
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Stormwater Management Act.121
(2) Any suspension or revocation of a state permit shall constitute
revocation of zoning approval, and the operator shall be subject to
the enforcement provisions of § 180-109 of this chapter.
J. A logging plan prepared and sealed by a registered surveyor or
engineer shall be submitted that shows, at a minimum:
(1) The design, construction, maintenance and retirement of the
access system, including haul roads, skid roads, skid trails and
landings;
(2) The design, construction and maintenance of water-control
measures and structures such as culverts, broad-based dips, filter
strips and water bars;
(3) The design, construction and maintenance of stream and wetland
crossings, if any;
(4) The general boundaries of the proposed operation in relation to
Borough and state or county roads, including any accesses to those
roads;
(5) The site location, including boundaries of the property and
boundaries of the proposed harvest area;
(6) Significant topographic features;
(7) The location of all earth-disturbance activities, such as roads,
landings and water-control measures and structures; and
(8) The location of all crossings of waters of the commonwealth.
K. Felling or skidding on or across any public street is prohibited without
the express written consent of the Borough, Beaver County or the
119. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
120. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
121. Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 180-77 ECONOMY CODE § 180-77
178:600
§ 180-78. No-impact home-based business.
All no-impact home-based businesses, as defined herein, shall comply with
the following:
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Penn DOT), whichever is
responsible for maintenance of the street.
L. No remnants of trees or debris shall be left within 25 feet of any public
street or any private road providing access to adjoining residential
property during the operation.
M. All remnants of trees, stumps and debris within 50 feet of a public
street or residential property line shall be cut to a maximum of four feet
above the adjacent ground level following completion of the forestry
operation.
N. No remnants of trees or debris shall be left on any adjoining property or
across any property line without the consent of the adjoining owner
during the operation.
O. Upon completion of the forestry operation, haul roads shall be restored
to their original condition.
A. The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
B. The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
C. There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling of
inventory of a substantial nature.
D. There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
E. No on-site parking of commercially identified vehicles shall be
permitted.
F. The business activity shall not use any equipment or process that
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
that is detectable in the neighborhood.
G. The business activity shall not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
H. The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
shall not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area of the
dwelling.
I. The business shall not involve any illegal activity.
§ 180-77 WATER § 180-78
178:601
§ 180-78.1. Oil and gas operations and impoundments used
exclusively for oil and gas operations. [Added 1-22-2013 by Ord. No.
440]
In those districts where oil and gas operations and impoundments used
exclusively for oil and gas operations are authorized as permitted uses by
right, the following standards shall apply:
§ 180-78.2. Solar photovoltaic system. [Added 5-24-2016 by Ord.
No. 456]
A solar photovoltaic system shall be permitted subject to the following
express standards and criteria:
J. The business shall register annually in January of each year with the
Zoning Officer or his or her designated representative to demonstrate
continuing compliance with these regulations.
A. The application for a zoning permit shall contain all the information
required by § 180-66BB(2) of this chapter for a conditional use
application; however, the procedure for approval of a conditional use
application shall not apply.
B. All applicable standards of § 180-66BB shall apply to the application for
a zoning permit and compliance with those standards shall be
determined by the Borough Zoning Officer.
A. Location within a lot; setback.
(1) A building-mounted solar system is permitted to face any rear yard,
side yard, and front yard or any unregulated yard area as defined in
this chapter.
(2) A ground-mounted solar system is permitted subject to compliance
with the requirements of this chapter; provided, however, a
ground-mounted solar system shall not be located any closer to a
front lot line than the principal structure on the subject property.
(3) No part of a ground-mounted solar system shall extend over the
required rear or side building setback line due to a solar tracking
system or other adjustment of solar PV equipment or parts.
B. Design and installation.
(1) A solar PV system shall comply with the Construction Code
(Chapter 66).
(2) A building-mounted system shall be installed such that no solar
facility will cover more than 50% of each roof area covered by the
facility.
§ 180-78 ECONOMY CODE § 180-78.2
178:602
(3) For a ground-mounted solar system, all exterior electrical lines
shall be buried below the surface of the ground where possible and
placed in conduit.
C. Height restrictions.
(1) For a building-mounted solar system installed on a sloped roof that
faces the front yard of a lot, the system must be installed at the
same angle as the roof on which it is installed with a maximum
distance, measured perpendicular to the roof, of 18 inches between
the roof and highest edge or surface of the system.
Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Front Yard: Building-
Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
(2) For a building-mounted solar system installed on a sloped roof, the
highest point of the system shall not exceed the highest point of the
roof to which it is attached.
Height Restriction, Sloped Roof Facing Rear or Side Yard:
Building-Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
(3) For a building-mounted solar system installed on a flat roof, the
highest point of the system shall be permitted to extend up to six
feet above the roof to which it is attached.
(4) A ground-mounted solar system shall not exceed the permitted
height of accessory structures in the zoning district where the solar
PV system is to be installed.
Height Restriction: Ground-Mounted Solar PV System Elevation
D. Screening and visibility.
(1) A building-mounted solar system on a sloped roof shall not be
required to be screened.
§ 180-78.2 WATER § 180-78.2
178:603
(2) A building-mounted solar system mounted on a flat roof shall not be
visible from a street right-of-way within a one-hundred-foot radius
of the subject property at a level of five feet from the ground in a
similar manner as to any other rooftop HVAC or mechanical
equipment. This can be accomplished with architectural screening
such as a building parapet or by setting the system back from the
roof edge in such a manner that the solar PV system is not visible
from the street right-of-way within a one-hundred-foot radius when
measured at a distance of five feet from the ground.
E. Impervious lot coverage restrictions.
(1) The surface area of any ground-mounted solar system, regardless
of the mounted angle of any portion of the system, is considered
impervious surface and shall be calculated as part of the applicable
lot coverage limitation for the subject property. If the groundmounted
solar system is mounted above existing impervious
surface, it shall not be calculated as part of the lot coverage
limitation for the subject property.
F. Performance requirements.
(1) All solar PV systems shall comply with the applicable performance
standards of this chapter.
§ 180-78.2 ECONOMY CODE § 180-78.2
178:604
ARTICLE XIII
Off-Street Parking and Loading
§ 180-79. Applicability.
§ 180-80. Off-street parking design.
Parking areas and driveways in parking areas in all zoning districts shall
comply with the following standards:
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this article in any district whenever any new use is
established or any existing use is changed or enlarged.
B. All parking areas established prior to the effective date of this chapter
that are not in conformance with all provisions of this article shall be
allowed to continue as previously laid out. If any change or alteration is
proposed to these existing nonconforming parking areas, the portions
to be changed or altered shall be upgraded in accordance with all
provisions of this article.
C. Any change in use or in floor area of an existing building that would
require a greater number of off-street parking spaces than the previous
use or floor area did shall provide additional off-street parking for the
new use in accordance with this article. If the number of additional
required parking spaces results in more than a twenty-five-percent
increase in the total number of parking spaces currently provided on
the lot or requires the addition of at least five more spaces, whichever is
greater, then all existing parking shall also be required to meet or
exceed all provisions of this article, including surfacing.
A. Size. Each off-street parking space shall have an area of not less than
180 square feet, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall have
minimum dimensions of nine feet in width and 20 feet in length and
shall be maintained free from obstruction. Except in the case of singlefamily
dwellings, two-family dwellings and townhouses, parking areas
shall be designed to provide sufficient turnaround area so that vehicles
are not required to back onto the cartway of any public street.
B. Design. The minimum dimensions of aisles and driveways for all uses
other than single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings shall be as
follows:
(1) Minimum width of aisles providing two-way travel shall be 22 feet.
(2) One-way aisles shall not be dead-ended. Minimum width of aisles
providing one-way travel shall vary with the angle of parking, as
follows:
§ 180-79 WATER § 180-80
178:605
Angle of Parking
(degrees)
Width
(feet)
Parallel 12
30° 14
45° 16
60° 20
90° 22
(3) Two-way aisles may be dead-ended in off-street parking areas,
provided they are designed according to the following minimum
standards:
(a) Depth of turnaround area: 13 feet.
(b) Width of turnaround area: 25 feet.
(4) The minimum width of entrance and exit drives shall be:
(a) For one-way travel, a minimum of 12 feet.
(b) For two-way travel, a minimum of 22 feet.
(c) A maximum of 35 feet at the street right-of-way line and 54 feet
at the curbline.
(d) Adequate sight distance shall be provided, subject to review
and approval by the Borough Engineer. Driveways shall not
exceed a slope of 10% within 12 feet of the street right-of-way
line.
(5) Fire lanes shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of
the Borough Fire Code and the Volunteer Fire Department.
C. Handicapped parking spaces. Handicapped-accessible parking spaces
marked in accordance with Commonwealth of Pennsylvania regulations
and measuring 12 feet by 20 feet for automobiles and measuring 18 feet
by 20 feet for vans shall be provided for all buildings designed for public
occupancy in accordance with the following table:
Total Parking Spaces Required
by § 180-81C
Number of Required Spaces
That Must Be Accessible
Spaces
Up to 25 1*
26 to 50 2
51 to 75 3
76 to 100 4
101 to 150 5
151 to 200 6
§ 180-80 ECONOMY CODE § 180-80
178:606
Total Parking Spaces Required
by § 180-81C
Number of Required Spaces
That Must Be Accessible
Spaces
201 to 300 7
301 to 400 8
401 to 500 9
501 to 1,000 2% of total
Over 1,000 20, plus 1 for each 100 over 1,000
NOTES:
* If only one accessible space is required, it shall be van accessible.
If more than one space is required, at least one space shall be van
accessible.
D. Access. Access to parking areas shall be provided in accordance with
the following requirements:
(1) When an existing lot does not adjoin a public or private street, an
easement of access and an access driveway shall be provided
leading to the parking areas.
(2) Access to off-street parking areas shall be limited to well-defined
locations, and in no case shall there be unrestricted access along
the length of a street. In the C-1 and I-1 Districts, the street
frontage shall be curbed to restrict access to the lot, except where
the access drives are proposed.
(3) The number of access drives from a single lot or development to
any public street shall not exceed two for every 400 feet of street
frontage.
(4) Except on corner lots, access drives shall be located at least 200
feet from the intersection of any two street right-of-way lines.
(5) Access drives entering state highways shall be subject to a highway
occupancy permit issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation (Penn DOT).
(6) Access driveways entering Borough streets shall comply with the
requirements of the Pennsylvania Code, Title 67, Chapter 441,
"Access to and Occupancy of Highways by Ways and Local Roads."
(7) Each parking space shall have access directly to a driveway.
Interior circulation of traffic shall be designed so that no driveway
providing access to parking spaces shall be used as a through
street. Interior traffic circulation shall be designed to ensure safety
and access by emergency vehicles.
E. Safety requirements. Borough Council shall consider whether safety
requirements are warranted to reduce traffic hazards that endanger
§ 180-80 WATER § 180-80
178:607
public safety. The developer shall be responsible for construction of
any required islands, acceleration, deceleration or turning lanes and
shall bear the cost of installing any required traffic control devices,
signs or pavement markings within and adjoining the boundaries of the
development site.
F. Marking. In parking areas that contain five or more spaces, all parking
spaces shall be clearly delineated by painted lines marked with durable
white or yellow paint in stripes a minimum of four inches wide
extending the length of the parking space. All vehicular entrances and
exits to parking areas shall be clearly marked for all conditions. Shortterm
visitor parking spaces shall be differentiated from long-term
employee spaces by suitable markings. Handicapped parking shall be
appropriately marked.
G. Curbs and wheelstops.
(1) All outdoor hard-surfaced off-street parking areas shall be curbed
unless sheet drainage of surface water can be achieved subject to
approval by the Borough Engineer.
(2) Wheelstops shall be provided along boundaries of adjoining
properties, public rights-of-way, sidewalks or landscaped areas
unless curbs are provided in that portion of the parking lot.
H. Surfacing.
(1) All outdoor off-street parking areas and access driveways shall be
paved with asphalt, concrete or similar material of adequate
thickness to support the weight of fully loaded vehicles that
customarily park or travel on it. The exceptions to this requirement
are:
(a) Single-family dwellings and two-family dwellings in plans with
less than five dwelling units; and
(b) Parking areas located to the rear of buildings on lots in the I-1
Industrial District, which shall, as a minimum, have a dust-free
slag or stone surface parking area.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner to ensure that
driveway surface materials and stormwater runoff do not discharge
onto a public street.
I. Location of parking areas.
(1) Required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot with the
principal use. In the case where adequate lot area does not exist on
the same lot to meet the parking requirements, the Zoning Hearing
Board may approve off-site parking as a use by special exception,
provided it is located no more than 400 feet from the principal
entrance to the building it is intended to serve and evidence of a
lease agreement or cross easement is submitted for any property
§ 180-80 ECONOMY CODE § 180-80
178:608
under different ownership proposed to be used for off-site parking.
If the off-site parking is not located on property contiguous to
the use it serves, the off-site parking shall be used for employee
parking, and a means of safe pedestrian access shall be provided.
(2) Parking authorized in front yards shall be located at least 10 feet
from the street right-of-way line. All parking areas containing five
or more spaces shall be set back at least 10 feet from a side or rear
property line, except where a buffer area is required by this
chapter that results in a more stringent setback requirement.
J. Landscaping. Parking areas containing more than 20 spaces shall
provide landscaping as required below:
(1) The area of the front yard between the street right-of-way and
parking located in a front yard shall be seeded with grass or
planted with ground cover and shall be landscaped with trees and/
or shrubs that comply with the requirements for visibility of
§ 180-70D. This landscaping may include trees required by
§ 180-69J.
(2) In the event that a parking area containing 20 or more spaces is not
otherwise required to be screened by a buffer area, then Buffer
Area C, as described in § 180-69A, shall be provided along any
property line where the parking adjoins property in an R-A, R-1, R-2
or R-3 Zoning District.
K. Shopping cart return areas. One shopping cart return area shall be
provided for each 10,000 square feet of gross floor area in retail stores
that provide shopping carts. Shopping cart return areas shall measure
nine feet by 20 feet and shall provide containment on three sides and
shall be identified by an above-grade sign secured to the containment
structure. The surface area of the sign shall not exceed four square feet.
L. Lighting. If parking areas are proposed to be used during evening
hours, lighting shall be provided. Any lighting used to illuminate offstreet
parking areas shall be designed to reflect the light away from
adjoining properties in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District and away from
any streets or highways. The lighting system shall furnish a level of not
less than 0.5 footcandle during hours of operation and shall be designed
with cutoff luminaires that have a cutoff angle of 60° or less. (See the
illustration in Appendix B.122) There shall be no spillover of illumination
at any property line adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3
District in excess of 0.2 footcandle.
M. Stormwater management. All paved areas shall be designed so that
stormwater runoff shall not adversely affect adjacent properties.
Surface drainage shall be connected to the existing or proposed
drainage system. The method of stormwater management and the
design of the proposed facilities shall be subject to the requirements of
122. Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-80 WATER § 180-80
178:609
§ 180-81. Off-street parking requirements.
Any new use or change of use in any zoning district shall comply with
the following minimum requirements for the provision of off-street parking
spaces:
the Borough, county and state regulations and to review and
recommendation by the Borough Engineer.
N. Slope. The maximum permissible slope of any parking area accessory to
any use other than a single-family or two-family dwelling shall be 7%. If
parking spaces are provided in areas that exceed a five-percent slope,
all such spaces shall be parallel to the contour lines of the area.
A. When the calculation of required parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional parking space, any fraction shall be counted
as one parking space.
B. Where more than one use exists on a lot, parking requirements for each
use shall be provided.
C. The following table of parking requirements specifies the number of
spaces required for various categories of uses in any zoning district:
Use Parking Spaces Required
Adult businesses 1 space for each 250 square feet
of floor area devoted to retail
sales; 1 space for each seat in a
theater; 1 space for each viewing
booth or machine; 1 space for
each sleeping room in a motel; 1
space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area in a nightclub
devoted to patron seating
Agriculture 1 space per employee
Agricultural sales 1 space per employee, plus 1
space for each 400 square feet of
growing and display area
accessible to the public
Amusement or video arcade 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area
Amusement park 1 space for each 1,500 square feet
of gross lot area
Animal shelter 1 space for each volunteer or
employee, plus a minimum of 2
spaces for visitors
Appliance store; home furnishings
store
1 space for each 1,500 square feet
of display and sales area
§ 180-80 ECONOMY CODE § 180-81
178:610
Use Parking Spaces Required
Assisted-living facility;
independent-living facility
1 space per dwelling unit, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 0.5 space per dwelling
unit for visitors
Auditorium See "theater; auditorium."
Automobile service station 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 2 spaces for each
service bay, plus 1 space for each
200 square feet devoted to retail
sales
Banks and financial institutions 1 space per 300 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on peak shift, plus the
waiting spaces required by
§ 180-73 for each drive-through
window
Bar or tavern 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
50 square feet of net floor area
devoted to patron seating
Bed-and-breakfast 1 space for each sleeping room in
addition to the parking required
for the single-family dwelling
Beverage distributor 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 500 square feet of
net floor area, plus 1 space for
each business vehicle, plus the
standing spaces required for any
drive-through facility
Beverage bottling and distribution 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle
Billiard parlors 4 spaces for each table, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
shift, plus the requirement
specified in this table for any area
devoted to bar or tavern or
restaurant
Boarding stable 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each horse stall and 1
space for each 3 seats in an arena
or each 80 lineal inches of
bleacher seating, if any
Bowling alleys 5 spaces for each alley
§ 180-81 WATER § 180-81
178:611
Use Parking Spaces Required
Business or professional offices 1 space for every 300 square feet
of net floor area
Business services 1 space for every 300 square feet
of net floor area
Car wash 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
bay in a self-serve car wash to
allow for the drying of vehicles,
plus 1 space for any additional
service positions such as the
dispensing of air, plus the
standing spaces required in
§ 180-73
Catering hall 1 space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area devoted to customer
seating, plus 1 space for each
employee at maximum occupancy
Cemetery 1 space for each 40 square feet of
floor area accessible to the public
in a chapel or mausoleum, plus 1
space for each employee
Churches 1 space per 4 seats or 80 lineal
inches of pew, or if there are no
pews or seats, 1 space for each 75
square feet of net floor area used
for assembly
Commercial greenhouse 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
250 square feet of retail sales
area, plus 1 space for each 1,500
square feet of growing area that is
accessible to the public
Commercial school 1 space for each faculty and
employee, plus 1 space for each
1.5 students
Communications tower 1 space for periodic visits by
maintenance workers
Community centers in a planned
residential development or
subdivision
1 space for each 10 dwelling units
in the development
Community club 1 space for each 10 member
households, plus 1 space for each
75 square feet of net floor area
used for activities
§ 180-81 ECONOMY CODE § 180-81
178:612
Use Parking Spaces Required
Contracting business 1 space for each business vehicle
or equipment within an enclosed
garage, plus 1 space for each
employee on site, plus 1 space for
each 250 square feet of floor area
devoted to product display and
retail sales
Contractor's yard 1 space for each employee on site,
plus 1 space for each 250 square
feet of floor area devoted to
product display and retail sales,
plus 1 space for each business
vehicle or equipment
Convenience store 1 space for each 200 square feet
of gross floor area
Dance halls, skating rinks 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area
Day-care center or preschool
facility
1 space for each teacher and/or
employee on largest shift, plus 1
space per each 6 students
Dormitories; fraternity houses;
sorority houses
1 space for each bed at maximum
capacity, plus 1 space for each
employee and 0.5 space per bed
for guests
Drive-through facility See § 180-73 for the standing
space requirements for each
drive-through position.
Educational studio 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 2 students at
maximum occupancy
Equipment storage yard 1 space for each business vehicle
or equipment within an enclosed
garage, plus 1 space for each
employee on site, plus 1 space for
each 250 square feet of floor area
devoted to product display and
retail sales
Family day-care home 1 space for each employee in
addition to the parking required
for the dwelling
§ 180-81 WATER § 180-81
178:613
Use Parking Spaces Required
Fire and emergency medical
services; other public buildings
1 space for each 300 square feet
of area used for office, plus the
requirement for indoor assembly
for the floor area devoted to that
use, plus 1 space in an enclosed
garage for each vehicle or
equipment, plus the requirement
for a catering hall for any rental
hall with kitchen facilities
Fitness center 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area accessible to
members
Flex space Each portion of the floor area
used for office, manufacturing
and/or warehousing shall meet the
minimum requirements of this
section for that specific use
Fourplex 2 spaces per dwelling unit, 1 of
which must be in an enclosed
garage, plus 0.5 space per
dwelling unit for visitors to be
located within 300 feet of the
units they are intended to serve
Funeral homes 35 spaces for the first viewing
parlor, plus 30 spaces for each
additional parlor
Furniture store 1 space for each 1,500 square feet
of display and sales area
Garden apartments 2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus
0.5 space per dwelling unit for
visitors to be located within 300
feet of the units they are intended
to serve
Golf course; golf or country club 8 spaces for each hole, plus 1
space for each employee, plus the
requirement for restaurant and/or
swimming pool (commercial) if
those facilities are provided
Group-care facility 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
resident authorized to drive, plus
1 space for each 6 beds
§ 180-81 ECONOMY CODE § 180-81
178:614
Use Parking Spaces Required
Gymnasium 1 space per 3 fixed seats or 1
space for each 80 lineal inches of
bleacher seating or, if there are no
fixed seats, 1 space for each 75
square feet of net floor area used
for assembly
Health club 1 space for each 100 square feet
of net floor area accessible to
members
Home occupation 3 spaces for visitors or clients in
addition to the spaces required for
the dwelling unit
Hospitals 1 space per 3 beds, plus 1 space
for each employee on the peak
working shift
Hotel See "motel/hotel."
Indoor entertainment See "indoor places of assembly."
Indoor places of assembly
(without fixed seats)
1 space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area
Indoor places of assembly (with
fixed seats)
1 space for each 3 seats or 80
lineal inches of bleacher seating
Junkyard 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 1,000 square feet
of vehicle or scrap material
storage area
Landscaping contractor 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each business vehicle,
plus 1 space for each 1,000
square feet of sales, display and
growing area accessible to the
public
Kennel 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 5 kennel units
Libraries/museums 1 space for each 500 square feet
of gross floor area, plus the
requirement for indoor places of
assembly, if applicable
§ 180-81 WATER § 180-81
178:615
Use Parking Spaces Required
Life-care community 2 spaces for each single-family
dwelling and 1 space for each
other type of dwelling unit, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
shift, plus the spaces required for
a nursing home or personal-care
boarding home, if proposed
Manufacturing, light or heavy 1 space for each 1,500 square feet
of gross floor area or 1 space for
each employee on the peak
working shift, whichever is
greater
Medical clinic 1 space for each doctor, plus 1
space for each employee, plus 2
spaces for each chair, examination
or treatment room or other
patient service area
Medical offices 1 space for each 100 square feet
of gross floor area
Mineral removal 1 space for each employee on the
2 largest shifts, combined
Mini warehouse/self-storage
building
2 spaces for manager's quarters, if
any, plus 1 space for each 25
storage units located near the
office or manager's quarters for
prospective customers, plus 1
space for each 10 storage units
equally distributed throughout the
storage area to be used by
customers
Mobile home park 2 spaces for each dwelling unit,
plus 1 space for each 200 square
feet of gross floor area in a
community building
Mobile home sales, service and
storage
1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
2,000 square feet of indoor and
outdoor display and sales area
Motel/hotel 1 space per employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space per sleeping
unit, plus 1 space for each 75
square feet of floor area in shops,
restaurants, meeting rooms and
the like accessible to the public
No-impact home-based business None required
§ 180-81 ECONOMY CODE § 180-81
178:616
Use Parking Spaces Required
Nursing homes 1 space per 3 beds, plus 1 space
for each employee on the peak
working shift
Outdoor places of assembly
(without fixed seats)
1 space for each 1,500 square feet
of gross lot area devoted to
assembly
Outdoor places of assembly (with
fixed seats)
1 space for each 3 seats or 80
lineal inches of bleacher seating
Personal-care boarding home 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
resident authorized to drive, plus
1 space for each 6 beds
Personal service establishments 1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Pet grooming; pet services 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 3 spaces for each
service position
Places of assembly See "indoor places of assembly"
and "outdoor places of assembly"
Playing fields; play courts 2 parking spaces for each team
member on the field or court
during regulation play, plus 1
space for each 3 seats in viewing
stands or for each 80 lineal inches
of bleacher seating
Private club 1 space for each 100 square feet
of floor area accessible to the
members
Professional offices (other than
medical)
1 space for every 300 square feet
of net floor area
Public buildings 1 space for each 300 square feet
of net floor area devoted to
offices, plus 1 space for each 40
square feet of net floor area
devoted to conference rooms or
public meeting rooms
Public utility building or structure 1 space per employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each service
vehicle stored on the lot
Repair shop 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each 300 square feet of
floor area accessible to the public
§ 180-81 WATER § 180-81
178:617
Use Parking Spaces Required
Research and development,
including pilot manufacturing
1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus a minimum of 5
spaces for each 10,000 square
feet of gross floor area reserved
for visitors
Restaurant, fast-food 1 space for each 50 square feet of
gross floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on peak shift, plus the
standing spaces required by
§ 180-73 for each drive-through
window
Restaurant, all other 1 space for each 75 square feet of
net floor area devoted to customer
seating and waiting areas, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
working shift
Retail businesses not otherwise
listed in this table
1 space for each 250 square feet
of gross floor area
Riding academy 1 space for each employee, plus 1
space for each horse stall, plus 1
space for each 3 seats or each 80
lineal inches of bleachers in an
arena if events are open to the
public
Schools, elementary and
intermediate (public or private)
1 space for each employee or
faculty member
Schools, secondary and
postsecondary (public or private)
1 space for each employee or
faculty member, plus 1 space for
each 5 students
Schools, commercial See "commercial school."
Single-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Sportsmen's club 1 space for each 75 square feet of
floor area devoted to meeting
rooms or dining rooms, plus 1
space for each employee, plus 2
spaces for each shooting position
or station on an outdoor shooting
range
Stadium 1 space for each 3 fixed seats or 1
space for each 80 lineal inches of
bleacher seating
§ 180-81 ECONOMY CODE § 180-81
178:618
Use Parking Spaces Required
Supply yards 1 space for each employee on site,
plus 1 space for each 250 square
feet of floor area devoted to
product display and retail sales,
plus 1 space for each business
vehicle or equipment
Swimming pools 1 space for each 50 square feet of
surface water area
Temporary use or structure Parking shall be based on the
requirement for the use listed in
this table that most closely
conforms to the temporary use or
structure proposed.
Tennis, racquetball and handball
courts
1 space per employee, plus 4
spaces for each court
Theater; auditorium 1 space for each 3 fixed seats; or
if there are no fixed seats, 1 space
for each 75 square feet of net floor
area used for assembly; or 1 space
for each 80 lineal inches of
bleacher seating
Townhouses 2 spaces per dwelling unit, plus
0.5 space per dwelling unit for
visitors to be located within 300
feet of the units they are intended
to serve
Transitional dwelling 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
resident authorized to drive, plus
1 space for each 6 beds
Triplex 2 spaces per dwelling unit, one of
which must be in an enclosed
garage, plus 0.5 space per
dwelling unit for visitors to be
located within 300 feet of the
units they are intended to serve
Truck and heavy equipment
rental, sales and service
1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
1,000 square feet of indoor and
outdoor display and sales area
Truck terminal 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
service vehicle stored on site
Two-family dwelling 2 spaces per dwelling unit
§ 180-81 WATER § 180-81
178:619
§ 180-82. Off-street loading.
In all zoning districts, whenever a new use is established or an existing use
is structurally altered, converted or enlarged, off-street loading spaces shall
be provided in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Use Parking Spaces Required
Vehicle accessory sales and
installation
1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
500 square feet of indoor and
outdoor display and sales area
Vehicle rental, sales and service 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
1,000 square feet of indoor display
and sales area
Vehicle repair garages 4 spaces for each bay, plus 1
space for each employee on peak
shift, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle
Veterinary clinic 1 space for each doctor and
employee, plus 2 spaces for each
treatment room
Warehousing and distribution 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle
Wholesale business 1 space for each employee on
peak shift, plus 1 space for each
business vehicle
All other uses 1 space for each 3 occupants at
maximum permitted occupancy or
1 space for each 300 square feet
of gross floor area, whichever is
greater
A. Off-street loading design.
(1) Size. Each loading berth shall be at least 60 feet in length and 14
feet in width, with an overhead clearance of 15 feet. The area used
for loading berths shall not be used to satisfy parking area
requirements and shall not block any driveway used for circulation
through the site.
(2) Access. Loading berths shall be designed to provide sufficient
turnaround area so that vehicles are not required to back onto
public streets, and the design shall be subject to review and
approval by the Borough Engineer. Loading berths shall have direct
access to a driveway and shall be maintained free from obstruction.
§ 180-81 ECONOMY CODE § 180-82
178:620
(3) Location. All loading berths shall be located on the same lot with
the principal use they are intended to serve. No loading berth shall
be located in the minimum required front yard setback. Loading
berths shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest point of
intersection of any two streets.
(4) Screening. Loading berths shall be screened by a minimum eightfoot-
high wall or opaque fence on all sides adjoining property in an
R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District in addition to the buffer area, as
described in § 180-69A.
(5) Surfacing. All loading berths shall have a paved, concrete or
bituminous surface, with adequate thickness to support the weight
of a fully loaded vehicle and graded with positive drainage to
dispose of surface water.
(6) Lighting. Any lighting used to illuminate loading berths shall be
designed to reflect away from any adjoining properties in an R-A,
R-1, R-2 or R-3 District and away from any street or highway.
Spillover lighting shall not exceed 0.2 footcandle at any property
line adjoining property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
B. Off-street loading requirements. In all zoning districts, every use that
requires the receipt or distribution, by tractor-trailer, of material or
merchandise, shall provide off-street loading berths in accordance with
the following requirements:
Gross Floor Area
(square feet) Number of Berths Required
Under 10,000 None
10,000 to 49,999 1
50,000 to 99,999 2
100,000 to 160,000 3
For each additional 80,000 1 additional
C. In addition to required off-street parking and loading facilities,
adequate storage areas for vehicles awaiting loading and unloading
shall be provided. Under no circumstances shall vehicles be stored on
or block access to a public right-of-way.
§ 180-82 WATER § 180-82
178:621

ARTICLE XIV
Signs
§ 180-83. Applicability.
The regulations contained in this article shall apply to all signs in all zoning
districts.
§ 180-84. Types and classes.
Signs in all zoning districts shall be categorized according to the types and
classes described below and shall comply with the requirements for those
types and classes described in this section.
A. Classes.
(1) Freestanding: a sign supported on a foundation or by one or more
uprights, poles or braces permanently affixed to the ground and not
attached to any building or other structures, including:
(a) Pole sign: a freestanding sign that is supported by one or more
poles, uprights, braces or pylons and that has a minimum
clearance between the bottom edge of the sign and the
adjacent ground level, as specified by this chapter.
(b) Ground sign: a freestanding sign that is affixed to the ground
by means of a permanent foundation and that provides a
maximum clearance of 18 inches between the bottom edge of
the sign and the adjacent ground level or, in the case of an
elevated foundation, from the top of the foundation.
(c) Monument sign: a sign supported on two posts or uprights
located at the entrance to a shopping center or planned
industrial park that identifies the name of the development and
that may include the names of one or more of the businesses in
the development.
(2) Wall sign: a sign painted on or attached to and erected parallel to
the face of an outside wall of a building projecting outward from
the wall of the building no more than 18 inches.
(3) Canopy or awning sign: a sign that also functions as a rooflike
shelter, either permanent, retractable or removable, made of
canvas or other durable material, that is affixed to a building or is
self-supporting and provides protection from sun, rain, snow and
other elements.
(4) Arcade sign: a sign suspended beneath a ceiling of an exterior
covered walkway, roof or marquee containing only the name of a
business for the purpose of assisting pedestrian traffic traveling
under the arcade, roof or marquee to identify the location of
§ 180-83 WATER § 180-84
178:623
establishments within a shopping center or other multitenant
building.
(5) Bulletin sign: a type of manual changeable copy sign constructed to
allow letters or symbols to be changed periodically, such as those
used by churches and schools to announce events.
(6) Roof sign: a sign erected and maintained upon or above the roof of
any building which projects no more than six feet above the highest
point of the roof.
(7) Overhanging sign: a sign, other than a wall sign or arcade sign,
affixed perpendicular to a building or wall whose leading edge
extends beyond such building wall, but not including awnings,
canopies or marquees otherwise authorized by this chapter.
(8) Billboard: an off-premises sign that advertises an establishment,
activity, person, product or service that is unrelated to or
unavailable on the premises where the sign is located.
(9) Changeable copy sign: a sign that is designed so that characters,
letters or illustrations can be manually or electronically changed or
rearranged without altering the face or surface of the sign.
(10) Portable sign: a sign that is not permanently affixed to a building, a
structure or the ground and which is designed to be moved from
place to place, including, but not limited to, signs attached to wood
or metal frames designed to be self-supporting and movable;
sandwich board signs; and trailer-mounted signs.
(11) Attention-getting device: a pennant, flag, valance, banner,
propeller, spinner, streamer, searchlight; balloon or other inflatable
device, or similar object or representation of a product, vehicle,
equipment or other advertising image or any ornamentation that is
designed or used for the purpose of promoting, advertising or
attracting attention.
(12) Indirectly illuminated: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices external to, and reflected on, the sign, which
lighting is stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times
and which is shielded so that the illumination is concentrated on
the face of the sign and there is no spillover of illumination or glare
beyond the face of the sign.
(13) Internally illuminated: a sign that is lighted by means of lamps or
lighting devices internal to the sign, which lighting is either behind
the face of the sign or is an integral part of the sign structure and
the advertising effect.
(14) Festoon lighting: a group of two or more light bulbs of more than
20 watts each hung or strung overhead, not on a building or
structure, that are exposed to view by persons on a public right-of-
§ 180-84 ECONOMY CODE § 180-84
178:624
way or that are not shaded or hooded to prevent the direct rays of
light from being visible from the property line, but not including
the temporary erection of lights as part of a holiday celebration or
small lights of less than 20 watts each.
B. Types. Signs are categorized by use, function or purpose into the
following types:
(1) Agricultural sales sign: a temporary sign announcing the seasonal
sale of agricultural products raised and sold on a farm, as defined
herein.
(2) Residential identification sign: a sign containing only the name and
address of the occupant of the premises.
(3) Home occupation identification sign: a sign containing only the
name and address of the occupant of the premises and his or her
occupation. No logos or other advertising shall be permitted.
(4) Residential plan identification sign: a permanent wall or
freestanding ground sign containing only the name and address of
a plan of subdivision or a multifamily building or development.
(5) Real estate sign: a temporary sign advertising the sale or rental of
premises. The sign may also bear the words "sold," "sale pending"
or "rented."
(6) Development sign: a temporary sign erected during the period of
construction and/or development of a property by the developer,
contractor or their agents.
(7) Contractor's sign: a temporary sign announcing the name of
contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in performing work on
the premises.
(8) Public sign: a sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public
interest, erected by, or on the order of, a public officer in the
performance of any public duty, such as official signs and notices of
any public or governmental agency, or erected by or on the order of
a court or public officer, including official traffic signs, public
notices, government flags and other signs warning of hazardous or
dangerous conditions.
(9) Notification sign: signs bearing legal and/or property notices such
as no trespassing, private property, no turnaround, safety zone, no
hunting and similar messages and signs posted by a landowner or
governmental agency for traffic control or the safety of the general
public.
(10) On-premises directional sign: a sign that directs and/or instructs
vehicular or pedestrian traffic relative to parking areas, proper
exits, loading areas, entrance points and similar information on the
premises on which it is located.
§ 180-84 WATER § 180-84
178:625
§ 180-85. General regulations.
The following regulations shall apply to signs in all zoning districts:
(11) Business identification sign: a sign that contains the name, address
and goods, services, facilities or events available on the premises.
(12) Temporary special event sign: a banner, flag, pennant, portable
sign or similar display constructed of durable material and affixed
to the wall of a building or the supporting structure of an approved
freestanding pole business identification sign or, if a portable sign,
adequately affixed to the ground or some permanent structure,
erected for a period not exceeding 30 days, whose sole purpose is
to advertise a special event or promotion.
(13) Temporary off-premises directional sign: a temporary sign located
on property other than where a business or event is located to
direct traffic to the site of the business or event, including, but not
limited to, real estate open houses, garage sales, estate sales,
weddings, showers, picnics, concerts, special promotions and
similar events.
(14)Window signs: a sign or group of signs affixed to the inside of a
display window in a commercial establishment that advertises a
product or service available on the premises or that announces or
promotes a special sale or special event.
(15) Memorial/historical plaques: a commemorative plaque recognized
by an agency of the Borough, county, commonwealth or federal
government or a nonprofit historical or veterans' organization.
A. Restricted signs. The following signs shall not be permitted in any
zoning district:
(1) Attention-getting devices.
(2) Portable signs in all districts, except where authorized as a
temporary special event sign.
(3) Festoon lighting.
(4) Moving or flashing signs, except for that portion of an authorized
sign that indicates time or temperature or an authorized electronic
changeable copy sign.
(5) Signs attached to trees, utility poles or official traffic control
devices or signs within the public right-of-way.
(6) Signs that imitate traffic control devices.
(7) Signs painted on walls or chimneys of a building or on fences or
freestanding walls.
(8) Overhanging signs, as defined herein.
§ 180-84 ECONOMY CODE § 180-85
178:626
(9) Roof signs, as defined herein.
(10) Signs on or affixed to vehicles and/or trailers that are parked on a
public right-of-way, or on any public property or private property
other than the site of the business it advertises, except for
maintenance, repair, loading, unloading or rendering a service at
any location, where the apparent purpose is to advertise a product
or direct people to a business or activity located on nearby
property, but not including temporary construction trailers
authorized by this chapter.
B. Exempt signs. The following signs are exempt from these regulations
and the requirement to obtain a permit:
(1) Holiday decorations displayed for recognized federal or state
holidays, provided they do not interfere with traffic safety or do not,
in any way, become a public safety hazard.
(2) Memorial/historical plaques, as defined herein.
(3) Public signs, as defined herein.
(4) Window signs, as defined herein.
C. Surface area of sign. The surface area of a sign shall be measured as
described below. For two-sided signs, only one sign face is counted in
computing the surface area.
(1) In the case of an advertising panel, the surface area of the sign
shall be the total area enclosed by one continuous line connecting
the extreme points or edges of the advertising panel containing
letters.
(2) In the case of freestanding letters mounted on a wall or other
surface, the surface area of the sign shall be the sum of the areas of
each individual letter calculated by measuring the distance
between the highest and lowest points of each letter and
multiplying that distance by the distance between the extreme
horizontal distance across the letter.
(3) In the case of freestanding ground or pole signs, the area shall not
include the main supporting structure; however, logos, ornamental
attachments and framework around or connections between
advertising panels shall be included.
(4) In the case of letters that are painted on or affixed to an awning,
canopy or marquee, the surface area of the sign shall be the area of
the geometric shape formed by outlining the height and width of all
the letters, including free space between the letters.
D. Lots with multiple street frontage.
§ 180-85 WATER § 180-85
178:627
(1) In all other zoning districts, lots fronting on more than one street
shall be permitted to have one of each type of sign that is
authorized for the lot only on the street frontage where the street
address is assigned.
(2) In commercial and industrial districts, lots fronting on more than
one street shall be permitted to have one of each type of sign
authorized for the lot at the entrance to the lot on each street
frontage, provided the entrances are not visible from any property
in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District.
E. Temporary signs. In all zoning districts where authorized by § 180-86,
real estate, temporary off-premises, contractor and development signs
shall be considered temporary signs that shall be removed within 30
days of the completion of sales or construction.
F. Notification signs. In all zoning districts, the number, location and size
of legal notification signs erected by public agencies shall be in
accordance with the laws of the commonwealth. In all zoning districts,
legal notification signs posted outside the public street right-of-way on
private property by property owners such as "no trespassing," "no
hunting" and the like shall be limited to a surface area not exceeding
two square feet. The placement and maximum number of signs
permitted along road frontages shall be one sign for every 30 feet of
road frontage.
G. Visibility. No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a
hazard by obstructing visibility for traffic on a street or obscuring a
traffic signal or other traffic control device. No sign, other than official
traffic signs and authorized temporary off-premises directional signs,
shall hang over or be erected within the right-of-way of any street. No
sign shall be located within the clear sight triangle defined by
§ 180-70D of this chapter.
H. Illumination. Illumination; when authorized by this chapter, shall be
directed upon the sign face and not toward adjoining properties or
streets. Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted. Lighting
shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color at all times,
except that electronic changeable copy signs, where authorized, may
have a changing message, provided each message is stationary for at
least three seconds. The intensity of any source of illumination of any
sign, whether indirect or internal, shall be controlled so as to not
exceed a maximum of 0.2 footcandle at the property line.
I. Design, construction, maintenance and inspection. All signs shall be
designed to be compatible with the architecture of the principal use to
which they are accessory. All signs shall be constructed of a durable
material and shall be maintained in good condition. All freestanding
signs shall be designed to withstand a sustained one-hundred-mile-perhour
wind load. Any sign found to be in an unsafe condition upon
inspection shall be declared to be a public nuisance, and the Zoning
§ 180-85 ECONOMY CODE § 180-85
178:628
§ 180-86. Signs authorized in all zoning districts.
In addition to the signs authorized by §§ 180-87 through 180-89 in specific
zoning districts, the following signs are authorized in all zoning districts:
Officer shall give notice to the owner in writing, in accordance with
§ 180-109B of this chapter, to repair or remove the sign within 10 days.
Upon failure of the owner to comply, the Borough shall remove the sign
at the owner's expense. The Borough may lien the property for the cost
of removing the sign and all legal fees and costs incurred with filing and
enforcing the lien.
J. Removal of signs. Whenever any business is discontinued or vacated
with no intention to reopen under the same name, all sign advertising
panels containing the name of the discontinued or vacated business
shall be removed within 30 days of the vacation or discontinuance of the
business. Upon failure of the owner to comply, the Borough may remove
the sign at the owner's expense. The Borough may lien the property for
the cost of removing the sign and all legal fees and costs incurred with
filing and enforcing the lien.
K. Permits required.
(1) No permit shall be required for the following types of signs as
described in § 180-84B above: residential identification,
notification, real estate, contractor and window signs. Permits shall
not be required for any signs exempted from these regulations by
§ 180-85B.
(2) Permits shall be required in accordance with § 180-114 of this
chapter for all other signs authorized by §§ 180-86 through 180-89.
The Zoning Officer shall issue the required permits upon
submission of an application which complies with all applicable
provisions of this chapter and payment of the required fee
established from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
L. Expiration of permits. Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for
erection, alteration, replacement or relocation of any sign shall expire
automatically within six months of the date of issuance, if work
authorized by the permit has not been initiated and diligently pursued.
M. Sign location. Except for billboards temporary off-premises directional
signs and off-premises business identification or monument signs, as
defined and regulated by this chapter, all signs shall be located on the
premises that they are intended to serve.
A. Bulletin signs. One bulletin sign that is nonilluminated or indirectly or
internally illuminated shall be permitted in connection with any church,
school, library or similar public or semipublic building. If the bulletin
sign is a wall sign, the surface area shall not exceed 12 square feet. If
the bulletin sign is a freestanding ground sign, the surface area shall
not exceed 24 square feet.
§ 180-85 WATER § 180-86
178:629
B. Real estate signs. One nonilluminated temporary real estate sign shall
be permitted on each lot, provided the sign shall not exceed six feet in
height. The real estate sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in surface
area when located in any R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District and shall not
exceed 32 square feet in any other zoning district. Such sign shall be
removed within 30 days of the sale or rental of the property on which it
is located.
C. Development signs. One nonilluminated temporary development sign
shall be permitted on each development site, provided the surface area
of the sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in surface area. If the
development is phased, the development sign shall be located in the
phase that is currently under construction. A second nonilluminated
temporary development sign shall be permitted at the entrance to the
development, provided the surface area of the sign shall not exceed 16
square feet. The development sign shall not exceed eight feet in height.
Such sign shall be removed within 30 days of the sale or rental of the
last lot or completion of the proposed construction in the development.
D. Contractor signs. One nonilluminated temporary contractor sign
announcing the names of contractors, mechanics or artisans engaged in
performing work on the premises shall be permitted on a lot, provided
the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in area nor six feet in height
and shall be removed within 30 days of the completion of the work.
E. Temporary special event signs for public and nonprofit organizations.
One nonilluminated temporary special event sign, as defined by this
chapter, shall be permitted to be erected on the face of a public
building, church or building housing a nonprofit organization, provided
that the area of the sign shall not exceed 40 square feet and provided
the sign is displayed for a period no longer than 30 days and is removed
within five days following the event that it is erected to promote. Each
organization may display a temporary special event sign a maximum of
three times in any twelve-month period for a maximum of 30 days each
time.
F. Home occupation identification signs. One nonilluminated home
occupation identification sign shall be permitted for an approved home
occupation, provided that the surface area of the sign shall not exceed
two square feet and the sign shall contain only the name, address and
occupation of the resident and shall not contain any logo or other
advertising. The sign shall be wall mounted or affixed to the structure
supporting the mailbox.
G. Temporary off-premises directional signs. Temporary off-premises
directional signs may be located in the street right-of-way with the
permission of the owner of the right-of-way or located on private
property with the permission of the landowner. The maximum surface
area of such sign shall be four square feet. Such sign shall not be
illuminated and shall be removed within 24 hours of the event for which
it was erected.
§ 180-86 ECONOMY CODE § 180-86
178:630
§ 180-87. Signs authorized in agricultural and residential zoning
districts.
In addition to the signs authorized in all zoning districts by § 180-86, the
following signs shall be permitted in all R-A, R-1, R-2 and R-3 Districts:
H. Agricultural sales signs. In those districts where agricultural sales are
authorized or may exist as a legal nonconforming use, two
nonilluminated freestanding agricultural sales signs shall be permitted
to announce the agricultural sales, provided the cumulative surface
area of both signs shall not exceed 20 square feet, the height of the sign
shall not exceed six feet and the sign shall be located no closer than 10
feet to any property line or street right-of-way.
I. Residential identification signs. One nonilluminated residential
identification sign shall be permitted on each lot, provided the sign
shall not exceed one square foot in surface area and the maximum
height of any freestanding sign shall be two feet. The residential
identification sign may be affixed to the mailbox or to the wall of the
dwelling or may be a freestanding ground sign located in the front yard.
A. Residential plan identification sign. One nonilluminated or indirectly
illuminated permanent wall or freestanding ground residential plan
identification sign containing only the street address and/or name of a
residential subdivision plan or multifamily building or development
shall be permitted, provided the sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in
area. The residential plan identification sign may be affixed to a
freestanding decorative wall, rather than to a building wall, provided
that the decorative wall meets all applicable ordinance requirements
and does not obstruct visibility for traffic entering or leaving the plan in
compliance with the clear sight triangle required by § 180-70D. Such
signs shall not be located in any public street right-of-way without the
permission of the owner of the right-of-way and an agreement for
maintenance of the sign by a homeowners' association or similar
private organization.
B. Business identification sign for authorized conditional uses, uses by
special exception or legal nonconforming uses. If a legal nonconforming
use exists in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District, or if a business
identification sign is not otherwise authorized and regulated by
§ 180-66 of this chapter for a conditional use or use by special exception
in a C-1 or I-1 District, such business may have one nonilluminated or
indirectly illuminated business identification sign that is either a wall
sign or freestanding ground sign, provided the sign shall not exceed 12
square feet in area, and the maximum height of a freestanding sign
shall not exceed six feet.
C. On-premises directional signs.
(1) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily buildings and/or
any lot that provides more than 100 parking spaces, on-premises
§ 180-86 WATER § 180-87
178:631
§ 180-88. Signs authorized in commercial and industrial districts.
In addition to the signs authorized by § 180-86 in all zoning districts, only
the following signs shall be permitted in all C-1 and I-1 Districts:
directional signs shall be permitted, provided that the surface area
of any one sign shall not exceed four square feet.
(2) On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises directional
signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one acre or more, a
maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated onpremises
directional signs shall be permitted on the first acre, and
for each additional acre or fraction thereof over one acre, two
additional on-premises directional signs shall be permitted.
A. Temporary special event signs for businesses. Temporary special event
signs, as defined by this chapter, shall be permitted, provided that:
(1) No more than two signs or banners shall be permitted on any
establishment at any one time.
(2) The temporary special event signs shall be securely attached to the
building or to the supporting structure of a freestanding pole
business identification sign.
(3) Temporary special event signs shall be displayed no more than
three times in any twelve-month period, provided each display shall
not exceed 30 days.
(4) The aggregate surface area of all temporary special event signs
shall not exceed 24 square feet per establishment. In the event that
there is more than one establishment on a site, the maximum
aggregate surface area of all temporary special event signs on the
site at any one time shall not exceed 70 square feet.
(5) Portable signs may be used as temporary special event signs,
provided they are securely anchored, are located outside any public
street right-of-way, do not obstruct any existing parking spaces and
do not constitute a hazard for pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
(6) Temporary special event signs may be illuminated, but the message
shall remain stationary at all times.
B. Changeable copy signs.
(1) One nonilluminated or internally illuminated manual or electronic
changeable copy sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of the
number of businesses on the lot. The changeable copy sign shall be
permanently affixed to the wall of the building or to the supporting
structure of an authorized freestanding sign on the lot or, in the
case of an automobile service station, on the canopy over the gas
§ 180-87 ECONOMY CODE § 180-88
178:632
pumps. The surface area of the changeable copy sign shall not
exceed 24 square feet.
(2) An electronic changeable copy sign shall not be permitted if the
face of the sign is visible from any property in an R-A, R-1, R-2 or
R-3 District.
C. Business identification sign.
(1) Wall signs.
(a) In the C-1 and I-1 Districts, each business establishment shall
be permitted to have wall signs that may be illuminated or
nonilluminated. No wall sign shall be located on the roof, nor
shall any portion of the wall sign extend above the height of the
building.
(b) In the C-1 District, the aggregate surface area of all wall signs
shall not exceed one square foot for each one lineal foot of
width of the front wall of the building, or portion of the
building, occupied by the business or a maximum of 30 square
feet, whichever is less.
(c) In the C-1 and I-1 Districts, the aggregate surface area of all
wall signs for each business shall not exceed one square foot
for each one lineal foot of width of the front wall of the
building, or portion of the building, occupied by the business or
a maximum of 100 square feet, whichever is less.
(d) In the case of a shopping center where buildings are set back
from the public street a distance in excess of 500 feet, the
aggregate surface area of all wall signs for a business shall not
exceed 200 square feet.
(2) Ground signs. In addition to the wall signs authorized by
§ 180-88C(1), one freestanding ground sign shall be permitted per
lot, regardless of the number of businesses on the lot, provided
that:
(a) No freestanding pole sign exists or is proposed to be erected
on the lot and the lot is not located in a shopping center or
planned industrial park that has a monument sign.
(b) The maximum surface area of the ground sign shall not exceed
32 square feet in the C-1 District and shall not exceed 64
square feet in the I-1 District.
(c) The height and location of the sign shall be designed so as not
to interfere with visibility for vehicular traffic entering or
leaving the lot or traveling on any street, and in no case shall
the total height exceed eight feet above the adjacent ground
level on which it is located. The sign shall comply with the
visibility requirements of § 180-70D.
§ 180-88 WATER § 180-88
178:633
(d) Ground signs may be nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or
internally illuminated.
(e) All freestanding ground signs shall be located at least 15 feet
from any property line, except where property abuts on a
public right-of-way, the ground sign shall be set back at least
15 feet from the right-of-way or at least 20 feet from the edge
of the cartway if the right-of-way is not contiguous with the
front lot line.
(3) Pole signs. In addition to the wall signs authorized by § 180-88C(1),
one freestanding pole sign shall be permitted per lot, regardless of
the number of businesses on the lot, provided that:
(a) No freestanding ground sign exists or is proposed to be
erected on the lot, and the lot is not located in a shopping
center or planned industrial park that has a monument sign.
(b) The pole sign shall be nonilluminated, indirectly illuminated or
internally illuminated.
(c) The maximum height of the top of the pole sign shall be 25 feet
above the adjacent street level from which the sign is to be
viewed.
(d) The minimum height of the bottom edge of the sign shall be 14
feet if traffic circulates under the sign. The minimum height of
the bottom edge of the sign shall be eight feet if traffic does not
circulate under the sign.
(e) The maximum surface area of the freestanding pole sign shall
not exceed 40 square feet if there are fewer than three
businesses on the lot and shall not exceed 64 square feet if
there are three or more businesses on the lot. Neither
dimension of such sign shall be less than five feet.
(f) No portion of any pole sign shall project over any public rightof-
way, nor shall it be located within the clear sight triangle of
any street intersection as defined by § 180-70D of this chapter.
(g) All freestanding pole signs shall be set back a distance
equivalent to the height of the sign from every property line,
except where property abuts on a public right-of-way, the sign
shall be set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way.
(4) Monument signs.
(a) One illuminated or nonilluminated monument sign shall be
permitted at the main entrance to a shopping center or
planned industrial park, provided a ground sign or pole sign
does not exist and is not proposed at that entrance. Outparcels
in a shopping center or lots fronting on a public street in a
planned industrial park owned in fee simple may have a ground
§ 180-88 ECONOMY CODE § 180-88
178:634
sign or pole sign authorized by Subsection C(2) and (3) of
§ 180-88. No other businesses within a shopping center or
planned industrial park shall be permitted to have a ground
sign or pole sign; however each business shall be permitted to
have the wall signs authorized by Subsection C(1) of § 180-88.
(b) The maximum surface area of a monument sign in a
commercial district that has over 350,000 gross square feet of
commercial building space shall be 400 square feet. The
maximum surface area of a monument sign in all other
commercial and industrial districts shall be 150 square feet.
The maximum height of a monument sign in a commercial
district that has over 350,000 gross square feet of commercial
building space shall be 50 feet. The maximum height of a
monument sign in all other commercial and industrial districts
shall be 25 feet. The monument sign shall be located at least 10
feet from any property line or street right-of-way line. The
monument sign shall comply with the visibility requirements of
§ 180-70D. The base of the sign shall be landscaped with
shrubs, perennials and annuals for a minimum distance of
three feet from the base of the sign. [Amended 4-12-2016 by
Ord. No. 455]
(5) Arcade signs. In a shopping center that has pedestrian accessways
covered by a roof, marquee or exterior arcade, one arcade sign, as
defined herein, shall be permitted for each business in the building,
provided that the maximum surface area of each sign shall not
exceed eight square feet.
(6) Canopy signs. Canopy signs may be erected at the street level
entrance to a building. In the case of multitenant buildings, each
business with a street-level entrance may have a canopy sign.
Canopy signs shall not be illuminated. The maximum height of the
letters on a canopy sign shall be six inches.
D. On-premises directional signs.
(1) On any lot that contains two or more multifamily or nonresidential
buildings and/or on any lot that provides more than 100 parking
spaces, on-premises directional signs shall be permitted, provided
that the surface area of any one sign shall not exceed four square
feet.
(2) On lots with areas less than one acre, a maximum of four
nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated on-premises directional
signs shall be permitted. On lots with areas of one acre or more, a
maximum of six nonilluminated or indirectly illuminated onpremises
directional signs shall be permitted on the first acre, and
for each additional acre or fraction thereof over one acre, two
additional on-premises directional signs shall be permitted.
§ 180-88 WATER § 180-88
178:635
§ 180-89. Billboards.
Billboards shall be permitted only as a conditional use in the C-1 and I-1
Districts, provided all of the following requirements are met:
E. Off-premises business identification or monument sign. For a shopping
center or planned industrial park that has frontage on a public street
that intersects with an arterial or collector street, as defined by this
chapter, one internally illuminated or indirectly illuminated offpremises
business identification or monument sign shall be permitted
at that intersection, provided all of the following requirements are met:
(1) The location of the off-premises business identification or
monument sign shall be within 1,500 feet of the entrance to the site
of the shopping center or planned industrial park that the offpremises
sign is erected to identify. [Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord.
No. 418]
(2) Evidence of permission from the landowner in the form of a lease
agreement, easement agreement or other acceptable legal
document granting the owner of the sign the right to locate the sign
on the premises.
(3) The maximum surface area of the off-premises business
identification or monument sign shall be 60 square feet.
(4) If the proposed sign is a freestanding pole sign, the maximum
height of the pole sign shall be 35 feet above grade level.
(5) If the proposed sign is a ground sign, the maximum height of the
ground sign shall be eight feet above the adjacent ground level.
(6) The off-premises business identification or monument sign shall be
located at least 10 feet from any front or side property line.
[Amended 4-8-2008 by Ord. No. 418]
(7) The off-premises business identification or monument sign shall be
authorized in addition to the maximum number of signs and the
maximum surface area of signs legally existing and/or authorized
for the property on which it is located.
A. Location. Billboards shall be authorized only within 400 feet of the
center line of a limited-access federal highway as a conditional use on
property in any zoning district, provided all of the following
requirements are met:
(1) Billboards shall not be erected within 500 feet of the boundary line
of any R-A, R-1, R-2 or R-3 District or within 500 feet of any public
or private school, church or cemetery, said 500 feet being
measured along the radius of a circle from the centermost point of
the billboard structure extending in all directions.
§ 180-88 ECONOMY CODE § 180-89
178:636
(2) Billboards shall not be erected within 500 feet of an interchange or
safety rest area measured along the interstate or limited-access
highway from the beginning or ending of the pavement widening at
the exit from or entrance to the main-traveled way.
(3) Billboards shall maintain a lateral minimum spacing between any
existing or proposed billboard structure of 1,000 feet. Required
spacing shall be measured along both sides of the same roadway
frontage from the centermost point of the billboard structure along
a line extending from the centermost point of the billboard that is
parallel to the center line of the roadway to which the billboard is
oriented.
(4) No part of the billboard shall be located closer than 15 feet to the
limited-access federal highway right-of-way.
(5) For all other billboards not located along limited-access federal
highway rights-of-way, the minimum front, side and rear yard
requirements applying to a principal structure as set forth within
the zoning district in which the billboard is to be located shall apply
to all parts of each billboard structure.
(6) No billboard shall be erected in such a manner as to block the view
from the road or street of any existing business identification sign,
residential or nonresidential structure, or limit or reduce the light
and ventilation requirements.
(7) No billboard shall be constructed within the clear sight triangle of
the public street or road on which it is situated, as defined by
§ 180-70D of this chapter, and shall not in any case obstruct or
impede traffic safety.
(8) No billboard shall be erected over any sidewalk or public right-ofway.
(9) Billboards shall not be part of a roof or wall, nor shall they be
mounted on the roof, wall or other part of a building or any other
structure.
B. Size and height. A billboard shall have a maximum allowable gross
surface area of 750 square feet per sign face. This gross surface area
shall be permitted, provided all of the following additional requirements
are met:
(1) A billboard shall have no more than two sign faces per billboard
structure which may be placed back to back or in a V-shaped
configuration having an interior angle of 90° or less.
(2) Neither dimension of the billboard's sign face shall exceed 24 feet
in total height or 48 feet in total length, provided the total
allowable gross surface area for the sign face is not exceeded.
§ 180-89 WATER § 180-89
178:637
(3) A billboard structure shall have a maximum height above the curb
of the roadway from which it is intended to be viewed of 40 feet.
C. Construction methods. Billboards shall be constructed in accordance
with applicable provisions of the Uniform Construction Code (UCC), as
now or hereafter amended, and shall meet all of the following additional
requirements:
(1) A billboard structure shall have a maximum of one vertical support
being a maximum of three feet in diameter or width and without
additional bracing or vertical supports.
(2) A billboard sign face shall be independently supported and have
vertical supports of metal that are galvanized or constructed of
approved corrosive-resistant, noncombustible materials.
Structures constructed with galvanized metal shall be painted.
(3) The one vertical support shall be capable of enabling the entire
sign face to be able to withstand a minimum one-hundred-mile-perhour
wind load. Structural design computations shall be made and
certified by a registered engineer and shall be submitted to the
Borough with the application for conditional use.
(4) The base shall be installed using a foundation and footings
approved by the Borough Engineer for the type of construction
proposed.
(5) The entire base of the billboard structure parallel to the sign face
shall be permanently landscaped with suitable shrubbery and/or
bushes of minimum height of three feet placed in such manner as to
screen the foundation of the structure.
(6) Landscaping shall be maintained by the sign owner in an attractive
and healthy manner in accordance with accepted conservation
practices.
(7) No bare cuts shall be permitted on a hillside.
(8) All cuts or fills shall be permanently seeded or planted.
(9) A billboard with display lighting shall be constructed so that it does
not glare upon adjoining property and shall not exceed a maximum
of 1.0 footcandle upon the adjoining property.
(10) Display lighting shall not operate between 12:00 midnight and 5:00
a.m. prevailing local time.
(11)No billboard structure, sign face or display lighting shall flash or
emit noise. No display lighting shall cause distractions, confusion,
nuisance or hazard to traffic, aircraft or other properties.
D. Maintenance.
§ 180-89 ECONOMY CODE § 180-89
178:638
(1) A billboard structure shall be entirely painted every three years,
unless constructed of an approved corrosive-resistant material.
(2) Every 10 years, the owner of the billboard shall have a structural
inspection made of the billboard by a qualified Pennsylvania
registered engineer and shall provide to the Borough a written
report and certification from that engineer certifying that the
billboard is structurally sound.
(3) Annual visual inspections of the billboard may be conducted by the
Borough to determine continuing compliance with this chapter.
Upon such inspection the owner shall pay an annual inspection fee,
as established from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(4) Billboards found to be in violation of this chapter shall be brought
into compliance or removed within 30 days upon proper
notification by the Borough issued in accordance with § 180-109B
of this chapter.
(5) Billboards using removable paper or other materials shall be
maintained in such condition as to eliminate loose or frayed
material protruding or hanging from the structure. All paper and
other waste materials shall be removed from the site and disposed
of properly whenever any sign face is changed.
E. Liability insurance. The applicant for a sign permit to erect a billboard
shall provide a certificate of insurance for public liability and property
damage that holds the Borough harmless in an amount no less than
$500,000 or as may be adjusted, from time to time, by resolution of
Borough Council. The insurance certificate shall contain a clause
stating that the insurance shall not be canceled or reduced without first
giving 10 days' notice to the Borough.
F. Permits.
(1) Prior to submission of an application for a sign permit, the
applicant for a billboard shall obtain, and submit with the
application, approvals from the United States Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA), when applicable.
(2) Approval of the conditional use shall be valid for six months from
the date of action by Borough Council granting the conditional use.
If the applicant fails to obtain a sign permit for the approved
billboard within the six-month period, approval of the conditional
use shall expire automatically, without written notice to the
applicant.
(3) The issuance of a sign permit for a billboard that has been granted
approval of a conditional use shall be conditioned upon the
approval of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation (Penn
DOT) for billboards proposed to be located along state highways. If
the applicant fails to submit evidence of the required approval by
§ 180-89 WATER § 180-89
178:639
Penn DOT within 30 days of the issuance of the conditional sign
permit, the sign permit shall be revoked by the Borough Zoning
Officer, who shall provide written notice to the applicant.
(4) The applicant may reapply for the required sign permit, upon
submission of evidence of Penn DOT approval, without payment of
any additional sign permit fee, provided the application is filed
within the six-month period during which the conditional use
approval is valid.
G. Application fees. Said application shall be accompanied by an
application fee in an amount equal to that set from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
H. Nonconforming billboards.
(1) Any billboard that does not conform to the requirements of this
section shall not be enlarged or moved unless the billboard
complies with all provisions of this section.
(2) Any billboard that is damaged or destroyed by more than 51% of its
replacement value at the time of damage or destruction shall be
reconstructed only in compliance with all provisions of this
§ 180-89.
§ 180-89 ECONOMY CODE § 180-89
178:640
ARTICLE XV
Nonconforming Uses, Structures and Lots
§ 180-90. Applicability.
This article shall apply to all nonconforming uses, structures and lots, as
defined by this chapter. Nothing contained herein shall require any change
in the overall layout, plans, construction, size or designated use of any
development, building, structure or part thereof for which official approval
and required permits have been granted prior to the effective date of this
chapter or any amendment thereto.
§ 180-91. Nonconforming uses.
These regulations shall apply to any use of a structure or lot in any zoning
district that is a nonconforming use as defined by this chapter. Whenever
the boundaries of a zoning district are changed so as to transfer an area
from one zoning district to another zoning district of a different
classification, these regulations shall apply to any uses that thereby become
nonconforming.
A. Continuation and sale. Where, at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this chapter, a lawful use of a lot or structure exists that
is made no longer permissible under the terms of this chapter as
enacted or amended, such use may be sold or otherwise transferred to
other owners and may be continued as long as it remains otherwise
lawful in accordance with the provisions of this article.
B. Enlargement or expansion.
(1) Single-family dwellings that are nonconforming uses in any
nonresidential zoning district classification may be enlarged or
expanded to occupy a greater area of the lot or to increase the
height of the dwelling, provided all applicable area and bulk
regulations of the zoning district in which the property is located
are met.
(2) No other nonconforming use of a lot or nonconforming use of a
structure shall be enlarged or increased or extended to occupy a
greater area of the lot or structure than was occupied at the
effective date of adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless the
Zoning Hearing Board, after public hearing, shall interpret that the
enlargement or extension is necessitated by the natural expansion
and growth of the nonconforming use. Any such enlargement or
expansion shall conform to the area, height and yard requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located.
(3) No nonconforming use shall be moved in whole or in part to any
other portion of the lot occupied by such use at the effective date of
adoption or amendment of this chapter, unless authorized by the
Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 180-90 WATER § 180-91
178:641
(4) Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any part of a
structure that was designed for such use at the time the use
became nonconforming; however, a nonconforming use shall not be
extended to occupy any structure, lot or portion of a lot that was
not owned by the owner of the nonconforming use at the time the
use became nonconforming.
C. Change of use.
(1) A nonconforming use shall not be changed to any use other than a
conforming use, except as permitted as a use by special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the following
standards:
(a) The new nonconforming use will more closely correspond to
the uses authorized in the district as permitted uses,
conditional uses or uses by special exception.
(b) The new nonconforming use will be in keeping with the
character of the neighborhood in which it is located and will
have an equal or lesser impact on the neighborhood than the
existing nonconforming use.
(c) Any change from one nonconforming use to another shall
comply with the parking requirements of Article XIII for the
new use and shall be subject to the area, bulk and buffer area
regulations for such use in the zoning district where such use
is authorized as a permitted use, conditional use or use by
special exception.
(2) When a nonconforming use is changed to a conforming use, the use
thereafter shall not be changed to a nonconforming use.
(3) Where a nonconforming use exists on a lot, a conforming use shall
not be established on the same lot unless the nonconforming use is
discontinued.
D. Abandonment. When a nonconforming use of a structure and/or lot is
discontinued or abandoned for 12 consecutive months, the structure
and/or lot shall not thereafter be used, except in conformance with the
regulations of the zoning district in which it is located.
E. Damage or destruction.
(1) Residential dwellings that are nonconforming uses in the C-1 or I-1
District may be rebuilt on the existing foundation in the event of
damage or destruction, provided the reconstruction is started
within 18 months of the date of destruction.
(2) In the case of nonconforming uses, other than dwellings, in any
district, when damage or destruction of a structure in which the
nonconforming use is conducted involves 50% or less of the gross
floor area of the structure, repairs or reconstruction may be
§ 180-91 ECONOMY CODE § 180-91
178:642
§ 180-92. Nonconforming structures.
These regulations shall apply to all nonconforming structures, as defined by
this chapter, in all zoning districts.
undertaken, provided that such restoration is started within 18
months of the date of destruction. No enlargement or expansion of
the structure in which the nonconforming use is located shall be
undertaken unless the provisions of § 180-91B are met.
(3) In the case of nonconforming uses, other than dwellings, in any
district, when the structure in which the nonconforming use is
conducted is damaged or destroyed by fire or other means to an
extent of more than 50% of its gross floor area, the structure shall
be reconstructed only to house a conforming use.
A. Structural alteration or enlargement. A nonconforming structure may
be enlarged or structurally altered, provided the enlargement or
alteration does not encroach any further into a required yard setback
than the existing nonconforming structure does and further provided
that no new nonconformities are created. All other alterations or
enlargements shall require review by the Zoning Hearing Board, and
after public hearing, the Zoning Hearing Board may determine undue
hardship and may authorize a variance for the reasonable alteration or
enlargement of such structure.
B. Damage or destruction. Any nonconforming structure that has been
partially or completely damaged or destroyed by fire or other means
may be rebuilt or repaired on its existing foundation even though such
foundation may violate the setback requirements for the zoning district
in which the structure is located, provided that the repair or
reconstruction and reoccupancy of the structure occurs within 18
months of the date that the original structure was damaged or
destroyed. No enlargement or expansion of the nonconforming
structure shall be undertaken unless the provisions of § 180-92A are
met.
C. Moving. Should a nonconforming structure be moved for any reason for
any distance whatever, it shall thereafter conform to the requirements
of the zoning district in which it is located.
D. Signs.
(1) Nonconforming signs may be repaired or reconstructed, provided
that no structural alterations are made that increase the gross
surface area of the sign; however, nonconforming signs that are
damaged or destroyed to an extent of more than 51% of their
replacement cost at the time of destruction shall not be
reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. Replacement cost shall be determined by the Borough
Engineer upon request by the Borough. The Borough Engineer
§ 180-91 WATER § 180-92
178:643
§ 180-93. Nonconforming lots.
The following regulations shall apply to nonconforming lots, as defined by
this chapter:
§ 180-94. Registration of nonconformity.
shall inspect the sign and submit a report to the Zoning Officer
within five working days of the Borough's request. The cost of the
services of the Borough Engineer shall be borne by the applicant.
Said cost shall not exceed the amount established from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council.
(2) Nonconforming signs shall not be enlarged, added to or replaced
by another nonconforming sign, use or structure, except that the
interchange of advertising panels shall be permitted, subject to
obtaining the sign permit required by § 180-114.
E. Repair or maintenance. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to
prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any
structure or part thereof declared to be unsafe by any official charged
with protecting the safety of the public, provided all other requirements
of this section are met.
A. Lot area or lot width. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of
this chapter may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to
the use regulations of the zoning district in which it is located, without a
lot area or lot width variance, even though its lot area and width are
less than the minimum required by this chapter; however, such lot must
comply with the front, rear and side yards, height and lot coverage
standards of the zoning district wherein it is located.
B. Front yard setback. Where structures exist on adjacent nonconforming
lots of record that have front yards that are less than the minimum
depth required, the minimum front yard for an adjacent vacant
nonconforming lot of record proposed to be built upon shall be the
average depth of the nonconforming front yards for the existing
structures on the adjacent nonconforming lots in the same block on the
same side of the street.
A. The owner of a nonconforming use shall make an application for
registration of the nonconforming use, and upon presentation of
documentation acceptable to the Zoning Officer that the use was
lawfully in existence prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment that created the nonconformity, the Zoning Officer shall
register the same on a map and by the Beaver County Assessor's tax
parcel number as a legal nonconforming use.
B. In the course of administering this chapter and reviewing applications
for zoning certificates, certificates of occupancy or variances, the
Zoning Officer shall register all nonconforming structures and
§ 180-92 ECONOMY CODE § 180-94
178:644
nonconforming lots as they become known through the application
process.
§ 180-94 WATER § 180-94
178:645

ARTICLE XVI
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 180-95. Membership.
The membership of the Zoning Hearing Board shall consist of three
residents of the Borough appointed by Borough Council. Their terms of
office shall be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office
of one member shall expire each year. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
promptly notify Borough Council when vacancies occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members of
the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold no other elected or appointed office in
the Borough, nor shall any member be an employee of the Borough.
§ 180-96. Alternate members.
A. Appointment of alternate members. Borough Council may appoint by
resolution at least one, but no more than three, residents of the
Borough to serve as alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board.
The term of office of an alternate member shall be three years. When
seated pursuant to the provisions of § 180-96B, an alternate shall be
entitled to participate in all proceedings and discussions of the Zoning
Hearing Board to the same and full extent as provided by law for Zoning
Hearing Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote
as a voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the
powers and duties set forth in this chapter and as otherwise provided
by law. Alternates shall hold no other elected or appointed office in the
Borough, including service as a member of the Planning Commission or
as Zoning Officer, nor shall any alternate be an employee of the
Borough. Any alternate may participate in any proceeding or discussion
of the Zoning Hearing Board but shall not be entitled to vote as a
member of the Zoning Hearing Board nor be compensated pursuant to
§ 180-105A unless designated as a voting alternate member pursuant to
§ 180-96B of this chapter.
B. Participation by alternate members. The Chairman of the Zoning
Hearing Board may designate alternate members of the Zoning Hearing
Board to replace any absent or disqualified members, and if, by reason
of absence or disqualification of a member, a quorum is not reached, the
Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board shall designate as many
alternate members of the Zoning Hearing Board to sit on the Zoning
Hearing Board as may be needed to reach a quorum. Any alternate
member of the Zoning Hearing Board shall continue to serve on the
Zoning Hearing Board in all proceedings involving the matter or case
for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Zoning Hearing
Board has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation
of an alternate pursuant to this subsection shall be made on a case-bycase
basis in rotation according to declining seniority among all
alternates.
§ 180-95 WATER § 180-97
178:647
§ 180-97. Removal of members.
Any Zoning Hearing Board member may be removed for malfeasance,
misfeasance or nonfeasance in the office or for other just cause by a
majority vote of Borough Council taken after the member has received 15
days' advance notice of the intent to take such vote. A hearing shall be held
in connection with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
§ 180-98. Organization of the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 180-99. Jurisdiction of the Zoning Hearing Board.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudication in the following matters:
A. Officers. The Zoning Hearing Board shall elect from its own
membership its officers, who shall serve annual terms as such and may
succeed themselves.
B. Quorum. For the conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a
quorum shall be not less than a majority of all members of the Zoning
Hearing Board except when member(s) of the Zoning Hearing Board
are disqualified to act in a particular matter, alternate members shall be
appointed to provide a quorum.
C. Hearing Officer. The Zoning Hearing Board may appoint a Hearing
Officer from its own membership to conduct any hearing on its behalf,
and the parties may waive further action by the Zoning Hearing Board
and accept the findings or decision of the Hearing Officer as final.
D. Procedures. The Zoning Hearing Board may make, alter and rescind
rules and forms for its procedure, consistent with ordinances of the
Borough and laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Files and annual report. The Zoning Hearing Board shall keep full
public records of its business and shall submit a report of its activities
to Borough Council once a year.
A. Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance, except
curative amendments brought before Borough Council.
B. Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising procedural
questions or alleged defects in the process of enactment or adoption,
which challenges shall be raised by an appeal taken within 30 days after
the effective date of the ordinance.
C. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not
limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the
application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist order or the
registration or refusal to register any nonconforming use, structure or
lot.
§ 180-97 ECONOMY CODE § 180-99
178:648
§ 180-100. Variances.
The Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall have the power to authorize
variances from the requirements of this chapter and to attach such
conditions to the variance as it deems necessary to assure compliance
with the purposes of this chapter. A variance may be granted if all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
D. Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning
Officer with reference to the administration of any floodplain or flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance.
E. Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance
pursuant to § 180-100.
F. Applications for uses by special exception under this chapter or
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land
use ordinance, pursuant to Article XI and § 180-101 of this chapter.
G. Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section 916.2 of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended).123
H. Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or provision
thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion control and
stormwater management insofar as the same relate to development not
involving subdivision and land development or planned residential
development.
A. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including
irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or shape, or
exceptional topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property and that the unnecessary hardship is due to such
conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally created by
the provisions of this chapter in the neighborhood or district in which
the property is located.
B. That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no
possibility that the property can be developed in strict conformity with
the provisions of this chapter and that the authorization of a variance is
therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property.
C. That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the appellant.
D. That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential character of
the neighborhood or district in which the property is located nor
substantially or permanently impair the appropriate use or
123. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 180-99 WATER § 180-100
178:649
§ 180-101. Uses by special exception.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall have the power to hear and decide on
applications for uses by special exception as authorized by this chapter, in
harmony with its general purpose and intent and in accordance with the
standards set forth in Article XI. The Zoning Hearing Board shall approve
a use by special exception only if it meets all applicable requirements of
this chapter and the express standards and criteria set forth in Article XI. In
granting a use by special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board may attach
such reasonable safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter,
as it may deem necessary to properly implement this chapter and protect
the public health, safety and welfare.
§ 180-102. Notice and conduct of hearings.
development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the public
welfare.
E. That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum variance
necessary to afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue.
A. Notice.
(1) Written notice of the hearing shall be given to the public, the
applicant, the Zoning Officer, Borough Council, the Planning
Commission and to any person who has made timely request for the
same. A notice of the hearing shall be given to other persons at
such a time and in such manner as Borough Council or the Zoning
Hearing Board shall designate.
(2) Public notice, as defined herein, shall be given for the public
hearing. In addition, written notice of said hearing shall be
conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the public hearing.
(3) In addition, at least 14 days prior to the public hearing, written
notices shall be sent by first-class mail to the addresses to which
real estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within 300
feet of the property line boundaries of the property for which the
appeal is filed, including properties across any street right-of-way.
The names and addresses shall be provided by the appellant and
the cost of mailing the notices shall be borne by the applicant.
B. Conduct of hearing. The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings
in accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The first hearing shall be commenced within 60 days from the date
of receipt of the applicant's application, unless the applicant has
agreed in writing to an extension of time.
§ 180-100 ECONOMY CODE § 180-102
178:650
(2) Each subsequent hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or
Hearing Officer shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing,
unless otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the
record. An applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-inchief
within 100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the
applicant, the Zoning Hearing Board or Hearing Officer shall
assure that the applicant receives at least seven hours of hearings
within the 100 days, including the first hearing. Persons opposed to
the application shall complete the presentation of their opposition
to the application within 100 days of the first hearing held after the
completion of the applicant's case in chief. And the applicant may,
upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are
granted an equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed
to the application may, upon the written consent or consent on the
record by the applicant and the Borough, be granted additional
hearings to complete their opposition to the application, provided
the applicant is granted an equal number of additional hearings for
rebuttal.
(3) The hearings shall be conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board, or
the Zoning Hearing Board may appoint any member as a Hearing
Officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the findings
shall be made by the Zoning Hearing Board; however, the appellant
or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough,
may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings
by the Zoning Hearing Board and accept the decision or findings of
the Hearing Officer as final.
(4) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Zoning Hearing Board, and any other person,
including civic or community organizations permitted to appear by
the Zoning Hearing Board. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Zoning
Hearing Board for that purpose.
(5) The Chairman or acting Chairman of the Zoning Hearing Board or
the Hearing Officer presiding shall have power to administer oaths
and issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(6) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(7) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
§ 180-102 WATER § 180-102
178:651
§ 180-103. Failure to render a decision.
(8) The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may
be, shall keep a stenographic record of the proceedings. Fees for
the stenographer and transcript are governed by § 180-105B of this
chapter.
(9) The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer shall not
communicate, directly or indirectly, with any party or his
representatives in connection with any issue involved except upon
notice and opportunity for all parties to participate; shall not take
notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda or other
materials, except advice from their solicitor, unless the parties are
afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(10) The Zoning Hearing Board or the Hearing Officer, as the case may
be, shall render a written decision or, when no decision is called for,
make written findings on the application within 45 days after the
last hearing before the Zoning Hearing Board or Hearing Officer.
Where the application is contested or denied, each decision shall be
accompanied by findings of fact and conclusions based thereon,
together with the reasons therefor. Conclusions based on any
provisions of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found. If
the hearing is conducted by a Hearing Officer and there has been
no stipulation that his decision or findings are final, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be
entitled to make written representations thereon to the Zoning
Hearing Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the
Zoning Hearing Board's decision shall be entered no later than 30
days after the report of the Hearing Officer.
A. Where the Zoning Hearing Board fails to render a decision within the
required forty-five-day period or fails to commence or complete the
required hearing as provided in § 180-102B, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
B. When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to meet or render a decision, the
Zoning Hearing Board shall give public notice of the decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the same
manner as provided in § 180-102B. If the Zoning Hearing Board shall
fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this
section shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to
appeal the decision to the Court of Common Pleas.
§ 180-102 ECONOMY CODE § 180-104
178:652
§ 180-104. Mediation.
§ 180-105. Fees and expenditures.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized in this article may utilize mediation
as an aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the
Zoning Hearing Board, in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board
initiate mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this article once they have
been formally initiated. Nothing in this subsection shall be interpreted
as expanding or limiting municipal police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. The Borough,
in offering the mediation option, shall assure that in each case, the
mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate, develop
terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skills in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this chapter or in
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as
amended),124 provided there is written consent by the mediating
parties, and by an applicant or Borough decisionmaking body, if
either is not a party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties, and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in this chapter.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediated agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. Fees. Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
124. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 180-104 WATER § 180-105
178:653
§ 180-106. Time limitations.
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
B. Stenographer's appearance fee and transcripts. The appearance fee for
a stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Zoning
Hearing Board. The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the
Zoning Hearing Board if the transcript is ordered by the Zoning
Hearing Board or Hearing Officer or shall be paid by the person
appealing from the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board if such appeal
is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid
by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
C. Expenditures. Members of the Zoning Hearing Board may receive
compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by
Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of Borough Council. Within the
limits of funds appropriated by Borough Council, the Zoning Hearing
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical services.
A. No person shall file any proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
later than 30 days after a preliminary or final application for
development has been approved by an appropriate Borough officer,
agency or body, if such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to
limit the approval in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves
that he had no notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such
approval had been given. If such person has succeeded to his interest
after such approval, he shall be bound by the knowledge of his
predecessor in interest.
B. The failure of anyone, other than the landowner, to appeal from an
adverse decision on an application for tentative approval of a planned
residential development (PRD) or from an adverse decision by the
Zoning Officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map
filed pursuant to Section 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code125 shall preclude an appeal from a final approval, except
in the case where the final submission substantially deviates from the
approved tentative approval.
C. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
125. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
§ 180-105 ECONOMY CODE § 180-107
178:654
§ 180-107. Stay of proceedings.
A. Upon the filing of any proceeding and during its pendency before the
Zoning Hearing Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or of any
agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall be stayed unless
the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or body certifies to
the Zoning Hearing Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
that may be granted by the Zoning Hearing Board or by the court
having jurisdiction of zoning appeals on petition after notice to the
Zoning Officer or other appropriate agency or body. When an
application for development, preliminary or final, has been duly
approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the approval are
filed with the Zoning Hearing Board by persons other than the
applicant, the applicant may petition the Court having jurisdiction of
the zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a condition to
continuing the proceedings before the Zoning Hearing Board. The
question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the Court.
B. All appeals from decisions rendered by the Zoning Hearing Board shall
be taken to the Beaver County Court of Common Pleas and shall be filed
within 30 days after the entry of the decision or, in the case of a deemed
decision, within 30 days after the date upon which notice of said
deemed decision is given as required by Subsection 908(9) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247, as amended).126
126. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908(9).
§ 180-107 WATER § 180-107
178:655

ARTICLE XVII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 180-108. Zoning Officer powers and duties.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by a
Zoning Officer, who shall be appointed by Borough Council. The Zoning
Officer shall hold no elective office in the Borough. The Zoning Officer
shall meet the qualifications established by the Borough and shall be
able to demonstrate, to the satisfaction of the Borough, a working
knowledge of municipal zoning.
B. The Zoning Officer shall have all the powers and duties conferred upon
him by this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.127 The Zoning Officer's duties shall include the following:
(1) Receive and examine all applications for zoning certificates and
certificates of occupancy.
(2) Notify applicants of any deficiencies in applications and request
additional information.
(3) Process applications for zoning certificates and certificates of
occupancy for all permitted uses.
(4) Receive applications for uses by special exception and variances
and forward these applications to the Zoning Hearing Board for
action prior to considering issuance of zoning certificates or
certificates of occupancy for the proposed use.
(5) Receive applications for conditional uses and forward these
applications to the Planning Commission and Borough Council for
recommendation and action prior to considering issuance of zoning
certificates or certificates of occupancy for the proposed use.
(6) Issue permits only where there is compliance with the provisions of
this chapter, with other Borough ordinances and the laws of the
commonwealth.
(7) Issue denials of zoning certificates or certificates of occupancy and
refer any appeal of the denial to the Zoning Hearing Board for
action thereon.
(8) Conduct inspections and surveys to determine compliance or
noncompliance with this chapter.
(9) Issue notices of violation in accordance with the requirements of
§ 180-109, below.
(10)With the approval of Borough Council, or when directed by
Borough Council, institute, in the name of the Borough, any
127. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101.
§ 180-108 WATER § 180-108
178:657
§ 180-109. Enforcement.
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent unlawful erection,
construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use; to restrain, correct or abate such violation so
as to prevent the occupancy or use of any building, structure or
land; or to prevent any illegal act, conduct, business or use in or
about such premises.
(11) Revoke any order or permit issued under a mistake of fact or
contrary to the law or the provisions of this chapter.
(12) Record and file all applications for zoning certificates and
certificates of occupancy with accompanying plans and documents,
and maintain those files as a public record.
(13) Maintain the Official Zoning District Map for the Borough.
(14) Register nonconforming uses, structures and lots in accordance
with § 180-94 of this chapter.
(15) Submit a monthly written report to Borough Council of all zoning
certificates, certificates of occupancy, sign permits, temporary use
permits and all notices of violation and orders issued.
(16) Meet with the Planning Commission no less frequently than
quarterly to advise the Commission regarding potential
developments and to discuss any problems in administering this
chapter and/or recommend amendments to this chapter.
A. Violations. Failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter; failure
to secure a zoning certificate prior to the erection, construction,
extension, structural alteration, addition or occupancy of a building or
structure; or failure to secure a certificate of occupancy for the use or
change of use or occupancy of structures or land shall be a violation of
this chapter.
B. Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall contain the following
information:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other persons against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements that
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which steps for compliance must be commenced,
and the date before which the steps must be completed.
§ 180-108 ECONOMY CODE § 180-109
178:658
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
C. Enforcement remedies.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees, incurred by
the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, be levied or be payable until the date of the determination
of a violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil procedure.
(2) Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the District Justice, determining that there has
been a violation, further determines that there was a good faith
basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating this
chapter to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation
until the fifth day following the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice, and thereafter each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation. All
judgments, costs and reasonable attorney fees collected for the
violation of this chapter shall be paid over to the Borough.
(3) The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of
stay, upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
(4) Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed or
interpreted to grant to any person or entity other than the Borough
the right to commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this
subsection.
D. Causes of action. In case any building or structure is erected,
constructed, reconstructed, structurally altered, repaired, converted or
maintained or any building or structure or land is used in violation of
this chapter or of any other ordinance or regulation made under
authority conferred hereby, Borough Council or, with approval of
Borough Council, the Zoning Officer or other proper official, in addition
to other remedies, may institute in the name of the Borough any
appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain, correct or abate
such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, structural
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use; to prevent the
§ 180-109 WATER § 180-109
178:659
§ 180-110. Coordination with other Borough requirements and
permits, state and federal requirements and permits.
In all cases, any application for a permit of any of the types described
in this chapter shall be decided not only on the basis of compliance with
this Chapter 180, Zoning, but also on the basis of compliance with all
other applicable Borough ordinances and all other applicable rules and
regulations of the various Borough authorities and agencies that might be
concerned, as well as state and federal requirements and permits.
§ 180-111. Zoning certificate required.
occupancy of any building, structure or land; or to prevent any illegal
act, conduct, business or use that constitutes a violation.
A. When required.
(1) No land use may be established or changed; no structure or
building may be erected, constructed, reconstructed, structurally
altered, razed or removed; and no building or structure may be
used or occupied or the use changed until a zoning certificate has
been obtained from the Zoning Officer.
(2) In the instances where a building permit is required and applied
for, a zoning certificate shall be prerequisite to issuance of the
building permit. In those instances where no building permit is
required, an application for a certificate of occupancy for a new or
changed use of land or structure shall be accompanied by a zoning
certificate.
(3) In the case of a conditional use or use by special exception, the
Zoning Officer shall refer the application to the Planning
Commission and Borough Council or to the Zoning Hearing Board,
whichever is applicable, for a decision granting approval of the
conditional use or use by special exception prerequisite to issuing a
zoning certificate. Whenever the approval of a conditional use or
use by special exception includes conditions attached to the
approval, said conditions shall be incorporated into the zoning
certificate.
(4) In the case of a permitted use, the Zoning Officer shall not issue the
zoning certificate unless and until all applicable regulations of this
chapter have been met and, in the case of a use for which land
development plan approval is required by Chapter 163, Subdivision
and Land Development, unless and until final approval of the land
development plan has been granted by Borough Council. Whenever
final approval of a land development plan is subject to conditions,
those conditions shall be incorporated into the zoning certificate.
B. Application for zoning certificate.
§ 180-109 ECONOMY CODE § 180-111
178:660
(1) All applications for zoning certificates shall be made in writing by
the owner or his authorized agent on a form furnished by the
Borough and shall include a statement of the intended use of the
building and a property survey both prepared in duplicate and
drawn to scale, and copies of all required county, state and/or
federal permits as approved by the appropriate agency, and shall
include the following information at a minimum:
(a) All applications for a proposed use that does not involve
construction, alteration or enlargement of a principal or
accessory structure shall include a property survey showing
compliance with any applicable requirements for the proposed
use such as signage, parking, buffer areas and the like, as well
as a narrative describing the proposed use and demonstrating
compliance with all applicable criteria for approval, including,
but not limited to, any express standards and criteria for a
conditional use or use by special exception.
(b) All applications for a zoning certificate for a principal structure
where construction is proposed shall be accompanied by two
copies of a property survey, drawn to scale, showing key
location map; graphic scale; North arrow; closest intersecting
public road; exact dimensions and total acreage of the lot(s) or
parcel; zoning of the lot(s) and zoning of all abutting
properties; exact location and exterior dimensions of the
existing and proposed building(s) or other structure(s); exact
location and area of all existing and proposed watercourses;
drainageways, rights-of-way and easements; exact location of
existing and proposed driveways, streets and roads within,
adjacent and opposite to the lot(s) or parcel; exact location of
existing and proposed off-street parking, loading and
pedestrian movement facilities; exact dimensions of front, side
and rear yards for all principal and accessory uses; and any
other additional data as may be deemed necessary and be
requested by the Zoning Officer to determine compliance with
this chapter.
(c) All applications for construction, alteration or enlargement of
an accessory structure shall be accompanied by two copies of a
plot plan showing the principal structure, the proposed
location of the accessory structure, setbacks for the accessory
structure, its relationship to the principal structure and all
easements and rights-of-way on the property.
(d) The Zoning Officer may require an applicant to furnish a
survey of the property by a Pennsylvania registered land
surveyor when complete and accurate information is not
readily available from existing records.
(e) The Zoning Officer may require additional data to determine
compliance with this chapter.
§ 180-111 WATER § 180-111
178:661
§ 180-112. Certificate of occupancy.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the application to
determine if all necessary information has been submitted or
request more information of the applicant and officially receive the
application for review by the appropriate Borough agencies.
(3) All applications for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a
fee, to be based upon the fee schedule of the Borough, as provided
for in § 180-116 of this chapter.
C. Approval of zoning certificate. Upon approval of the application for a
zoning certificate, one copy of the approved zoning certificate with the
approved application attached shall be returned to the applicant. One
copy of such zoning certificate shall be kept on file in the Borough
Office.
D. Denial of zoning certificate. In the event of a denial, the Zoning Officer
shall state in writing the reason(s) for such denial, including the citation
of the specific section(s) of this or other pertinent ordinances that have
not been met.
E. Inspection. The Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed representative,
may make inspections on the property for which an application for a
zoning certificate has been submitted, issued or completed.
F. Failure to obtain zoning certificate. Failure to obtain a zoning certificate
shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to the
enforcement remedies of § 180-109 of this chapter.
A. A certificate of occupancy indicating compliance with the provisions of
this chapter shall be required prior to:
(1) Occupancy of any structure following completion of construction,
reconstruction or enlargement of the structure governed by an
approved building permit.
(2) Occupancy of any land or structure for which a building permit is
not required.
(3) A change in the use of an existing building, structure, water body
or land area.
(4) A change of a nonconforming use, building or structure authorized
by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Application for certificate of occupancy.
(1) A certificate of occupancy shall only be required for the first
occupancy following construction of any dwelling. Except for
subsequent occupancies of existing dwellings, a certificate of
occupancy shall be required prior to the use and occupancy of any
structure, building, water body or land area. A certificate of
§ 180-111 ECONOMY CODE § 180-112
178:662
occupancy shall be required for the change of use of any structure,
building, water body or land area, including dwellings.
(2) All requests for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing,
on a form furnished by the Borough, completed by the owner, or
other authorized agent, and shall include a statement that the use
and/or construction authorized by the approved zoning certificate
has been completed in compliance with all applicable
requirements.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the
application to determine if all necessary information has been
submitted, to request more information from the applicant and
officially receive the application.
(b) All applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be
accompanied by a fee to be based upon the fee schedule of the
Borough, as provided for in § 180-116 of this chapter.
C. Issuance of certificate of occupancy.
(1) Applications for a certificate of occupancy shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue findings as a
basis for denial or shall approve the application.
(2) Upon approval of the request for a certificate of occupancy, one
copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be given to the applicant,
and one copy of the certificate of occupancy shall be kept on file in
the Borough Office.
D. Denial of certificate of occupancy. In the event of denial, the Zoning
Officer shall forward to the applicant a written statement containing
the reason(s) for such denial and shall cite the specific requirements of
this chapter that have not been met.
E. Time limitations. A certificate of occupancy shall remain valid for as
long as the structure, building, water body or land area is used in the
manner for which the certificate of occupancy has been issued.
F. Temporary certificate of occupancy. A temporary certificate of
occupancy may be issued by the Zoning Officer for a period not
exceeding six months to permit partial occupancy of a building,
structure, water body or land area while work is being completed,
provided such temporary certificate of occupancy may require such
conditions and safeguards as may be warranted, including posting of
surety, to protect the health and safety of the occupants and the public
and guarantee compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any
conditions attached to the zoning certificate.
G. Failure to obtain a certificate of occupancy. Failure to obtain a
certificate of occupancy shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be
§ 180-112 WATER § 180-112
178:663
§ 180-113. Temporary use permits.
A temporary use permit shall be required prior to the initiation of an
authorized temporary use of a structure, land or water body and shall meet
the following requirements:
subject to enforcement remedies as provided in § 180-109 of this
chapter.
A. Approvals required.
(1) Temporary construction trailers, model homes or sales offices shall
be subject to approval of a temporary use permit by the Zoning
Officer under this section, provided the Zoning Officer also
determines compliance with § 180-74.
(2) Sidewalk sales, carload sales and other special promotions
conducted on the site of an existing retail business with the
permission of the landowner for a period of not more than 72
consecutive hours shall be exempt from obtaining a temporary use
permit. Any such activity that exceeds 72 consecutive hours in
duration shall be exempt from obtaining approval of a use by
special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board but shall be
subject to approval by the Zoning Officer of a temporary use permit
provided the Zoning Officer determines compliance with all
applicable standards of § 180-66II as a condition precedent to
issuing the temporary use permit under this section.
(3) Temporary uses such as festivals, fairs or other similar activities
sponsored by a governmental, local nonprofit, community or
charitable organization shall be exempt from obtaining approval of
a use by special exception from the Zoning Hearing Board but shall
be subject to approval by the Zoning Officer of a temporary use
permit, provided the Zoning Officer determines compliance with all
applicable standards of § 180-66II as a condition precedent to
issuing the temporary use permit under this section.
(4) All other temporary uses shall be subject to approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board of a use by special exception in accordance with the
criteria of § 180-66II as a condition precedent to obtaining a
temporary use permit from the Zoning Officer under this section.
B. Application for temporary use permit. All requests for temporary use
permits shall be made in writing on a form furnished by the Borough
and shall include a full description of the type of use for which such
permit is being sought and the dates during which this use is proposed
to be in existence.
(1) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the application
for compliance, request more information of the applicant and
officially receive the application.
§ 180-112 ECONOMY CODE § 180-113
178:664
(2) All applications for a temporary use permit shall be accompanied
by a fee, to be based upon the fee schedule adopted by the
Borough, as provided for in § 180-116 of this chapter.
(3) Any temporary use that requires approval of a use by special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board shall include the
information required by § 180-64C for approval of an application
for a use by special exception.
C. Issuance of permit.
(1) Any temporary use permit that requires approval of a use by special
exception in accordance with the express standards and criteria of
§ 180-66II shall not be issued until the favorable decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board is received.
(2) Applications for a temporary use permit shall be reviewed by the
Zoning Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue findings as a
basis for denial or shall approve the temporary use permit.
(3) Upon approval of the application for a temporary use permit, one
copy of the permit shall be given to the applicant. The applicant's
copy of the permit must be publicly displayed at the site of the
temporary use during the existence of the use. One copy of the
permit shall be kept on file in the Borough Office.
D. Denial of permit. In the event of denial, the Zoning Officer shall forward
to the applicant a written statement containing the reason(s) for such
denial and shall cite the specific requirements of this chapter that have
not been met.
E. Time limitations. Temporary use permits are valid for the time period(s)
specified in the approval. Annual renewal may be granted subject to the
Zoning Officer's determination that there is continuing compliance with
§ 180-66II. All temporary uses shall be removed within 10 days of the
expiration of the specific period for which the structure or use is
approved.
F. Inspections.
(1) The Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed representative, may make
an inspection of the property on which such temporary use is to be
located to determine the suitability of the site for the use. This
inspection shall be made prior to issuing a permit, prior to initiation
of the use or, in the event a renewal of the permit is requested,
during the time the use is in existence.
(2) In the event of such inspection, a record shall be made indicating
the time and date of inspection; the findings of the Zoning Officer in
regard to conformance with this chapter and other Borough
ordinances; and the opinion of the Zoning Officer with regard to the
suitability of the site for this use.
§ 180-113 WATER § 180-113
178:665
§ 180-114. Sign permits.
A sign permit shall be required in accordance with the provisions of
§ 180-85 of this chapter. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence
work for the erection or alteration of any sign until a permit has been
issued.
G. Failure to obtain a temporary use permit. Failure to obtain a temporary
use permit shall be a violation of this chapter and shall be subject to
enforcement remedies as provided in § 180-109 of this chapter.
A. Application for permit. All requests for sign permits shall be made in
writing on a form furnished by the Borough and shall include a full
description of the proposed sign, a description of the lot upon which
such proposed sign is to be located and a description of any other
existing signs on the same lot.
(1) All applications for a sign permit shall be accompanied by two
copies of a drawing showing width of sign; height of sign; gross
surface area of sign; total height of sign above adjacent ground
level; clearance between bottommost part of sign and ground level;
and, for freestanding signs, the distance between the front edge of
the sign and adjacent street right-of-way and the distance between
the side or rear edge of the sign and the side or rear property line;
the proposed message; construction specifications; the type of
foundation, structural integrity and ability to withstand wind loads;
the form of illumination proposed, if any; and compliance with the
visibility requirements of § 180-70D of this chapter.
(2) It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer to review the application
for completeness and compliance, request more information of the
applicant or officially receive the application for the sign.
(3) All applications for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a fee, to
be based upon the fee schedule of the Borough as provided for in
§ 180-116 of this chapter.
(4) In the case of new construction of a multitenant development site,
it shall be the responsibility of the developer to submit an
application for a sign package that includes any monument signs,
pole signs or ground signs proposed for the site, as well as any onpremises
directional signs. Individual businesses shall apply for
permits for any wall signs proposed for their buildings and, in the
case of outparcels, any freestanding signs proposed.
B. Issuance of permit.
(1) Applications for a sign permit shall be reviewed by the Zoning
Officer. The Zoning Officer shall either issue findings as a basis for
denial or shall approve the application.
§ 180-113 ECONOMY CODE § 180-114
178:666
§ 180-115. Procedure for amendments.
Borough Council may introduce and/or consider amendments to this
chapter and to the Zoning District Map. In addition, Borough Council may
consider amendments to this chapter and to the Zoning District Map that
are proposed by the Planning Commission or by a petition of landowners of
property within the Borough.
(2) Upon approval of the sign permit, one copy of the permit shall be
given to the applicant, and one copy of the permit shall be kept on
file in the Borough Office.
C. Denial of permit. In the event of denial, the Zoning Officer shall forward
to the applicant a written statement containing the reason(s) for such
denial and shall cite the specific requirements of this chapter that have
not been met.
D. Inspections. For a sign permit, the Zoning Officer, or his duly appointed
representative, may make the following inspections on property on
which the permanent sign is to be located: prior to installation of the
sign; following installation of the sign; occasionally to determine
continued maintenance and compliance with this chapter; in response
to any written complaint; whenever the sign is proposed to be replaced
or modified; and upon cessation of the use for which the sign was
erected.
E. Failure to obtain a sign permit. Failure to obtain a sign permit shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be subject to enforcement remedies
as provided in § 180-109 of this chapter.
A. Petitions. Petitions for amendments by landowners shall be filed with
the Planning Commission at least 20 calendar days prior to the meeting
at which the petition is to be heard. In the case of a petition for
reclassification of property, the petitioners, upon such filing, shall
submit a legal description of the property proposed to be rezoned. All
petitions shall include a statement justifying the request and
documenting consistency with the Borough's Comprehensive Plan and a
filing fee, in accordance with the fee schedule fixed by resolution of
Borough Council as provided for in § 180-116. The Planning
Commission shall review the proposed amendment and report its
findings and recommendations in writing to Borough Council.
B. Referral. Any proposed amendment presented to Borough Council
without written findings and recommendations from the Borough
Planning Commission and the Beaver County Planning Commission
shall be referred to these agencies for review at least 30 days prior to
the public hearing of Borough Council. Borough Council shall not hold a
public hearing upon such amendments until the required reviews are
received or the expiration of 30 days from the date of referral,
whichever comes first.
§ 180-114 WATER § 180-115
178:667
C. Posting of property. If the proposed amendment involves a change to
the Zoning District Map, notice of the public hearing shall be
conspicuously posted by the Borough at points deemed sufficient by the
Borough along the tract to notify potentially interested citizens at least
seven days prior to the date of the public hearing.
D. Mailing of notices. In addition to posting the property, if the proposed
amendment involves a change to the Zoning District Map, notice of the
public hearing shall be mailed by the Borough at least 30 days prior to
the date of the hearing by first-class mail to the addresses to which real
estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within the area
being rezoned, as evidenced by tax records within the possession of the
Borough. The notice shall include the location, date and time of the
public hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall
satisfy the requirements of this subsection. This subsection shall not
apply when the rezoning constitutes a comprehensive rezoning.
E. Public notice and public hearing. Before acting on a proposed
amendment, Borough Council shall hold a public hearing thereon.
Public notice, as defined by this chapter, shall be given containing a
brief summary of the proposed amendment and reference to the place
where copies of the same may be examined.
F. Readvertisement. If, after any public hearing is held upon a proposed
amendment, the amendment is substantially changed or revised to
include land not previously affected by the amendment, Borough
Council shall hold another public hearing, pursuant to public notice,
before proceeding to vote on the amendment.
G. Publication, advertisement and availability.
(1) Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless Borough
Council gives notice of the proposed enactment, including the time
and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered and a
reference to the place in the Borough where copies of the proposed
amendment may be examined without charge or obtained for a
charge not greater than the cost thereof.
(2) Borough Council shall publish the proposed amendment once in a
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough not more than 60
nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the
proposed amendment shall include either the full text thereof or
the title and a brief summary prepared by the Borough Solicitor
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is
not included:
(a) A copy thereof shall be provided to the newspaper at the time
public notice is published; and
(b) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library.
§ 180-115 ECONOMY CODE § 180-115
178:668
§ 180-116. Fees.
Borough Council shall establish and revise, from time to time, a schedule
of fees by resolution, as well as a collection procedure, for all applications
submitted under the provisions of this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
available to the public from the Zoning Officer or the Borough Manager.
§ 180-117. Landowner curative amendments.
A curative amendment may be filed by a landowner who desires to
challenge, on substantive grounds, the validity of this chapter or the Zoning
District Map, or any provision thereof, that prohibits or restricts the use or
development of land in which he has an interest.
H. Action. In the case of proposed adoption of a completely revised Zoning
Ordinance, within 90 days of the date when the public hearing on the
proposed ordinance is officially closed, Borough Council shall vote on
the proposed ordinance. In the event substantial amendments are made
in the proposed ordinance or amendment, Borough Council shall
readvertise in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough a
brief summary of the ordinance or amendments at least 10 days prior to
enactment.
I. Filing amendment with County Planning Commission. Within 30 days
after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this chapter shall be
forwarded to the Beaver County Planning Commission.
J. Mediation option. Borough Council may offer the mediation option as an
aid in completing proceedings authorized by this § 180-115. The
Borough and the mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and
follow the procedures set forth in § 180-104 of this chapter.
A. Procedure. The landowner may submit a curative amendment to
Borough Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Sections 609.1 and
1004 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247, as
amended.128 As with other proposed amendments, the curative
amendment shall be referred to the Borough Planning Commission and
the Beaver County Planning Commission at least 30 days before the
hearing is conducted by Borough Council. Public notice shall be given
in accordance with Sections 610, 1004 and other applicable provisions
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.129 The hearings shall
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of Subdivisions (4)
through (8) of Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
128. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, respectively. Section 1004 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (53 P.S. § 11004; see now 53 P.S. § 10916.1)
was repealed 12-21-1988 by P.L. 1329, No. 170, § 100.
129. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10610 and 10916.1.
§ 180-115 WATER § 180-117
178:669
Code,130 and all references in that section to the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be references to Borough Council.
B. Evaluation of merits of curative amendment. If Borough Council
determines that a validity challenge has merit, Borough Council may
accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without revision, or
may adopt an alternative amendment that will cure the alleged defects.
Borough Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and
explanatory material submitted by the landowner and shall also
consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning District Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of the use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses that are essential to public health and welfare.
C. Declaration of invalidity by court. If the Borough does not accept a
landowner's curative amendment brought in accordance with this
section and a court subsequently rules the challenge has merit, the
court's decision shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this
entire ordinance but only for those provisions that specifically relate to
the landowner's curative amendment challenge.
130. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 180-117 ECONOMY CODE § 180-117
178:670
Appendix
Chapter A190
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ A190-1. Definitions and word usage.
A. For the purpose of this agreement, the following terms, phrases, words
and abbreviations shall have the meanings ascribed to them below:
AFFILIATE — An entity which owns or controls, is owned or controlled
by or is under common ownership with the grantee.
BASIC CABLE — The tier of service regularly provided to all
subscribers that includes the retransmission of local broadcast
television signals.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, as
amended.
CABLE SERVICE — The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or other programming service, and subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the selection of such video
programming or any other lawful communication service.
CABLE SYSTEM — A facility, consisting of a set of closed transmission
paths and associated signal generation, reception and control
equipment or other communications equipment that is designed to
provide cable service and other service to subscribers.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission or the successor
governmental entity thereto.
FRANCHISE — The initial authorization or renewal thereof issued by
the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a
franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise,
which authorizes construction and operation of the cable system for the
purpose of offering cable service or other service to subscribers.
FRANCHISE AUTHORITY or FRANCHISING AUTHORITY — The
Borough of Economy or the lawful successor, transferee or assignee
thereof.
GRANTEE — TCI of Pennsylvania, Inc., or the lawful successor,
transferee or assignee thereof.
GROSS SUBSCRIBER REVENUE — The monthly cable service revenue
actually received from subscribers who receive basic cable service
through that portion of the cable system located within the Borough.
Included also are monthly charges for all premium channels and all
other required, recurring monthly charges. Excluded are any taxes on
cable service which are imposed directly or indirectly on any Borough
§ 180-117 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-1
A190:671
§ A190-2. Grant of franchise.
The Borough hereby grants to the grantee a nonexclusive franchise which
authorizes the grantee to construct and operate a cable system and offer
cable service and other services in, along, among, upon, across, above, over,
under or in any manner connected with public ways within the service area
and for that purpose to erect, install, construct, repair, replace, reconstruct,
maintain or retain in, on, over, under, upon, across or along any public
way and all extensions thereof and additions thereto, such poles, wires,
cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, pedestals, amplifiers,
subscriber, by any governmental unit or agency and which are collected
by the grantee on behalf of such governmental unit or agency.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, association, joint stock
company, trust, corporation or governmental entity.
PUBLIC WAY — The surface of and the space above and below any
public street, highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court,
boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public way, drive, circle or
other public right-of-way, including public utility easements, dedicated
utility strips or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and any
temporary or permanent fixtures or improvements located thereon now
or hereafter held by the franchise authority in the service area which
shall entitle the franchise authority and the grantee to use thereof
for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing and maintaining the
cable system. "Public way" shall also mean any easement now or
hereafter held by the franchise authority within the service area for the
purpose of public travel or for utility or public service use dedicated
for compatible uses and shall include other easements or rights-ofway
as shall within their proper use and meaning entitle the franchise
authority and the grantee to use thereof for the purpose of installing
or transmitting the grantee's cable service or other service over poles,
wires, cables, conductors, ducts, conduits, vaults, manholes, amplifiers,
appliances, attachments and other property as may be ordinarily
necessary and pertinent to the cable system.
SERVICE AREA — The present municipal boundaries of the franchising
authority, and shall include any additions thereto by annexation or
other legal means.
SUBSCRIBER — A person or user of the cable system who lawfully
receives cable services or other service therefrom with the grantee's
express permission.
VIDEO PROGRAMMING — Programming provided by or generally
considered comparable to programming provided by a television
broadcast station.
B. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense
include the future tense, words in the plural number include the
singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number.
§ A190-1 ECONOMY CODE § A190-2
A190:672
appliances, attachments or other related property or equipment as may be
necessary or appurtenant to the cable system.
§ A190-3. Term of franchise.
The franchise granted pursuant to this agreement shall be for an initial term
of 10 years from the effective date of the franchise as set forth in § A190-4.
§ A190-4. Acceptance by grantee; effective date.
The grantee shall accept the franchise granted pursuant hereto by signing
this agreement and filing the same with the Borough Secretary or other
appropriate official or agency of the franchising authority within 60 days
after official action by the Borough. Subject to acceptance by the grantee,
the effective date of this agreement shall be the date of final and official
Borough action.
§ A190-5. Franchise to be nonexclusive.
The right to use and occupy said public ways, as defined above, for the
purpose herein set forth shall not be exclusive to the grantee. However,
the franchise authority shall require a franchise agreement for any other
person or entity, as defined above, engaging in the cable service business
within any portion of the Borough. The grantee shall receive the benefits
of any more favorable terms or conditions enjoyed by another person or
entity and otherwise, this agreement and any enabling legislation shall only
be amended through mutual consent. In cases of future conflict between
the provisions of this agreement and any ordinance, resolution, rule or
regulation of the Borough, this agreement shall be the superseding
document.
§ A190-6. Conditions of street occupancy.
All transmission and distribution structures, poles, other lines and
equipment installed or erected by the grantee pursuant to the terms hereof
shall be located so as to cause a minimum of interference with the proper
use of public ways and with the rights and reasonable convenience of
property owners who can own property that adjoins any of said public ways.
§ A190-7. Restoration of public ways.
If during the course of the grantee's construction, operation or maintenance
of the cable system there occurs a disturbance of any public way by the
grantee, it shall, at its expense, replace and restore such public way to a
condition which existed immediately prior to such disturbance.
§ A190-8. Relocation of grantee's property at request of franchising
authority.
Upon its receipt of reasonable advance notice, not to be less than five
business days, the grantee shall, at its own expense, protect, support,
§ A190-2 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-8
A190:673
temporarily disconnect, relocate in the public way or remove from the
public way any property of the grantee when lawfully required by the
franchising authority by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street
abandonment, freeway and street construction, change or establishment of
street grade, installation of sewers, drains, gas or water pipes or any other
type of structures or improvements by the franchising authority, but the
grantee shall in all cases have the right of abandonment of its property. If
public funds are available to any company using such street, easement or
right-of-way for the purpose of defraying the cost of any of the foregoing,
the franchising authority shall make application for the same on behalf of
the grantee, and such funds shall also be made available to the grantee.
Should said public fund reimbursement request to fully compensate the
grantee be denied, and should the franchising authority and the grantee be
unable to agree on an acceptable method and amount of reimbursement,
then the grantee shall be released from any obligation to provide cable
service to the affected street or area.
§ A190-9. Temporary raising or lowering of wires.
The grantee shall, on the request of any person holding a building moving
permit issued by the franchising authority, temporarily raise or lower its
wires to permit the moving of such building, provided that the expense
of such temporary raising or lowering of wires is paid by said person,
including, if required by the grantee, making such payment in advance, and
the grantee is given not less than 10 business days' advance written notice
to arrange for such temporary wire changes.
§ A190-10. Authority of grantee to trim trees.
The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees or other natural growth
overhanging any of its cable system in the service area so as to prevent
branches from coming in contact with the grantee's wires, cables or other
equipment. The grantee shall be permitted to charge persons who own
or are responsible for such trees or natural growth for the cost of such
trimming, provided that similar charges are assessed by and paid to the
utilities or the franchising authority for tree trimming. The grantee shall
reasonably compensate the franchising authority or property owner for any
damages caused by such trimming or shall, in its sole discretion and at its
own cost and expense, reasonably replace all trees or shrubs damaged as
a result of any construction of the cable system undertaken by the grantee.
Such replacement shall satisfy any and all obligations the grantee may have
to the franchise authority or property owner pursuant to the terms of this
section.
§ A190-11. Use of grantee's equipment by franchising authority.
Subject to any applicable state or federal regulations or tariffs, the
franchising authority shall have the right to make additional use, for any
public purpose, of any poles or conduits controlled or maintained
exclusively by or for the grantee in any public way, provided that such use
§ A190-8 ECONOMY CODE § A190-11
A190:674
by the franchising authority does not interfere with a current or future use
by the grantee, and the franchising authority holds the grantee harmless
against any and from all claims, demands, costs or liabilities of every kind
and nature whatsoever arising out of such use of said poles or conduits,
including but not limited to reasonable attorneys' fees and costs, and, at
the grantee's sole discretion, the franchising authority may be required
either to pay a reasonable rental fee or otherwise reasonably compensate
the grantee for the use of such poles, conduits or equipment; provided,
however, that the grantee agrees that such compensation or charge shall
not exceed those paid by it to public utilities pursuant to the applicable pole
attachment agreement or other authorization relating to the service area.
§ A190-12. Safety and technical requirements.
Construction, installation and maintenance of the cable system shall be
performed in an orderly and workmanlike manner. All such work shall
be performed in substantial accordance with applicable safety code or
technical requirements, including but not limited to the National Electrical
Safety Code (National Bureau of Standards); the National Electrical Code
(National Bureau of Fire Underwriters); and applicable FCC or other federal
and state regulations. The cable system shall not unreasonably endanger
or interfere with the safety of persons or property in the service area.
In particular, the grantee shall comply with all state or federal laws or
regulations which govern cable plant signal leakage or interference with
communications media. Any antenna structure used in the cable system
shall comply with all construction, marking and lighting of antenna
structure requirements of the United States Department of Transportation
(Federal Aviation Administration) and the FCC.
§ A190-13. Aerial and underground construction.
In those areas of the service area where all of the transmission or
distribution facilities of the respective public utilities providing telephone
communications and electric services are underground, the grantee
likewise shall construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities underground, provided that such facilities are actually
capable of receiving the grantee's cable and other equipment without
technical degradation of the cable system's signal quality. In those areas
of the service area where the transmission or distribution facilities of the
respective public utilities providing telephone communications and electric
services are both aerial and underground, the grantee shall have the sole
discretion to construct, operate and maintain all of its transmission and
distribution facilities, or any part thereof, aerially or underground. Nothing
contained in this section shall require the grantee to construct, operate
and maintain underground any ground-mounted appurtenances, such as
subscriber taps, line extenders, system passive devices (splitters and
directional couplers), amplifiers, power supplies, pedestals or other related
equipment. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in this
section, in the event that all of the transmission or distribution facilities
of the respective public utilities providing telephone communications and
§ A190-11 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-13
A190:675
electric services are placed underground after the effective date of this
agreement, the grantee shall only be required to construct, operate and
maintain all of its transmission and distribution facilities underground if it
is given reasonable notice and access to the public utilities facilities at the
time that such are placed underground.
§ A190-14. Extension of service.
The cable system as presently constructed is hereby approved as to extent
of the service area. The grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable
system as necessary, as desirable or as required pursuant to the terms
hereof within the service area. Whenever the grantee shall receive a written
request for service from at least 15 potential subscribers within 1,320
cable-bearing stand feet [one-fourth (1/4) cable mile] of its aerial trunk
cable or from 25 potential subscribers in underground construction areas,
it shall extend its cable system to such subscribers at no cost to said
subscribers for system extension, other than the usual connection fees for
all subscribers, provided that such extension is technically feasible and
if it will not adversely affect the operation, financial condition or market
development of the cable system. Written requests shall be numbered at a
rate of one head of household per individual address.
§ A190-15. Arbitrary refusal of service prohibited; fees for unusual
circumstances.
No subscriber or potential subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily.
However, for unusual circumstances, such as requests for underground
cable where aerial installation is the standard, or where there is more than
150 feet of distance from distribution cable to connection of service to
subscribers or a density of less than that stated in § A190-14, the grantee
may establish a special fee. Existing subscribers who request replacement
of aerial line with underground installation may also be subject to this
special fee. Service may be made available on the basis of cost of material,
labor and easements, as a special fee, in order that existing subscribers
shall not be unfairly burdened.
§ A190-16. Service to public buildings.
The grantee shall provide without charge one outlet of basic cable service to
each of the franchise authority's office buildings, fire station, police station
and public elementary and secondary school building that is passed by its
cable system. The outlets of basic service shall not be used to distribute or
sell cable services in or throughout such buildings, nor shall such outlets be
located in common or public areas open to the public. Users of such outlets
shall hold the grantee harmless from any and all liability or claims arising
out of their use of such outlets, including but not limited to those arising
from copyright liability. Not withstanding anything to the contrary set forth
in this section, the grantee shall not be required to provide an outlet to
such buildings where the drop line from the feeder cable to said buildings
or premises exceeds 150 cable feet unless it is feasible and if it will not
§ A190-13 ECONOMY CODE § A190-16
A190:676
adversely affect the operation, financial condition or market development
of the cable system to do so or unless the appropriate governmental entity
agrees to pay the incremental cost of such drop line in excess of 150 cable
feet. In the event that additional outlet(s) of basic service are provided
to such buildings, the building owner shall pay the usual installation and
service fees associated therewith.
§ A190-17. Emergency usage.
In the case of any emergency or disaster, the grantee shall, upon request
of the franchising authority, make available its facilities for the franchising
authority to provide emergency information and instructions during the
emergency or disaster period. The franchising authority shall hold the
grantee, and its agents, employees, officers and assigns hereunder,
harmless from any claims arising out of the emergency use of its facilities by
the franchising authority, including but not limited to reasonable attorneys'
fees and costs.
§ A190-18. Technical and performance standards.
All performance and technical standards governing construction,
reconstruction, installation, operation, testing, maintenance and
dismantling of the cable system provided herein shall be in accordance with
all applicable FCC and other federal, state and local laws and regulations.
§ A190-19. Franchise fee.
The grantee shall pay to the franchising authority a franchise fee equal
to 5% of gross revenues, as defined by "gross subscriber revenue" in
§ A190-1A, received by the grantee from the operation of the cable system.
Franchise fee payments due the franchising authority under this section
shall be computed quarterly. The quarterly franchise fee payments shall be
due and payable 60 days after the close of the preceding calendar quarter.
For the purpose of franchise fee accounting, the applicable period shall be
a calendar year, and, within 60 days of the close of each calendar year,
a representative of the grantee shall prepare and deliver a brief report
showing the basis for computation of franchise fees. In no event shall the
franchise fee payments required to be paid by the grantee exceed 5% of
gross revenues received by the grantee in any twelve-month period. The
franchise fee payment shall be the sole compensation due, and no other fee,
charge, tax or other consideration shall be paid by the grantee. Sales tax
or other tax levied on a per-subscription basis and collected by the grantee
shall be deducted from gross revenues in computing any sum due.
§ A190-20. Rates and charges.
The franchising authority may not regulate the rates for the provision of
cable service and other services, including but not limited to ancillary
charges relating thereto, except as authorized pursuant to federal law,
including but not limited to the Cable Act and FCC rules and regulations
§ A190-16 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-20
A190:677
relating thereto. The grantee shall have the right to modify rates from time
to time and to implement additional charges and rates.
§ A190-21. Renewal of franchise.
§ A190-22. Conditions of sale.
A. The franchising authority and the grantee agree that any proceedings
undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of
the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the
provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act (as such existed as of the
effective date of the Cable Act), unless the procedures and substantive
protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and
superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provisions of federal or
state law.
B. In addition to the procedures set forth in said Section 626(a), the
franchising authority agrees to notify the grantee of its preliminary
assessments regarding the identity of future cable-related community
needs and interests, as well as the past performance of the grantee
under the then-current franchise term. The franchising authority
further agrees that such a preliminary assessment shall be provided to
the grantee prior to the time that the four-month period referred to in
Subsection (c) of Section 626 is considered to begin. Notwithstanding
anything to the contrary set forth in this section, the grantee and
franchising authority agree that at any time during the term of the thencurrent
franchise, while affording the public appropriate notice and
opportunity to comment, the franchising authority and grantee may
agree to undertake and finalize negotiations regarding renewal of the
then-current franchise, and the franchising authority may grant a
renewal thereof. The Grantee and the Franchising Authority consider
the terms set forth in this section to be consistent with the express
provisions of Section 626 of the Cable Act. A reproduction of Section
626 of the Cable Act as such existed as of the effective date of the Cable
Act is attached hereto as Exhibit A and incorporated herein by this
reference.131
A. Except to the extent expressly required by federal or state law, if a
renewal or extension of the grantee's franchise is denied or if the
franchise is lawfully terminated, and the franchising authority either
lawfully acquires ownership of the cable system or by its actions
lawfully effects a transfer of ownership of the cable system to another
party, any such acquisition or transfer shall be at a fair market value,
determined on the basis of the cable system valued as an ongoing
concern.
B. The grantee and franchising authority agree that in the case of a lawful
revocation of the franchise, at the grantee's request, which shall be
made in its sole discretion, the grantee shall be given a reasonable
131. Editor's Note: Said Exhibit A is currently on file in the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ A190-20 ECONOMY CODE § A190-22
A190:678
§ A190-23. Transfer.
The grantee's right, title or interest in the franchise shall not be sold,
transferred, assigned or otherwise encumbered, other than to an affiliate,
without the prior consent of the franchising authority, such consent not
to be unreasonably withheld. In cases where consent of the franchising
authority is requested, in this or other matters, the grantee shall be given
notice of the decision of the franchising authority, in writing and by
registered or certified mail, within 45 days of franchising authority receipt
of such request. Absence of notice within the specified time shall mean
that the request is automatically granted without official action by the
franchising authority. No such consent shall be required, however, for a
transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation or by assignment of
any rights, title or interest of the grantee in the franchise or cable system in
order to secure indebtedness.
§ A190-24. Testing for compliance.
The franchising authority may perform technical tests of the cable system
during reasonable times and in a manner which does not unreasonably
interfere with the normal business operations of the grantee or the cable
system in order to determine whether or not the grantee is in compliance
with the terms hereof and applicable state or federal laws. Except in
emergency circumstances, such tests may be undertaken only after giving
the grantee reasonable notice thereof, not to be less than two business
days, and providing a representative of the grantee an opportunity to be
present during such tests. In the event that such testing demonstrates that
the grantee has substantially failed to comply with a material requirement
hereof, the reasonable costs of such tests shall be borne by the grantee. In
the event that such testing demonstrates that the grantee has substantially
complied with such material provisions hereof, the cost of such testing shall
be borne by the franchising authority. Except in emergency circumstances,
the franchising authority agrees that such testing shall be undertaken no
opportunity to effectuate a transfer of its cable system to a qualified
third party. The franchising authority further agrees that during such
a period of time, it shall authorize the grantee to continue to operate
pursuant to the terms of its prior franchise; however, in no event shall
such authorization exceed a period of time greater than six months
from the effective date of such revocation. If, at the end of that time, the
grantee is unsuccessful in procuring a qualified transferee or assignee
of its cable system which is reasonably acceptable to the franchising
authority, the grantee and franchising authority may avail themselves
of any rights they may have pursuant to federal or state law, it being
further agreed that the grantee's continued operation of its cable
system during the six-month period shall not be deemed to be a waiver
nor an extinguishment of any rights of either the franchising authority
or the grantee. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in
this section, neither the franchise authority nor the grantee shall be
required to violate federal or state law.
§ A190-22 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-24
A190:679
more than two times a year in the aggregate and that the results thereof
shall be made available to the grantee upon the grantee's request.
§ A190-25. Review of books and records.
The grantee agrees that the franchising authority may review such of its
books and records, during normal business hours and on a nondisruptive
basis, as is reasonably necessary to monitor compliance with the terms
hereof. Such records shall include, but shall not be limited to, any public
records required to be kept by the grantee pursuant to the rules and
regulations of the FCC. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth
herein, the grantee shall not be required to disclose information which
it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature. The
franchising authority agrees to treat any information disclosed by the
grantee to it as confidential and only to disclose it to employees,
representatives and agents thereof that have a need to know or in order
to enforce the provisions hereof. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary
stated herein, the grantee shall not be required to violate the provisions of
Section 631 of the Cable Act, Protection of Subscriber Privacy.
§ A190-26. Insurance requirements.
The grantee shall maintain in full force and effect, at its own cost and
expense, during the term of the franchise, comprehensive general liability
insurance in the amount of $1,000,000 combined single limit for bodily
injury and property damage. The insurance carrier for the grantee shall
be solvent and authorized to conduct business in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. Any insurance policy issued in connection with this franchise
shall designate the franchising authority as an additional insured. The
grantee shall provide the franchising authority with a certificate of
insurance to show compliance with the provisions of this section. Such
insurance shall be noncancelable except upon 30 days prior written notice
to the franchising authority.
§ A190-27. Indemnification of franchising authority.
The grantee agrees to indemnify, save and hold harmless and defend the
franchising authority, its officers, boards and employees, from and against
any liability for damages and for any liability or claims resulting from
property damage or bodily injury (including accidental death), which arise
out of the grantee's construction, operation or maintenance of its cable
system, including but not limited to reasonable attorney's fees and costs.
§ A190-28. Bonds and other surety.
The grantee shall not be required to obtain or maintain bonds or other
surety as a condition of being awarded the franchise or continuing its
existence. The franchising authority acknowledges that the legal, financial
and technical qualifications of the grantee are sufficient to afford
compliance with the terms of the franchise and enforcement thereof.
§ A190-24 ECONOMY CODE § A190-29
A190:680
§ A190-29. Notice of violation.
In the event that the franchising authority believes that the grantee has
not complied with the terms of the franchise, it shall notify the grantee, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the exact nature of the alleged
noncompliance.
§ A190-30. Time limit for grantee to respond to notice.
The grantee shall have 30 days from receipt of the notice described in
§ A190-29 to respond to the franchising authority contesting the assertion
of noncompliance or to cure such default or, in the event that by the nature
of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty-day period, initiate
reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority
of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
§ A190-31. Public hearing.
In the event that the grantee fails to respond to the notice described in
§ A190-29 pursuant to the procedures set forth in § A190-30 or in the event
that the alleged default is not remedied within 60 days after the grantee
is notified of the alleged default pursuant to § A190-29, the franchising
authority shall schedule a public hearing to investigate the default. Such
public hearing shall be held at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the
franchising authority which is scheduled at a time which is no less than five
business days therefrom. The franchising authority shall notify the grantee
of the time and place of such hearing and provide the grantee with an
opportunity to be heard.
§ A190-32. Enforcement.
A. Subject to applicable federal and state law, in the event that the
franchising authority, after such hearing, determines that the grantee is
in default of any provision of the franchise, the franchising authority
may:
(1) Seek specific performance of any provision, which reasonably lends
itself to such remedy, as an alternative to damages;
(2) Commence an action at law for monetary damages or seek other
equitable relief; or
(3) In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the
franchise, declare the franchise agreement to be revoked.
B. The grantee shall not be relieved of any of its obligations to comply
promptly with any provision of the franchise by reason of any failure of
the franchising authority to enforce prompt compliance.
§ A190-29 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-33
A190:681
§ A190-33. Events beyond grantee's control.
The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the
provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating
thereto, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults are caused by
strikes, acts of God, power outages or other events reasonably beyond its
ability to control.
§ A190-34. Incorporated documents.
The following documents shall be incorporated herein:132
§ A190-35. Preemption by state and federal bodies.
If the FCC or any other federal or state body or agency shall now or
hereafter exercise any paramount jurisdiction over the subject matter of the
franchise, then to the extent such jurisdiction shall preempt and supersede
or preclude the exercise of the like jurisdiction by the franchising authority,
the jurisdiction of the franchising authority shall cease and no longer exist.
§ A190-36. Actions of grantee and franchising authority.
In any action by the grantee and the franchising authority or representative
thereof mandated or permitted under the terms hereof, such party shall
act in a reasonable, expeditious and timely manner. Furthermore, in any
instance where approval or consent is required under the terms hereof,
such approval or consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
§ A190-37. Form of notices.
Unless expressly otherwise agreed between the parties, every notice or
response to be served upon the franchising authority or grantee shall be
in writing and shall be deemed to have been duly given to the required
party five business days after having been posted in a properly sealed
and correctly addressed envelope by certified or registered mail, postage
prepaid, at a post office or branch thereof regularly maintained by the
United States Postal Service.
A. Exhibit A, Section 626, Cable Act of 1984.
B. Exhibit B, Special Cable System Extension.
C. Exhibit D, Construction Map.
D. Exhibit D, Street Names.
A. The notices or responses to the franchising authority shall be addressed
as follows:
132. Editor's Note: Said documents, consisting of Exhibits A through D, are currently on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary.
§ A190-33 ECONOMY CODE § A190-37
A190:682
§ A190-38. Section titles to facilitate reading only.
The captions to sections contained herein are intended solely to facilitate
the reading thereof. Such captions shall not affect the meaning or
interpretation of the text herein.
§ A190-39. Compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
The grantee shall at all times during the life of this agreement be subject
to all lawful exercise of the police power by the franchise authority. The
franchise authority reserves the right to adopt from time to time, in addition
to the provisions herein contained, such ordinances as may be necessary in
the exercise of police power. Such regulation shall be reasonable and not in
derogation of the rights herein granted, nor in conflict with the laws of the
state or other local or federal laws or regulations.
§ A190-40. Repealer.
All ordinances and resolutions, and any parts of either thereof, which are
inconsistent herewith, shall be and the same are hereby repealed.
The Office of the Borough Secretary
Borough of Economy
2856 Conway-Wallrose Road
Baden, PA 15005
The Borough may copy the Solicitor.
B. The notices or responses to the grantee shall be addressed as follows:
TCI of Pennsylvania, Inc.
1718 Mt. Nebo Road
Sewickley, PA 15143-8563
With copies to:
TCI of Pennsylvania, Inc.
ATTENTION: Government Relations
101 Ewing Road
Carnegie, PA 15106
TCI of Pennsylvania, Inc.
ATTENTION: Legal Department
Denver, CO 80217
P.O. Box 5630
§ A190-37 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § A190-41
A190:683
§ A190-41. Severability.
If any section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof is determined
to be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent
jurisdiction or by any state or federal regulatory authority having
jurisdiction thereof, such determination shall have no effect on the validity
of any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or provision hereof, all of
which will remain in full force and effect for the term of the franchise or any
renewal or renewals thereof.
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
356 6-11-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
357 8-28-1996 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
358 10-23-1996 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 175
359 1-9-1997 1997 tax rate NCM
360 4-8-1997 Sewer use amendment Ch. 145, Art. III
361 6-10-1997 Building construction Ch. 55
362 8-27-1997 Bond NCM
363 12-9-1997 Salaries and compensation of
Mayor and Council
See Ch. 38
364 1-5-1998 1998 tax rate NCM
365 1-8-1998 Bond NCM
366 6-9-1998 Pension Plan for Employees
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. 451
367 6-24-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
368 6-24-1998 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
369 9-8-1998 Street acceptance NCM
370 12-23-1998 1999 tax rate NCM
371 1-27-1999 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
372 7-13-1999 Per capita tax amendment Ch. 170, Art. VII
373 7-13-1999 Handicapped parking Ch. 100
374 11-9-1999 Pension Plan for Employees
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. 451
§ A190-41 ECONOMY CODE § DL-1
A190:684
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
375 12-14-1999 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31
376 12-22-1999 2000 tax rate NCM
377 5-9-2000 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
378 8-8-2000 Septic holding tanks Ch. 143
379 12-12-2000 2001 tax rate NCM
380 1-9-2001 Building construction
amendment
Ch. 55
381 5-8-2001 Zoning Map amendment NCM
382 12-11-2001 2002 tax rate NCM
383 6-11-2002 Authorizing incurrence of lease
rental debt
NCM
384 11-12-2002 2003 tax rate NCM
385 1-14-2003 Street acceptance NCM
386 4-8-2003 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
387 4-8-2003 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
388 6-10-2003 Multimunicipal comprehensive
planning
Ch. 11, Art. III
389 7-23-2003 Bond NCM
390 11-11-2003 Intergovernmental Risk
Management Association
Ch. 11, Art. IV
391 11-11-2003 2004 tax rate NCM
392 3-24-2004 Stormwater management Ch. 155
393 7-6-2004 Uniform construction codes Ch. 66
394 10-12-2004 Street vacation NCM
395 11-9-2004 2005 tax rate NCM
396 3-8-2005 2005 project; bond NCM
397 5-10-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
398 4-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
399 4-27-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
400 4-27-2005 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
401 4-27-2005 Street acceptance NCM
402 10-11-2005 Police Pension Fund Ch. 31
403 11-16-2005 Authorizing incurrence of lease
rental debt
NCM
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A190:685
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
404 12-13-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
405 4-11-2006 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 175
406 4-11-2006 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
407 5-9-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
408 6-13-2006 Zoning Map amendment NCM
409 9-12-2006 Upper Beaver Valley Council of
Governments
Ch. 11, Art. V
410 11-14-2006 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31
411 12-12-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
412 2-27-2007 Increasing indebtedness NCM
413 3-27-2007 Alcoholic beverages:
intermunicipal liquor license
transfers
Ch. 46, Art. II
414 7-10-2007 Outdoor burning Ch. 62
415 12-11-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
416 3-11-2008 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 175
417 3-25-2008 Zoning Ch. 180
418 4-8-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
419 Taxation amendment Vetoed
420 12-9-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
421 10-27-2009 Installation of speed humps NCM
422 11-10-2009 Nuisances amendment Ch. 124
423 11-24-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
424 12-8-2009 Taxation: local services tax Ch. 170, Art. VI
425 12-8-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
426 3-9-2010 Zoning Map amendment NCM
427 3-9-2010 Cable franchise agreement NCM
428 7-13-2010 Firearms Ch. 85
429 8-10-2010 Outdoor burning amendment Ch. 62
430 12-14-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
431 12-13-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
432 12-13-2011 Pension Plan for Employees
amendment
Ch. 23
433 12-13-2011 Police Pension Plan amendment Ch. 31
§ DL-1 ECONOMY CODE § DL-1
A190:686
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
434 4-10-2012 Subdivision and land
development amendment
Ch. 163
435 6-12-2012 Planning Commission Ch. 25
436 8-14-2012 Zoning Map amendment NCM
437 10-9-2012 Cooperative and
intergovernmental agreements:
Regional Board of Appeals
Ch. 11, Art. VI
438 12-11-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
439 1-29-2013 Tax Collector commission rate Vacated by court
order
11-13-2013
440 1-22-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
441 4-23-2013 Police Pension Plan amendment Ch. 31
442 6-11-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
443 7-9-2013 Police Pension Plan amendment Ch. 31
444 7-9-2013 Pension Plan for Employees
amendment
Repealed by
Ord. 451
445 11-12-2013 Street acceptances NCM
446 11-12-2013 Vehicles and traffic amendment Ch. 175
447 12-10-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
448 12-9-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
449 8-11-2015 Flood damage prevention Ch. 92
450 10-13-2015 Flood damage prevention
amendment
Ch. 92
451 11-10-2015 Pension Plan for Employees
amendment
Ch. 23
452 12-15-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
453 2-23-2016 Police Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31
454 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
455 4-12-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
456 5-24-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 180
§ DL-1 CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE § DL-1
A190:687