Part I, Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)],
the codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of
Greencastle, County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code Publishers Corp., and consisting of Chapters 1 through 205,
together with an Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and
enacted as a single ordinance of the Borough of Greencastle, which shall
be known and is hereby designated as the "Code of the Borough of
Greencastle," hereinafter referred to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent with the provisions
contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are hereby repealed;
provided, however, that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such
inconsistency, and any valid legislation of the Borough of Greencastle which
is not in conflict with the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain
in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 1-3-2005.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A1 attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed have
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Nomenclature.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-7." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copies of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by law, and such
certified copy shall remain on file in the office of the Borough Secretary,
available to persons desiring to examine the same during all times while
said Code is in effect.
(1) Throughout the Code, references to the following are updated as
indicated:
(a) "Town Council" to "Borough Council."
(b) "Department of Environmental Resources" or "DER" to
"Department of Environmental Protection" or "DEP."
(c) "Department of Community Affairs" to "Department of
Community and Economic Development."
(d) "Justice of the Peace" or "District Magistrate" to "District
Justice."
(2) Throughout Chapter 141, Peddling and Soliciting, references to the
"Borough Secretary" are revised to read "Borough Manager."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Borough
Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed, held and
considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the Code for
all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 6, 2005.
§ 1-14 GREENCASTLE CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 5
AUDITOR
§ 5-1. Independent auditor to be appointed.
An independent auditor, who shall be a certified public accountant
registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified public accountants so
registered or a competent public accountant or a competent firm of public
accountants, shall be appointed, annually, for the audit of the accounts of
the Borough, the appointment of that independent auditor and the authority,
powers and duties of that auditor to be in accordance with Sections 1005(7)
and 1196 of "The Borough Code," as amended.2
Chapter 11
BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 38.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Trees— See Ch. 187.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 46005 and 46196.
§ 1-15 AUDITOR § 5-1
5:9

ARTICLE I
Planning Commission
[Adopted 3-6-1961 by Ord. No. 3-61 (Ch. 1, Part 4A, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 11-1. Creation; membership; duties. [Amended 7-1-1985]
A Borough Planning Commission, to be composed of five members,
appointed as provided by law (53 P.S. § 10202), is hereby created in and
for the Borough of Greencastle. The Planning Commission shall perform all
duties and may exercise all powers conferred by law upon Borough planning
agencies; provided, the Planning Commission previously created in and for
the said Borough shall constitute the tenure of any of the members thereof,
but any and all vacancies in the said Commission, hereafter occurring, shall
be filled in the manner and for the term provided in the law governing
borough planning commissions in effect at the time of the happening of the
said vacancy.
§ 11-1 AUDITOR § 11-1
5:11

ARTICLE II
Civil Service Commission
[Adopted 6-1-1970 by Ord. No. 7-70 (Ch. 1, Part 4C, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 11-2. Creation.
There is hereby created by and for the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, a Civil Service Commission in accordance with the
provisions of the Borough Code.
§ 11-2 AUDITOR § 11-2
5:13

ARTICLE III
Shade Tree Commission
[Adopted 6-5-1972 by Ord. No. 3-72 (Ch. 1, Part 4B, of the 1985
Code); amended in its entirety 11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-05]
§ 11-3. Establishment; powers and duties; composition; terms.
A. A Shade Tree Commission is hereby established in and for the Borough
of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and the Shade Tree
Commission shall exercise all the powers, duties and obligations
imposed by the Act of 1965, P.L. 1956, enacted February 1, 1966, and
reenacted May 17, 2012, along with any and all amendments thereto,
generally known as the "Borough Code."3
B. The Shade Tree Commission shall be composed of five residents of the
Borough of Greencastle who shall be appointed by the Borough Council
of the Borough of Greencastle. The three members of the Shade Tree
Commission serving on the effective date of this article shall fulfill their
current terms, and the Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle
shall appoint one resident to serve as the fourth member of the Shade
Tree Commission for a term ending in 2018 and one resident to serve as
the fifth member of the Shade Tree Commission for a term ending in
2019. Thereafter, whenever a vacancy has occurred by reason of the
expiration of the term of any member, the Borough Council of the
Borough of Greencastle shall appoint a member of the Shade Tree
Commission for a term of five years from the date of expiration of the
prior term to succeed the member whose term has expired.
3. Editor's Note: For the rules and regulations adopted by the Shade Tree Commission, see
Ch. 187, Trees. For the Borough Code, see now 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 11-3 AUDITOR § 11-3
5:15

ARTICLE IV
Joint Municipal Board of Appeals
[Adopted 11-1-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-054]
§ 11-4. Agreement authorized.
The terms of the agreement labeled "Exhibit A" and attached hereto5 is
adopted by the Borough of Greencastle.
§ 11-5. Modification of terms.
The terms of the agreement may be modified in the future by unanimous
resolution of the municipal entity/entities.
4. Editor's Note: For informational purposes, the prefatory provisions of this ordinance
provided as follows: "WHEREAS, by Ordinance No. 2004-01 adopted May 3, 2004, Borough
of Greencastle adopted as its Building Code for the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, Act 45 of 1999, (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”);" and "WHEREAS, Section
501(c) of the Act and Section 403.121 of the Regulations promulgated thereunder by the
Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry make provisions and set standards for the
appointment of a Board of Appeals to hear and rule on appeals, requests for variances and
requests for extensions of time under the Act; and" "WHEREAS, Borough of Greencastle
has elected to establish a Joint Municipal Board of Appeals in cooperation with other
municipalities located in Franklin County, Pennsylvania; and" "WHEREAS, the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act (53 Pa.C.S. § 2301-2315) requires the passage of an
ordinance and a written agreement between the cooperating municipalities in order for
the agreement to be effective."
5. Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 11-4 AUDITOR § 11-5
5:17

ARTICLE V
Sidewalk and Curb Board of Appeals
[Adopted 6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-07]
§ 11-6. Creation and purpose.
In order to determine the suitability of alternate materials or methods of
construction, exemptions, requests for extensions of time, or interpretations
of the curb and sidewalk provisions of Chapter 169, as provided for herein,
there is hereby created a Sidewalk and Curb Board of Appeals ("Board of
Appeals") consisting of three members who are qualified by experience or
training to pass upon matters pertaining to the curb and sidewalk provisions
of Chapter 169.
§ 11-7. Powers and duties.
The Board of Appeals shall have all the powers and duties with regard to
appeals from a decision of a Borough Official or body regarding suitability
of alternate materials or methods of constructions, exemptions, requests for
extensions of time, or interpretation of the curb and sidewalk provisions
of Chapter 169. The Board of Appeals shall adopt and make available
to participants guidelines and standards to be used in formulating and
rendering decisions in proceedings before it.
§ 11-8. Membership.
§ 11-9. Officers.
The Board shall select one of its members to serve as Chairperson, and the
appointing official shall designate a clerk from the municipality to serve as
A. The Board of Appeals shall consist of three members appointed by the
Borough Council, and appointments shall be as follows: one member to
be appointed for five years, one for four years and one for three years,
and thereafter each new member shall serve for five years or until a
successor has been appointed. Each member shall serve at the pleasure
of the Borough Council and may be removed by the Borough Council at
any time for any reason. Members of the Borough Council, Zoning
Hearing Board members and code administrators employed by the
Borough are prohibited from serving on the Board of Appeals.
B. The Borough Council may appoint an alternate member to the Board of
Appeals, such alternate member to be appointed for five years. The
alternate member shall have the same qualifications as other members
of the Board. The alternate member may be seated at any time as
directed by the Chairperson to:
(1) Constitute a quorum for a meeting.
(2) Ensure three Board members are available for a hearing.
§ 11-6 AUDITOR § 11-9
5:19
Secretary to the Board, who shall keep a detailed record of all proceedings
on file with the Borough office.
§ 11-10. Disqualification from voting.
A member of the Board shall not pass on any question in which that member
is engaged as contractor or material dealer or in which the Board member
has any personal, professional or financial interest.
§ 11-11. Appeals and fees.
§ 11-12. Notice of meetings.
The Board shall meet upon written notice of the Chairman given to the
appellant and the Board members within 45 days of the filing of an appeal
or at a stated periodic meeting if warranted by the volume of work.
§ 11-13. Conduct of meetings.
All hearings shall be public and conducted under the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Sunshine Law.6 The appellant, the appellant's representative,
the relevant Borough official and any other person whose interest or who
may be affected by the subject appeal shall be given an opportunity to be
heard.
A. Any person aggrieved by a decision of any Borough official or body who
or which is responsible for the enforcement of the Curb and Sidewalk
Ordinance shall file a written notice of appeal with the Board of Appeals
within 10 days after the rendering of such decision.
B. A filing fee as the Borough Council may from time to time determine by
resolution shall accompany such notice of appeal.
A. The Board shall decide an appeal for alternate materials or methods of
construction, exemption, request for extension of time or provide a
requested clarification by reviewing documents and any written brief or
argument unless the owner or owner's agent requests a hearing.
B. The Board shall only consider the factors established under the curb
and sidewalk provisions of Chapter 169, Streets and Sidewalks, of this
Code.
C. The Board may:
(1) Deny the request in whole or in part;
(2) Grant the request in whole or in part; or
(3) Grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied.
6. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 11-9 GREENCASTLE CODE § 11-14
5:20
§ 11-14. Adjourned meetings.
When three qualified members are not present to consider a specific appeal,
either the appellant, the enforcing official or their representative may
request a postponement of the hearing.
§ 11-15. Voting.
The Board shall affirm, modify or reverse the decision of the enforcing
official by a concurring vote of a majority.
§ 11-16. Resolutions; filing of copies.
Every action of the Board shall be by resolution, and certified copies shall
be furnished to the appellant within 15 days of the decision. A copy shall
also be provided to the Borough office. Decisions of the Board of Appeals
shall be final and any appeal thereto shall be made to the Franklin County
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of the date of the Board's decision
as prescribed by law.
§ 11-14 AUDITOR § 11-16
5:21
Chapter 15
INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS
§ 11-16 GREENCASTLE CODE § 11-16
15:22
ARTICLE I
Franklin County Council of Governments
[Adopted 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-4]
§ 15-1. Agreement.
The municipality of Greencastle Borough agrees to become a member of the
Franklin County Council of Governments.
§ 15-2. Bylaws approved.
The Bylaws of the Franklin County Council of Governments, attached hereto
and made a part hereof,7 which specifies the organizational structure and
other operational means of the Council of Governments, are hereby
approved.
7. Editor's Note: A copy of said Bylaws is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 15-1 INTERGOVERNMENTAL AGREEMENTS § 15-2
15:23
Chapter 26
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 34.
§ 26-1. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Greencastle, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance at any time,
to abolish such office.
§ 26-2. Election by Council.
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this chapter, the Borough
Council shall elect, by a majority vote of all its members, one person to fill
the office of Borough Manager. In the case of a vacancy, the Council shall
fill said office by majority vote of all its members. The Borough Manager
shall, however, be subject to removal at any time by a majority vote of all
the members of the Council.
§ 26-3. Qualifications.
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to actual experience in or
knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the duties of the office as
herein outlined.
§ 26-4. Bond required.
Before entering upon his/her duties, the Borough Manager shall give a
bond to the Borough, with a bonding company satisfactory to Council as
surety, conditioned for the faithful performance of his/her duties, in such
amount as may be determined by Council from time to time, premium for
the said bond to be paid for by the Borough of Greencastle. The bond of
the Borough Manager may be included in, and the Manager may be bonded
under and covered by, the blanket bond now in force and effect for all
Borough employees.
§ 26-5. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed
from time to time by Council.
§ 15-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 26-6
26:24
§ 26-6. Chief administrative officer.
The Borough Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough and shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper
and efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough. The powers and
duties of administration of all Borough business shall be vested in the
Manager, unless expressly imposed or conferred by statute or ordinance
upon other Borough officers.
§ 26-7. Powers and duties.
Subject to recall by Council, the powers and duties of the Borough Manager
shall include the following:
A. To supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments except for the Police Department.
B. To hire and, when necessary, to suspend or discharge all employees
under his/her supervision, subject to all applicable civil service rules
and regulations. Further, the Manager shall report these actions to
Council at its first regularly scheduled meeting following the same.
C. To recommend wages and salaries for personnel under his/her
supervision to Council annually. Prior to presentation of these
recommendations to Council, the Manager shall conduct performance
evaluations with each employee under his/her supervision.
D. To prepare and submit to Council, before the close of each fiscal year, a
budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In
preparing the budget, the Manager shall obtain from the heads of each
department, agency, board or officer, estimates of revenues and
expenditures and other supporting data as is required. The Manager
shall review such estimates and may revise them before submitting the
budget to the Council.
E. To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its adoption
by the Council.
F. To hold such other Borough offices and to head such Borough
departments as the Council may, from time to time, direct in
accordance with law.
G. To attend all meetings of Council, and to attend meetings of committees
as required, and to take part in the discussions. The Manager shall
receive notice of special meetings of Council and all committees.
H. To prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply facts
pertinent thereto.
I. To keep the Council informed on a monthly basis as to the conduct of
Borough affairs; to submit periodic reports on the condition of the
Borough finances and such other reports as the Council shall request;
§ 26-6 MANAGER § 26-7
26:25
§ 26-8. Illness or absence.
and to make such recommendations to the Council as he/she deems
advisable.
J. To submit to Council from time to time a complete report on the
finances and administrative activities of the Borough.
K. To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
L. To employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and consultants
to perform work and to advise in connection with any of the functions of
the Borough.
M. To attend to the letting of contracts in due form under the law and to
supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same except
insofar as such duties are expressly imposed upon some other Borough
officer by statute.
N. To see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper procedures are taken for the security and collection of all the
Borough's claims.
O. To serve as purchasing officer of the Borough and to purchase in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code all supplies and
equipment for the various agencies, boards, departments and other
offices of the Borough. The Manager shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time, or when directed by Council,
make a full written report thereof. The Manager shall also issue rules
and regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
procurement of all Borough supplies and equipment.
P. To ensure that all ordinances and regulations of the Borough are
enforced.
Q. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. The Manager, or an officer
designated by him/her, shall investigate and dispose of such complaints,
and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
R. To perform all other tasks and duties which may from time to time be
delegated by Council or required by statute.
A. In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the Borough, the
Manager shall delegate one qualified member of his/her staff to
perform the duties of the Manager during his/her absence or disability.
The person so designated shall not perform such duties for a period
longer than two weeks without the approval of the Council.
B. As long as the Borough maintains the position of Assistant Borough
Manager, then, in instances set forth in the preceding subsection, the
§ 26-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 26-8
26:26
Chapter 29
MEETINGS
§ 29-1. Time, day and place of regular Council meetings.
The regular meetings of the Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle
shall convene on every first Monday of each month, except on Mondays
that fall on legal holidays, at such time as Council may from time to time
so designate, in the Council Chambers located at Borough Hall, except
that nothing herein shall prevent Council from convening special meetings
consistent with the provisions of Section 1006 of the Borough Code of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.8
Chapter 34
PENSIONS
party designated to assume the duties of Borough Manager shall be the
Assistant Borough Manager.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46006.
§ 26-8 MANAGER § 29-1
26:27

ARTICLE I
Non-Uniform Retirement Plan
§ 34-1. Establishment and continuation of plan.
The plan document entitled "Greencastle Borough Non-Uniform Retirement
Plan," as effective on January 1, 1997, and as may be amended or restated,
is considered an integral part of this article.
§ 34-2. Determination of Borough contributions; retirement
benefits; settlement; vested rights.
The administration of the plan and the determination of eligibility for
benefits, source and allocation of funds, calculation of retirement benefits,
return of member contributions, vesting terms of retirement benefits, and
other matters associated with its continuation and establishment shall be
in accordance with the terms and conditions of the Greencastle Borough
Non-Uniform Retirement Plan, as may be amended or restated, which is
incorporated herein by reference.
§ 34-1 MANAGER § 34-2
26:29

ARTICLE II
Police Retirement Plan
§ 34-3. Establishment and continuation of plan.
The plan document entitled "Greencastle Borough Police Retirement Plan,"
as effective on January 1, 2003, and as may be amended or restated, is
considered an integral part of this article.
§ 34-4. Determination of Borough contributions: retirement
benefits; settlement; vested rights.
The administration of the plan and the determination of eligibility for
benefits, source and allocation of funds, calculation of retirement benefits,
return of member contributions, vesting terms of retirement benefits,
disability retirement, death benefits and other matters associated with its
continuation and establishment shall be in accordance with the terms and
conditions of the Greencastle Borough Police Retirement Plan, as may be
amended or restated, which is incorporated herein by reference.
§ 34-3 MANAGER § 34-4
26:31
Chapter 38
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 34.
§ 38-1. Establishment of Department.
The existing Police Department is hereby recognized and reestablished and
reorganized in and for the Borough of Greencastle. The Chief of Police shall
be the chief executive of the Police Department. The Chief shall, under the
direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the police force and have supervision
over its members, in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
§ 38-2. Subordinate positions.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, is the position
of patrolperson.
§ 38-3. Powers of Borough Council.
The persons to serve in the positions of Chief of Police and patrolperson,
employment of part-time police persons as additional police personnel, and
the compensation of each, shall be as determined by the Borough Council
from time to time.
§ 38-4. Authority of Mayor.
Nothing herein contained shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint
special police persons.
Chapter 43
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 34-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 38-4
38:32
ARTICLE I
Tax Collector
[Adopted 7-1-1985 as Ch. 1, Part 1, § 107, of the 1985 Code]
§ 43-1. Compensation established.
For the term commencing January 1974, and thereafter, the compensation
of the Tax Collector of the Borough shall be determined as follows:
A. One percent of all current taxes collected.
B. One-and-one-half percent of all delinquent taxes collected.
§ 43-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-1
43:33

ARTICLE II
Borough Council
[Adopted 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-1]
§ 43-2. Compensation of Council members.
Beginning with the meeting of Borough Council on the first Monday of
January 2000, each Councilperson of the Borough of Greencastle, beginning
a new term of office, shall be paid compensation as a Councilperson the sum
of $75 for each regular meeting of the Borough Council which they attend.
Councilpersons shall receive no compensation for attendance at special
meetings of Council and, further, shall receive no compensation at all if they
miss the regularly scheduled monthly meeting of Borough Council.
§ 43-3. Payment schedule.
The compensation provided in § 43-2, supra, shall be paid monthly in the
month following the calendar month for which such compensation is due
and payable.
§ 43-4. Compensation of Council President.
The President of Borough Council shall be compensated at the rate of $100
per month subject to the same attendance requirements as previously set
forth in § 43-2, supra.
§ 43-5. Appropriation of funds.
An amount sufficient to pay the compensation herein provided shall be
included and appropriated annually in the budget of the Borough.
§ 43-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-5
43:35

ARTICLE III
Mayor
[Adopted 4-5-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-2]
§ 43-6. Compensation established.
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, shall be $1,500 per year, beginning with calendar year 2000,
payable in monthly installments.
§ 43-6 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 43-6
43:37
Part II, General Legislation
Chapter 57
ALARMS
§ 57-1. Definitions. [Amended 11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AUDIBLE ALARM — Any other alarm system which causes a communication
to a Borough public safety agency indicating that a crime, fire or other
emergency warranting immediate action by that public safety agency has
occurred or is occurring. This definition includes but is not limited to Knox-
Boxes®.
BOROUGH PUBLIC SAFETY AGENCY — The Borough Police or Fire
Department.
CUSTOMER — Individual, establishment, partnership, entity, incorporated
association, corporation, or other similar entity owning, possessing,
installing or having installed intrusion alarm equipment connected to the
Borough of Greencastle either directly or by a telephone dialer system or
having an audible alarm as defined above.
FALSE ALARM — The activation of an audible alarm and/or intrusion alarm
to which a Borough public safety agency responds and/or dispatches when
a crime, fire, or other emergency has not occurred.
INTRUSION ALARM — An alarm system which when activated causes the
phone or telephone line or lines which service the Borough public safety
agency to ring.
§ 57-2. False alarms; imposition of service charge. [Amended
11-4-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-04]
Should any intrusion alarm system or audible alarm system cause five
or more false alarms to occur in a consecutive twelve-month period, the
customer and/or the owner of the intrusion alarm system or audible alarm
system shall be assessed a service charge as follows:
A. For each violation representing false alarms five through eight in a
consecutive twelve-month period: $50; and
B. For each violation representing any false alarm exceeding eight false
alarms in a consecutive twelve-month period: $100.
§ 43-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 57-3
43:38
§ 57-3. Payment of service charge.
The service charge set forth in § 57-2 shall be payable to the Borough
of Greencastle within 30 days after each occurrence resulting in the
imposition of said service charge.
§ 57-4. Failure to pay service charge. [Amended 11-4-2013 by Ord.
No. 2013-04]
Should any customer or the owner of any intrusion alarm system or audible
alarm system fail to pay the service charge set forth in § 57-2 above within
the time frame set forth in § 57-3 above, then the intrusion alarm equipment
and/or audible alarm equipment connected to the Borough of Greencastle
or Borough public safety agency shall immediately be disconnected, and the
same shall not be reconnected until all charges and related costs are paid
to the Borough of Greencastle as provided in this chapter.
Chapter 64
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
§ 64-1. Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, the following words or phrases shall
be construed according to the definitions set forth below:
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES — Any spirits, wine, beer, ale or other liquid
containing more than 1/2% of alcohol by volume which is fit for beverage
purposes.
CONTAINER — Any bottle, can or other vessel in which alcoholic beverages
are contained.
§ 64-2. Open consumption.
No person shall consume any alcoholic beverage in any quantity upon
any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk, stairway, thoroughfare, or other public
property within the Borough, nor shall any person consume any alcoholic
beverage within five feet of any public way or thoroughfare while on a
private stairway, doorway or other private property open to public view
without the express or implied permission of the owner, his agent or other
party in lawful possession thereof.
§ 57-3 ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES § 64-3
64:39
§ 64-3. Possession.
No person shall possess any container of alcoholic beverage whether
wrapped or unwrapped which has been opened or on which the seal has
been broken in any manner on any public street, avenue, alley, thoroughfare
or other public property within the Borough, nor shall any person possess
any container or alcoholic beverage within five feet of any public way or
thoroughfare while on a private stairway, doorway, or other private property
open to public view without the express or implied permission of the owner,
his agent, or other person in lawful possession thereof.
§ 64-4. Exceptions.
Provided, however, that the provisions of §§ 64-2 and 64-3 above shall not
apply to interior portions of any private dwelling, habitat or building, nor
to the consumption or possession by persons in the areas herein designated
of any duly prescribed and dispensed medication having alcoholic content
as set forth in § 64-1 hereof; and provided further that the provisions of
said §§ 64-2 and 64-3 above shall not apply to premises duly licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board and to persons then and there patrons
of said licensee.
§ 64-5. Violations and penalties.
Whosoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/or
to be imprisoned for a period not to exceed 90 days
Chapter 71
ANIMALS
§ 64-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 64-5
71:40
ARTICLE I
Keeping of Animals
[Adopted 3-5-1951 by Ord. No. 2-51; amended in its entirety
7-1-1985 (Ch. 2, Part 2, of the 1985 Code)]
§ 71-1. Definitions and word usage.
§ 71-2. Keeping of pigs, hogs or swine prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any pigs, hogs or swine at any
place within the Borough.
§ 71-3. Regulations for keeping of domestic animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any domestic animals, except
household pets, except as provided in this section:
A. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ANIMAL — Any domestic animal or fowl, any wild animal or any
household pet.
DOMESTIC ANIMAL — Any animal normally or ordinarily domesticated
or raised in this area and climate as livestock or for work or breeding
purposes, or normally or ordinarily kept as a household pet.
HOUSEHOLD PET — Any dog, cat, or other domestic animal normally
and ordinarily kept in or permitted to be at large in the dwelling of its
owner.
LARGE ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal of the bovine, equine
or sheep family.
PERSON — Any person, firm, partnership, association, or corporation.
SMALL ANIMAL — Any wild or domestic animal such as a rabbit, hare,
guinea pig, rat, mouse, or chinchilla; and any wild or domestic fowl
such as a chicken, turkey, goose, duck, or pigeon (excepting homing
pigeons).
WILD ANIMAL — Any animal, bird, fowl, or reptile not normally or
ordinarily domesticated; not normally or ordinarily raised in this area
and climate as livestock or for work or breeding purposes; or not
capable of being kept as a household pet.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. Large animals shall be confined in quarters no part of which shall be
closer than 100 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
§ 71-1 ANIMALS § 71-3
71:41
§ 71-4. Regulations for keeping of household pets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any household pet, except as
provided in this section:
§ 71-5. Prosecution under state law.
Any violation of this article that would also violate any state law shall be
prosecuted under that state law and not under this article.
§ 71-6. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300, and/or
to undergo imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Small animals shall be kept confined in quarters no part of which shall
be closer than 25 feet from the exterior limits of any dwelling or of any
property line.
C. The keeper of every such animal shall confine the same in an enclosure
sufficient to prevent such animal from running at large, and such
enclosure shall be of a size conducive to good sanitary practices and
adequate and sanitary drainage facilities shall be provided.
D. Every keeper of any animal shall cause the litter and droppings
therefrom to be collected daily in a container or receptacle that when
closed shall be rat-proof and fly-tight, and after every such collection
shall cause such container or receptacle to be kept closed. At least
twice a week, every such keeper shall cause all litter and droppings so
collected to be disposed of in such manner as not to permit the
presence of fly larvae.
E. Every keeper of any animal shall cause all feed provided therefor to be
stored and kept in a rat-proof and fly-tight building, box, container, or
receptacle.
A. If any such pet shall be kept in a dwelling owned or occupied by its
owner, such owner shall be required to follow such procedures and
practices, as to the number of such pets to be kept there, and as to
sanitation, to insure that no public nuisance shall be created or
maintained and no threat to the health of persons living elsewhere than
in such dwelling shall be created.
B. If any such pet shall be kept in an enclosure outside such dwelling, the
provisions of § 71-3 of this article, insofar as the same applies to small
animals, shall be applicable to the keeping of such household pet.
§ 71-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 71-6
71:42
ARTICLE II
Control of Dogs and Cats
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 71-7. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle.
OWNER — Any person having a property right in any dog or cat, or having
custody of any dog or cat, or any person who harbors or permits a dog or
cat to remain on or around his or her property.
RUNNING AT LARGE — Being upon any public highway, street, alley, park
or any other public land, or upon property of another person other than the
owner, and not being accompanied by or under the immediate control of the
owner or any other person having custody of said dog and/or cat.
UNDER IMMEDIATE CONTROL — That any dog or cat being upon any
public highway, street, alley, park or any other public land, or upon property
of anther person other than the owner shall be on a leash.
§ 71-8. Running at large prohibited; disposal of animal waste.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog and/or cat to allow or permit
such dog and/or cat to run at large in the Borough. Further, any owner of
a dog or cat shall immediately collect the feces or droppings from such dog
or cat in a container or receptacle and dispose of the same in a safe and
sanitary manner.
§ 71-9. Licensing required.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog and/or
cat to have any such animal without bearing a current license tag. The dog
and cat licensing shall be performed under the rules and regulations of the
County of Franklin.
§ 71-10. Animal nuisances; vaccinations.
A. It shall be unlawful for the owner to have any dog and/or cat that
becomes a nuisance in the Borough. Acts of nuisance shall include, but
are expressly not restricted to, the following:
(1) The frequent creation of any disturbance between the hours of
10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. prevailing time, or at extended intervals
at any other time of day, or both.
(2) Viciousness.
§ 71-7 ANIMALS § 71-10
71:43
§ 71-11. Violations and penalties.
It shall be unlawful for any owner, custodian or keeper of any dog and/or cat
to violate any of the provisions of this article, and said violator shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more
than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of fine and
costs, shall be subject to imprisonment for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
(3) Frequent digging into flower beds, lawns, children's sandboxes,
gardens or the depositing of feces or urine and/or otherwise
damaging shrubbery, trees or lawns on premises, personal property
or other property not belonging to the owner of the dog and/or cat.
B. Any owner of any dog and/or cat shall comply with and be current with
rabies vaccination requirements of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with regard to dogs and/or cats.
§ 71-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 71-11
71:44
Chapter 78
BICYCLES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Skateboards, roller skates and roller
blades — See Ch. 158.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 78-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PEDALCYCLE — Any vehicle powered solely or primarily by humanpowered
pedals.
§ 78-2. Regulations for operation of pedalcycles.
In addition to compliance with the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania9 regarding the equipment, parking and operation of
pedalcycles, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons to operate or use
a pedalcycle upon the streets, alleys or public thoroughfares of the Borough
in violation of any of the following regulations:
A. No bicycle shall be operated unless it is in a safe mechanical condition
and in good working order at all times.
B. It shall be unlawful for anyone to tow or draw any coaster, sled, person
on roller skates, toy vehicles, or any other similar vehicle when
operating such pedalcycle on any street, alley or public thoroughfare in
the Borough; and further, it shall be unlawful for the operator of any
pedalcycle to be towed on his or her pedalcycle by any other vehicle.
C. No rider of a pedalcycle shall remove both hands from the handlebars,
nor feet from the pedals, nor practice any acrobatic stunts or fancy
riding on any street, alley or public thoroughfare in the Borough.
D. No pedalcycle or motor-powered bicycle or mini-bike or any other such
vehicle shall be ridden or operated at any time upon private property
without the permission of the property owner.
E. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride a pedalcycle on the sidewalk
along the following portions of streets:
9. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 71-11 ANIMALS § 78-2
71:45
§ 78-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 plus costs of
prosecution (court costs and reasonable attorney fees). Provided, however,
that any person accused of such violation by notice provided to them by a
police officer of the Borough of Greencastle may settle and compromise the
claim against him or her for such violation by paying the Borough the sum
of $25 within 72 hours of such notice being provided to them.
Chapter 86
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 132.
§ 86-1. Violations deemed nuisances. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-08]
Name of Street Side Between
East Baltimore Street Both Washington Street and Center Square
West Baltimore Street Both Center Square and Jefferson Street
North Carlisle Street Both Madison Street and Center Square
South Carlisle Street Both Center Square and Franklin Street
Center Square Outer Entire extent
A. For the purpose of this chapter, "owner" shall mean any person, firm,
partnership, association, trust, corporation, or other entity having any
ownership interest in real property and any tenant, lessee, or occupant
of real property.
B. No owner of any property within the Borough of Greencastle shall
permit or cause the following to occur:
(1) Any grass or weeds, or any vegetation whatsoever (not edible or
planted for some useful or ornamental purpose) to grow or remain
upon such premises, or upon the grass plot along the street or
sidewalk abutting such premises, in height in excess of 10 inches.
(2) Any weeds listed on the noxious weed control list set forth in Title
7, Chapter 110.1 of the Pennsylvania Code,10 as amended from time
10.Editor's Note: See 7 Pa. Code § 110.1.
§ 78-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 86-1
71:46
§ 86-2. (Reserved)11
§ 86-3. Abatement of nuisance. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
The owner of any premises shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of
the provisions of § 86-1.
§ 86-4. Notice of violation.
Borough Council, or the Mayor, or any officer or employee of the Borough
designated thereby for this purpose, may give written notice to any owner,
occupant, lessee or other person having an interest in land or real estate
which has weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation in excess of 10 inches in
height which is not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose
to cut or remove said weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation in compliance
with this chapter.
§ 86-5. Delivery and contents of notice; failure to comply; Borough
to do work.
The written notice described in § 86-4, supra, may be personally delivered
to the owner, occupant, lessee or other person having an interest in the
land or real estate, or the notice may be sent by certified mail to the last
known address of such person. The notice shall give such person 10 days to
cut and remove the weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation. If the owner,
occupant, lessee or other person having an interest in the land or real estate
fails to cut or remove the weeds, brush, grass or other vegetation, then
the Borough may hire someone or direct the cutting and removal of the
same, and charge and collect said costs, plus 10% penalty, from the owner,
occupant, lessee or other person as may be provided by law or equity or
pursue any other remedy provided by law or equity.
to time, to grow or remain upon such premises or upon the grass
plot along the street or sidewalk abutting such premises.
(3) Any grass clippings, tree trimmings, hedge clippings or tree leaves,
hereinafter referred to as "yard waste," to be placed into a public
street or alley along the curbline in such a manner that the yard
waste covers or could cover or enter the stormwater drainage
system of the Borough of Greencastle.
(4) Dumping or hosing debris into the storm drain system.
C. Any violation of any provisions of this subsection is hereby declared to
be a nuisance and detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness, comfort
and welfare of the inhabitants of the Borough.
11.Editor's Note: Former § 86-2, Height of vegetation restricted, was repealed 10-5-2005 by
Ord. No. 2015-08.
§ 86-1 ANIMALS § 86-6
71:47
§ 86-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-08]
Chapter 91
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
§ 91-1. Numbering of buildings required.
It shall be the duty of each and every owner, trustee, lessee, or agent and
occupant of each and every house, building or other structure to cause the
same to be numbered in accordance with this chapter.
§ 91-2. Placement and design of numbers.
A. Any owner who or which shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $450, plus costs of prosecution
and reasonable attorney fees and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days, provided that each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the
offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee(s) and the Borough
police officers are hereby duly authorized to issue a ticket in a form
established by the Borough to any owner violating the provisions of this
chapter. The ticket shall identify the address of the property where the
violation exists, as well as the nature of the violation. The ticket may
either be handed to an owner or occupant of the property, or may be
affixed to a door on the primary structure on the property where the
violation exists, fronting a right-of-way or otherwise conspicuously
posted on the property. The ticket shall instruct such violator that if he,
she or it reports to the Borough office and pays to the Borough the sum
of up to $100 for a first offense, $200 for a second offense, and $300 for
each subsequent offense within a calendar year, within 10 days of the
date of issuance of the ticket, then such payment shall save such
violator from prosecution by a citation, which prosecution may result in
court costs and attorney fees being assessed against the violator in
addition to the fine. In any event, if a ticket is not paid in full within 10
days of issuance, the official authorized to issue tickets shall issue a
citation to the violator, or initiate other appropriate enforcement action.
C. Officials authorized to issue tickets may, in their sole and absolute
discretion, issue a citation or institute other appropriate enforcement
action instead of a ticket.
§ 86-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 91-2
91:48
§ 91-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this
chapter shall be ordered to comply with said chapter within five days after
formal notification in writing. If compliance is not rendered they shall, upon
conviction, pay a fine of not more than $25; and, provided further, that
each day thereafter such violation exists shall be considered as a separate
offense.
Chapter 95
BURNING, OPEN
§ 95-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of the Borough of
Greencastle.
BURNING — The act of consuming by fire; to flame, char, scorch, or blaze.
As used in this chapter, smoldering shall have the same meaning as burning
and any smoldering shall be deemed a burning.[Added 8-6-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-08]
FURNACE — Any enclosed device specifically designed for burning any
material for the production of heat.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
INCINERATOR — Any device specifically designed for the destruction by
burning of refuse, sewage sludge, or any other combustible material.
OPEN FIRE — A fire in which any material is burning, smoldering or
smoking in the open or in a receptacle other than a furnace or incinerator.
OUTDOOR FURNACE — A boiler, stove or furnace fired by wood, coal,
oil or other fuel that is not located within a building inhabited by human
or animals, used for the purpose of heating the principal structure or
accessory building or other structure on the premises.[Added 11-2-2009
by Ord. No. 2009-03]
A. The numbers shall be mounted in a conspicuous place on every house,
building, or on both sides of a mailbox for the house or building so that
said numbers can be readily seen and read from the street or highway
where access is gained by an emergency vehicles.
B. Each number shall be a minimum of three inches in height.
C. It shall be unlawful to cover or conceal any number properly placed on a
building or mailbox.
§ 91-2 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 95-1
91:49
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
department, bureau, agency or other legal entity.
REFUSE — Garbage, rubbish and trade waste.
RUBBISH — Solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive,
including but not limited to rags, old clothes, leather, carpets, wood,
excelsior, paper, ashes, grass clippings, furniture, tin cans, glass, crockery,
masonry and other similar materials.[Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-08]
SALVAGE OPERATION — Any business, trade or industry engaged in whole
or in part in salvaging or reclaiming any product or material, including but
not limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers or drums.
TRADE WASTE — All solid or liquid material or rubbish resulting from
construction, building operations, or the prosecution of any business, trade
or industry including but not limited to, plastic products, cartons, paint,
grease, oil and other petroleum products, chemicals, cinders and other
forms of solid or liquid waste materials; provided that "trade waste" shall
not include any coal refuse associated with the mining or preparation of
coal.
YARD WASTE — Leaves, brush, tree trimmings, or chipped
shrubbery.[Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
§ 95-2. Policy. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
The Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle has determined that
air pollution from open burning may be detrimental to the health, comfort,
living conditions, welfare, and safety of the citizens of Greencastle. The
Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle approves the provisions of
this chapter to safeguard the citizens of Greencastle from such air pollution.
§ 95-3. Burning regulations; exceptions. [Amended 11-2-2009 by
Ord. No. 2009-03; 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
A. Within the Borough limits, no person shall:
(1) Ignite or feed an open fire for the destruction of refuse or in the
conduct of a salvage operation in any public or private place
outside any building; or
(2) Cause, suffer, allow, or permit the maintenance of any open fire for
the destruction of refuse, or in the conduct of a salvage operation
on any property under his control outside of any building;
(3) Construct and/or operate an outdoor furnace;
(4) Use any incinerator or container, to include burn barrels, for the
destruction of garbage, refuse, rubbish, or trade waste;
B. Exceptions.
§ 95-1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 95-3
91:50
§ 95-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-6-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-08]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/
or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Enforcement shall be
by action brought before a Magisterial District Judge in the same manner
provided for the enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania
Rules of Criminal Procedure. A separate offense shall arise for each day or
portion of a day in which a violation is found to exist or for each section
of this chapter which is found to have been violated. In addition, any
person found guilty of violating an ordinance may be assessed court costs
and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in the enforcement
proceedings.
§ 95-5. Enforcement. [Added 8-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-08]
The Code Enforcement Officer(s) and police officer(s) of the Borough of
Greencastle shall have the authority to administer the provisions of this
(1) Open fires may be set in the performance of an official duty of any
public officer if the fire is necessary for any of the following,
provided that the fire complies with the Department of
Environmental Protection regulations and is approved by the fire
chief having jurisdiction in the municipality:
(a) The prevention of a fire hazard which cannot be abated by
other means; or
(b) The protection of public health;
(c) Instructing personnel in firefighting.
(2) Open fires solely for the purpose of disposing yard waste may be
set, provided:
(a) The fire is attended by a responsible person;
(b) No garbage or rubbish is burned;
(c) No hazardous condition will be created by such burning;
(d) No such burning is allowed on any street, alley or sidewalk
within the Borough;
(e) All such burning takes place between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.; and
(f) No refuse is brought in from outside the Borough limits.
(3) A fire set solely for cooking food.
(4) A fire set solely for recreational or ceremonial purposes.
§ 95-3 BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF § 95-5
91:51
chapter including the investigation of complaints and the issuance of
notices of violation.
Chapter 99
CABLE TELEVISION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169. Trees — See Ch. 187.
§ 99-1. Findings; intent.
§ 99-2. Definitions and word usage.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. Words used in the
present tense include the future, words in the plural number include the
singular number and words in the singular number include the plural
number. All capitalized terms used in the definition of any other term shall
have their meaning as otherwise defined in this section. The words "shall"
and "will" are mandatory and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall
be given their common and ordinary meaning.
ADDITIONAL SERVICES —
A. Borough of Greencastle ("Borough"), pursuant to applicable federal and
state law, is authorized to grant one or more nonexclusive franchises to
construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct cable television systems
within Borough limits.
B. The Borough Council finds that the development of cable television
systems has the potential of having great benefit and impact upon the
residents of the Borough. Because of the complex and rapidly changing
technology associated with cable television, the Borough Council
further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare
can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be
vested in Borough or such persons as Borough shall designate. It is the
intent of this chapter and subsequent amendments to provide for and
specify the means to attain the best possible cable television service to
the public and any franchises issued pursuant to this chapter shall be
deemed to include this finding as an integral part thereof.
The services such as the transmissions of all leased access signals not
included in basic subscriber service, nonlocal broadcast signals and pay
television signals.
A.
Services not involving the transmission of signals, including rental
of equipment, training services and all other services which may be
provided by grantee to residential subscribers.
B.
§ 95-5 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-2
99:52
BASIC CABLE SERVICE — Any service tier which includes the
retransmission of local television broadcast signals.
BOROUGH — Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a
Pennsylvania municipal corporation, including all areas within its existing
boundaries and territory hereafter acquired or annexed.
BOROUGH AGENCY — The person, department, committee or agency
designated by the Council in a contemporaneous resolution to act for it in
certain matters relating to cable television; or otherwise the Council itself.
CABLE ACT — The Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Pub. L. No.
98-549, 98 Stat. 2779 (1984) [codified at 47 U.S.C. §§ 521-611 (1982 &
Supp. V 1987)] as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection
and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No. 102-385 and Pub. L. No. 104-101,
110 Stat. 56 et seq. (1996), and as may, from time to time, be amended.
CABLE SERVICE —
CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM, SYSTEM or CABLE SYSTEM — A facility,
consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception and control equipment, that is designed to provide
cable service which includes video programming and which is provided to
multiple subscribers within a community, but such term does not include:
CHANNEL or CABLE CHANNEL — A portion of the electromagnetic
frequency spectrum which is used in a cable system and which is capable of
delivering a television channel as defined by the Federal Communications
Commission.
The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
other programming service; and
A.
Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use
of such video programming or other programming service.
B.
A facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or
more television broadcast stations;
A.
B. A facility that serves subscribers without using any public rights-of-way;
A facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to
the provisions of 47 U.S.C. §§ 201-226, except that such facility shall
be considered a cable system to the extent such facility whether on a
common carrier basis or otherwise is used in the transmission of video
programming directly to subscribers unless the extent of such use is
solely to provide interactive on-demand services;
C.
An open video that complies with § 653 of the Communications Act of
1934, as amended; or
D.
Any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric
utility system.
E.
§ 99-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-2
99:53
COMMERCIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives services in
connection with a business, trade, profession or institution.
CONVERTER — An electric device which converts cable signals to a
frequency receivable by a television receiver.
COUNCIL — The governing body of the Borough of Greencastle.
FRANCHISE — An initial authorization, or renewal thereof, issued by
Borough, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit,
license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement, or otherwise, which
authorizes the construction or operation of a cable system.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT — A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter,
containing the specific provisions of the franchise granted, including
references, specifications, requirements and other related matters.
FRANCHISE FEE — Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by
Borough or other governmental entity on a grantee or cable subscriber, or
both, solely because of their status as such. The term "franchise fee" does
not include:
GOVERNING BODY — The governing body of the Borough of Greencastle.
GRANTEE — Any person receiving a franchise pursuant to this chapter
and its agents, employees, officers, designees or any lawful successor,
transferee or assignee.
GRANTOR or BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle, as represented
by the governing body or any delegate acting within the scope of its
jurisdiction.
GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES — Any and all cash, credits, property or other
consideration of any kind or nature received annually, directly or indirectly
by the franchisee, its affiliates or any person in which the franchisee has
a financial interest, or by any other entity that is a cable operator of
the system arising from, attributable to, or in any way derived from the
provisions by the franchisee of cable service in the Borough, including the
studios and other facilities associated therewith. Gross annual revenues
include, but are not limited to, monthly fees charged subscribers for any
Any tax, fee or assessment of general applicability (including any such
tax, fee or assessment imposed on both utilities and cable operators or
their services but not including a tax, fee or assessment which is unduly
discriminatory against cable operators or cable subscribers);
A.
Capital costs which are required by the franchise agreement to be
incurred by the cable operator for public, educational or governmental
access facilities;
B.
Requirements or charges incidental to the awarding or enforcing of
the franchise, including payments for bonds, security funds, letters of
credit, insurance, indemnification, penalties or liquidated damages; or
C.
D. Any fee imposed under Title 17 of the United States Code.
§ 99-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-2
99:54
basic, optional, premium, per-channel or per-program service; installation,
disconnection, reconnection and change-in-service fees; leased channel
fees; late fees and administrative fees; fees, payments or other
consideration received from programmers for carriage of programming on
the system; revenues from converter rentals or sales; studio and production
equipment rental; advertising revenues; barter other than revenues derived
from barter with any not for profit entity; revenues from program guides;
and revenues from home shopping and bank-at-home channels. Gross
annual revenues shall not include any taxes on services furnished by the
franchisee which are imposed directly on any subscriber or user by the
state, Borough or other governmental unit which are collected by the
franchisee on behalf of said governmental unit, nor shall it include revenue
derived from the sale or rental of real property interests of franchisee.
ILLEGAL CONNECTION — Any connection to the system or use of the cable
services that is not authorized by the grantee or that is otherwise prohibited
by law.
INITIAL SERVICE AREA — The area of the Borough which will receive cable
service initially, as set forth in any franchise agreement.
INSTALLATION — The connection of the system to subscribers' terminals
and the provision of cable service.
LEASED ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel designed for commercial lease.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where the
Council or other local governments or agencies are the designated
programmers.
LOCAL ORIGINATION CHANNEL — Any channel where grantee is the
programmer.
MONITORING — Observing a one-way communications signal, where the
observer is neither the subscriber nor the programmer, whether the signal
is observed by visual or electronic means for any purpose whatsoever.
NORMAL BUSINESS HOURS — Those hours during which most similar
businesses in the community are open to serve customers. In all cases,
"normal business hours" must include some evening hours at least one
night per week and/or some weekend hours or as otherwise specified in the
franchise agreement.
NORMAL OPERATING CONDITIONS — Those services which are within
the control of grantee. Those conditions which are not within the control of
grantee include, but are not limited to, natural disasters, civil disturbances,
power outages, telephone network outages and severe or unusual weather
conditions and significant legislative or regulatory requirements. Those
conditions which are ordinarily within the control of grantee include, but
are not limited to, special promotions, pay-per-view events, regular peak or
seasonal demand periods and maintenance or upgrade of the system.
ORDINANCE — The ordinances of the Borough of Greencastle.
§ 99-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-2
99:55
PAY TELEVISION — The delivery to subscribers, over the cable
communications system, of television signals for a fee or charge to
subscribers over and above the charge for basic subscriber service, on a
per-program, per-channel or other subscription basis.
PERSON — Any natural person or any association, firm, individual,
partnership, joint stock company, joint venture, trust, corporation, limited
liability company or other legally recognized entity, private or public,
whether for-profit or not-for-profit.
PRIVATE CHANNEL — Any channel which is available only to subscribers
who possess equipment or receive signals of the appropriate frequency.
PROGRAMMER — Any person, firm, corporation, institution or entity who
or which produces or otherwise provides program material for distribution
to subscribers by means of the cable communications system.
PUBLIC ACCESS CHANNEL — Any channel where any member of the
general public may be a programmer.
PUBLIC, EDUCATIONAL OR GOVERNMENT ACCESS FACILITIES or PEG
ACCESS FACILITIES —
RESIDENTIAL SUBSCRIBER — A subscriber who receives service in an
individual dwelling unit where the service is not in connection with a
business, trade, profession or institution.
SECTION — Any section, subsection or provision of this chapter.
SECURE CHANNEL — Any channel so arranged electronically as to be
available only to subscribers who possess special decoding equipment in
order to receive a usable signal.
SERVICE AREA or FRANCHISE AREA — The entire geographic area within
the Borough as it is not constituted or may in the future be constituted,
unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.
SERVICE INTERRUPTION — The loss of picture or sound on one or more
cable channels affecting at least 10% of the subscribers on the system.
STATE — The State of Pennsylvania.
STREET — Each of the following which have been dedicated to the public or
are hereafter dedicated to the public and maintained under public authority
or by others and located within Borough limits: streets, roadways,
highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, rights-of-way and
similar public property and areas that the Borough shall permit to be
included within the definition of "street" from time to time.
SUBSCRIBER — Any person who or which lawfully elects to subscribe
to, for any purpose, a cable service provided by grantee by means of or
in connection with the cable system and who pays the charges therefor,
Channel capacity designated for public, educational or governmental
use; and
A.
B. Facilities and equipment for the use of such channel capacity.
§ 99-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-2
99:56
except such persons or entities authorized to receive a cable service without
charge as described in the franchise agreement.
SUBSCRIBER SERVICE DROP — Each extension wiring from grantee's
distribution lines to a subscriber's point of use.
§ 99-3. Franchise to install and operate.
A franchise granted by Borough under the provisions of this chapter shall
encompass the following purposes:
§ 99-4. Franchise required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct, install or operate a cable
television system in the Borough within any street without a properly
granted franchise awarded pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 99-5. Term of franchise.
§ 99-6. Franchise territory.
Any franchise shall be valid within all the territorial limits of the Borough,
and within any area added to the Borough during the term of the franchise,
unless otherwise specified in the franchise agreement.
§ 99-7. Federal, state and Borough jurisdiction.
A. To engage in the business of providing cable service and such other
services as may be permitted by the franchise agreement.
B. To erect, install, construct, repair, rebuild, reconstruct, replace,
maintain and retain cable lines, related electronic equipment,
supporting structures, appurtenances and other property in connection
with the operation of a cable system in, on, over, under, upon, along and
across streets or other public places within the designated service area.
C. To maintain and operate said franchise properties for the origination,
reception, transmission, amplification and distribution of television and
radio signals for the delivery of cable services and any other services
permitted by the franchise agreement.
D. To set forth the obligations of a grantee under the franchise agreement.
A. A franchise granted hereunder shall be for a term established in the
franchise agreement, commencing on Borough's adoption of an
ordinance or resolution authorizing the franchise.
B. A franchise granted hereunder may be renewed upon application by
grantee pursuant to the provisions of applicable state and federal law
and of this chapter.
A. This chapter shall be construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state laws.
§ 99-2 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-7
99:57
§ 99-8. Franchise nontransferable.
B. In the event that the state or federal government discontinues
preemption in any area of cable communications over which it currently
exercises jurisdiction in such manner as to expand rather than limit
municipal regulatory authority, grantor may, if it so elects, adopt rules
and regulations in these areas to the extent permitted by law.
C. This chapter shall apply to all franchises granted or renewed after the
effective date of this chapter. It shall further apply to the extent
permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing franchises
granted prior to the effective date of this chapter.
D. Grantee's rights are subject to the police powers of the Borough to
adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and
welfare of the public. The grantee shall comply with all applicable
general laws and ordinances enacted by the Borough pursuant to that
power. However, the grantor acknowledges that the provisions of the
franchise agreement constitute a valid and enforceable contract
between the parties. Grantor will undertake no unilateral action that
materially changes the franchise agreement; subject, however, to the
police powers of the grantor to take action necessary to the health,
safety and welfare of the public.
E. The grantee shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of
the provisions of this chapter or any franchise granted pursuant to this
chapter by reason of any failure of the Borough to enforce prompt
compliance.
F. This chapter and any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall
be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of
the State of Pennsylvania.
A. The grantee shall not sell, transfer, lease, assign, sublet or dispose of, in
whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary
sale, consolidation or otherwise, the franchise and/or cable system or
any of the rights or privileges granted by the franchise, without the
prior consent of the Council, which consent shall not be unreasonably
denied or delayed and shall be denied only upon a good-faith finding by
the Borough that the proposed transferee lacks the legal, technical or
financial qualifications to perform its obligations under the franchise
agreement. Any attempt to sell, transfer, lease, assign or otherwise
dispose of the franchise and/or cable system without the consent of the
Council shall be null and void. This provision shall not apply to sales of
property or equipment in the normal course of business. No consent
from the Borough shall be required for a transfer in trust, mortgage or
from instrument of hypothecation, in whole or in part, to secure an
indebtedness, or for a pro forma transfer to a corporation, partnership
or other entity controlling, controlled by or under common control with
the grantee.
§ 99-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-8
99:58
B. The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other
transfer of the franchise and/or cable system requiring compliance with
this section: the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of
the grantee's assets; the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital
stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in the
grantee by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members
or other equity owners so as to create a new controlling interest in the
grantee; the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership,
membership or other equity interest by the grantee so as to create a
new controlling interest in the grantee; and the entry by the grantee
into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of the
grantee and/or the system. The term "controlling interest" as used
herein means majority equity ownership of the grantee.
C. In the case of any sale or transfer of ownership of any franchise and/or
cable system, the Borough shall have 120 days to act upon any request
for approval of such sale or transfer that contains or is accompanied by
such information as is required in accordance with other reasonable
information as Borough, in its sole discretion, may request. If the
Borough fails to render a final decision on the request within 120 days
from receipt by the Borough of all required information, such request
shall be deemed granted unless the requesting party and the Borough
agree to an extension of time.
D. The grantee shall notify the grantor in writing of any foreclosure or any
other judicial sale of all or a substantial part of the franchise property of
the grantee or upon the termination of any lease or interest covering all
or a substantial part of said franchise property. Such notification shall
be considered by the grantor as notice that a change in control of
ownership of the franchise has taken place and the provisions under
this section governing the consent of the grantor to such change in
control of ownership shall apply.
E. For the purpose of determining whether it shall consent to such change,
transfer or acquisition of control, the grantor may inquire into the
qualifications of the prospective transferee or controlling party and the
grantee shall assist the grantor in any such inquiry. In seeking the
grantor's consent to any change of ownership or control, the grantee
shall have the responsibility of insuring that the transferee completes
an application in form and substance reasonably satisfactory to the
grantor, which application shall include the information required under
state and federal law as well as Subsection B(1) through (8) of § 99-12
of this chapter. An application, acceptable to the Borough, shall be
submitted to the grantor not less than 60 days prior to the date of
transfer. The transferee shall be required to establish that it possesses
the legal, technical and financial qualifications to operate and maintain
the system and comply with all franchise requirements for the
remainder of the term of the franchise. If, after considering the legal,
financial, character and technical qualities of the applicant and
determining that they are satisfactory, the Borough finds that such
§ 99-8 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-8
99:59
§ 99-9. Geographical coverage.
§ 99-10. Nonexclusive franchise.
Any franchise granted shall be nonexclusive. The Borough specifically
reserves the right to grant, at any time, such additional franchises for a
cable television system or any component thereof, as if deems appropriate,
subject to applicable state and federal law; provided, however, that no
franchise shall be granted on terms materially less burdensome or more
favorable than any other franchise granted hereunder.
§ 99-11. Multiple franchises.
transfer is acceptable, the Borough shall transfer and assign the rights
and obligations of such franchise. The consent of the Borough to such
transfer shall not be unreasonably denied.
F. Any financial institution having a pledge of the grantee or its assets for
the advancement of money for the construction and/or operation of the
franchise shall have the right to notify the Borough that it or its
designee satisfactory to the Borough shall take control of and operate
the cable television system, in the event of a grantee default in its
financial obligations. Further, said financial institution shall also submit
a plan for such operation within 30 days of assuming such control that
will insure continued service and compliance with all franchise
requirements during the term the financial institution exercises control
over the system. The financial institution shall not exercise control over
the system for a period exceeding one year unless extended by the
Borough in its discretion and during said period of time it shall have the
right to petition the Borough to transfer the franchise to another
grantee.
A. The grantee shall design, construct and maintain the cable television
system to have the capability to pass every dwelling unit in the service
area, subject to any line extension requirements of the franchise
agreement.
B. After service has been established by activating trunk and/or
distribution cables for any part of the service area, the grantee shall
provide cable service to any requesting subscriber within that service
area within 30 days from the request; provided, that the grantee is able
to secure all rights-of-way necessary to extend service to such
subscriber within such thirty-day period on reasonable terms and
conditions where economically feasible. Economic feasibility shall be
defined as installation costs within 150% of the average cost of service
installation, as demonstrated by the cable operator.
A. The grantor may grant one or more franchises for a service area. The
grantor may, in its sole discretion, limit the number of franchises
granted, based upon, but not necessarily limited to, the requirements of
applicable law and specific local considerations, such as:
§ 99-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-11
99:60
§ 99-12. Initial franchise applications.
(1) The capacity of the public rights-of-way to accommodate multiple
coaxial cables in addition to the cables, conduits and pipes of the
utility systems, such as electrical power, telephone, gas and
sewerage.
(2) The impact on the community of having multiple franchises.
(3) The disadvantages that may result from cable system competition,
such as the requirement for multiple pedestals on residents'
property and the disruption arising from numerous excavations of
the rights-of-way.
(4) The financial capabilities of the applicant and its guaranteed
commitment to make necessary investment to erect, maintain and
operate the proposed system for the duration of the franchise term.
B. Each grantee awarded a franchise to serve the entire Borough shall
offer service to all residences in the Borough, in accordance with
construction and service schedules mutually agreed upon between the
grantor and the grantee and consistent with applicable law.
C. Developers of new residential housing with underground utilities shall
provide conduit to accommodate cables for at least two cable systems
in accordance with the provisions of § 99-18.
D. The grantor may require that any new grantee be responsible for its
own underground trenching and the costs associated therewith, if, in
the grantor's opinion, the rights-of-way in any particular area cannot
feasibly and reasonably accommodate additional cables.
E. Any additional franchise granted by the Borough to provide cable
service in a part of the Borough in which a franchise has already been
granted and where an existing grantee is providing service shall
require the new grantee to provide service throughout its service area
within a reasonable time and in a sequence which does not discriminate
against lower-income residents.
A. Any person desiring an initial franchise for a cable television system
shall file an application with the Borough. A reasonable nonrefundable
application fee established by the Borough shall accompany the
application or renewal application. Such application fee shall not be
deemed to be "franchise fees" within the meaning of § 622 of the Cable
Act (47 U.S.C. § 542) and such payments shall not be deemed to be:
(1) "Payments in kind" or any involuntary payments chargeable against
the compensation to be paid to the Borough by the grantee
pursuant to § 99-18 hereof and applicable provisions of a franchise
agreement; or
§ 99-11 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-12
99:61
§ 99-13. Consideration of initial applications.
§ 99-14. Franchise renewal.
Franchise renewals shall be in accordance with applicable law including,
but not necessarily limited to, the Cable Communication Act, as amended.
The grantor and grantee, by mutual consent, may enter into renewal
negotiations at any time during the term of the franchise.
(2) Part of the compensation to be paid to Borough by grantee
pursuant to § 99-18 hereof and applicable provisions of a franchise
agreement.
B. An application for an initial franchise for a cable television system shall
contain, where applicable:
(1) A statement as to the proposed franchise and service area.
(2) Resume of prior history of the applicant, including the legal,
technical and financial expertise of the applicant in the cable
television field.
(3) List of the partners, general and limited, of the applicant, if a
partnership, or the percentage of stock owned or controlled by
each shareholder, if a corporation.
(4) List of officers, directors and managing employees of the applicant,
together with a description of the background of each such person.
(5) The names and addresses of any parent or subsidiary of applicant
or any other business entity owning or controlling applicant in
whole or in part, or owned or controlled in whole or in part by the
applicant.
(6) A current financial statement of the applicant verified by a CPA
audit or otherwise certified to be true, complete and correct to the
reasonable satisfaction of the Borough.
(7) Proposed construction and service schedule.
(8) Any additional information that the Borough deems applicable.
A. Upon receipt of any application for an initial franchise, the Manager
shall prepare a report and make his recommendations respecting
application to the Borough Council.
B. A public hearing shall be set prior to any initial franchise grant, at a
time and date approved by the Council. Within 30 days after the close of
the hearing, the Council shall make a decision based upon the evidence
received at the hearing as to whether or not the franchise(s) should be
granted, and, if granted, subject to what conditions. The Council may
grant one or more initial franchises, or may decline to grant any
franchise.
§ 99-12 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-15
99:62
§ 99-15. Consumer protection and service standards.
Except as otherwise provided in the franchise agreement, the grantee shall
maintain an office or offices to provide the necessary facilities, equipment
and personnel to comply with the following consumer protection standards
under normal operating conditions excluding periods of system outage and
monthly billing cycles:
A. Cable system office hours and telephone availability.
(1) The grantee will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone
access line which will be available to its subscribers 24 hours a day,
seven days a week.
(a) Trained grantee representatives will be available to respond to
customer inquiries during normal business hours.
(b) After normal business hours, the access line may be answered
by a service or an automated response system, including an
answering machine. Inquiries received after normal business
hours must be responded to by a trained grantee
representative on the next business day.
(2) Under normal operating conditions, telephone answer time by a
customer representative, including wait time, shall not exceed 30
seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be
transferred, transfer time shall not exceed 30 seconds. These
standards shall be met no less than 90% of the time under normal
operating conditions, measured on a quarterly basis.
(3) The grantee will not be required to acquire equipment or perform
surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering
standards above unless a historical record of complaints indicates a
clear failure to comply.
(4) Under normal operating conditions, the customer will receive a
busy signal less than 3% of the time.
(5) Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open at
least during normal business hours and will be conveniently
located.
B. Installations, outages and service calls. Under normal operating
conditions, each of the following four standards will be met no less than
95% of the time measured on a quarterly basis:
(1) Standard installations will be performed within seven business
days after an order has been placed. "Standard" installations are
those that are located up to 125 feet from the existing distribution
system.
(2) Excluding conditions beyond the control of the grantee, the grantee
will begin working on "service interruptions" promptly and in no
§ 99-15 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-15
99:63
event later than 24 hours after the interruption becomes known.
Grantee must begin actions to correct other service problems the
next business day after notification of the service problem.
(3) At the subscriber's request, the "appointment window" alternatives
for installations, service calls and other installation activities will
be at a specific time or within a maximum four-hour time block
during normal business hours. (The grantee may schedule service
calls and other installation activities outside of normal business
hours for the express convenience of the customer.)
(4) The grantee may not cancel an appointment with a customer after
the close of business on the business day prior to the scheduled
appointment.
(5) If the grantee's representative is running late for an appointment
with a customer and will not be able to keep the appointment as
scheduled, the customer will be contacted. The appointment will be
rescheduled, as necessary, at a time which is convenient for the
customer.
C. Communications between the grantee and cable subscribers.
(1) Notifications to subscribers.
(a) The grantee shall provide written information on each of the
following areas at the time of installation of service, at least
annually, to all subscribers, and at any time upon request:
[1] Products and services offered.
[2] Prices and options for programming services and
conditions of subscription to programming and other
services.
[3] Installation and service maintenance policies.
[4] Instructions on how to use the cable service.
[5] Channel positions programming carried on the system.
[6] Billing and complaint procedures, including the address
and telephone number of the Borough's cable office.
(b) Customers will be notified of any change in rates,
programming services or channel positions as soon as possible
through announcements on the cable system and in writing.
Notice must be given to subscribers a minimum of 30 days in
advance of such change if the change is within the control of
the grantee. In addition, the grantee shall notify subscribers 30
days in advance of any significant change in the other
information required by the preceding subsection. The grantor
§ 99-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-15
99:64
§ 99-16. Dissemination of information.
The grantee shall not disseminate information as to the names, addresses or
telephone numbers of subscribers or any subscriber information furnished
in connection with the request for service, except in conformity with § 361
of the Cable Act; subject, however, to the right of the Borough to audit the
records of the grantee to establish compliance with this chapter and with
any franchisee agreement.
§ 99-17. Rate regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to regulate rates for basic cable service
and any other services offered over the cable system, to the extent not
prohibited by federal or state law. The grantee shall be subject to the
rate regulation provisions provided for herein, and those of the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) at 47 CFR Part 76.900, Subpart N. The
may, in its sole discretion, waive this requirement on a case-bycase
basis.
(2) Billing.
(a) Bills will be clear, concise and understandable. Bills must be
fully itemized, with itemizations including, but not limited to,
basic and premium service charges and equipment charges.
Bills will also clearly delineate all activity during the billing
period, including optional charges, rebates and credits.
(b) In case of a billing dispute, the grantee must respond to a
written complaint from a subscriber within 30 days.
(c) Should the grantee choose, or be required, to print the
Borough's telephone number on the bills, the grantee shall
print the Borough's telephone number in such a manner that it
is clearly known to be that of the Borough and is not easily
confused with the grantee's telephone number. This is intended
to go by clarity for the grantee's customers and to attempt to
avoid numerous unnecessary phone calls for both the
customers and the Borough.
(3) Refunds. Refund checks will be issued promptly, but no later than
either:
(a) The customer's next billing cycle following resolution of the
request or 30 days, whichever is earlier; or
(b) The return of the equipment supplied by the grantee if service
is terminated.
(4) Credits. Credits for service will be issued no later than the
customer's next billing cycle following the determination that a
credit is warranted.
§ 99-15 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-17
99:65
Borough shall follow the rules relating to cable rate regulation promulgated
by the FCC at 47 CFR Part 76.900, Subpart N.
§ 99-18. Franchise fee.
§ 99-19. Design and construction requirements.
A. Following the issuance and acceptance of a franchise, the grantee shall
pay to the Borough a franchise fee in the amount set forth in the
franchise agreement.
B. The Borough, on an annual basis, shall be furnished a statement within
60 days of the close of the calendar year, certified by an officer of the
grantee or audited by a certified public accountant, reflecting the total
amounts of gross annual revenues and all payments and computations
for the previous calendar year. Upon 10 days' prior written notice, the
grantor shall have the right to conduct an independent audit of the
grantee's records, in accordance with generally accepted accounting
principles and if such audit indicates a franchise fee underpayment of
5% or more, the grantee shall assume all reasonable costs of such an
audit.
C. Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any payment by
the Borough shall be construed as a release or an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the Borough may have for further or additional
sums payable as a franchise fee under this chapter or any franchise
agreement or for the performance of any other obligation of the
grantee.
D. In the event that any franchise fee payment or recomputed amount is
not made on or before the dates specified in the franchise agreement,
the grantee shall pay as additional compensation an interest charge,
computed from such due date, at an annual rate equal to the prime
lending rate plus 1 1/2% during the period for which payment was due.
E. Franchise fee payments shall be made in accordance with the schedule
indicated in the franchise agreement.
A. The grantee shall not construct any cable system facilities until the
grantee has secured the necessary permits from the grantor or other
cognizant public agencies.
B. In those areas of the Borough where transmission or distribution
facilities of all the public utilities providing the telephone and electric
power service are underground, the grantee likewise shall construct,
operate and maintain its transmission and distribution facilities therein
underground.
C. In those areas of the Borough where the grantee's cables are located on
the aboveground transmission or distribution facilities of the public
utility providing telephone or electric power service and in the event
that the facilities of both such public utilities subsequently are placed
§ 99-17 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-19
99:66
underground, then the grantee likewise shall construct, operate and
maintain its transmission and distribution facilities underground, at the
grantee's cost. Certain of the grantee's equipment, such as pedestals,
amplifiers and power supplies, which normally are placed above
ground, may continue to remain in aboveground closures.
D. In new residential developments in which all the electric power and
telephone utilities are underground, the following procedure shall
apply with respect to access to and utilization of underground
easements:
(1) The developer shall be responsible for contacting and surveying all
franchised cable operators to ascertain which operators desire (or,
pursuant to the terms and provisions of this chapter and any
franchise agreement, may be required) to provide cable service to
that development. The developer may establish a reasonable
deadline to receive cable operator responses. The final
development map shall indicate the cable operators that have
agreed to serve the development.
(2) If one or two cable operators wish to provide service, they shall be
accommodated in the joint utilities trench on a nondiscriminatory
shared basis. If fewer than two operators indicate interest, the
developer shall provide conduit to accommodate two sets of cable
television cables and dedicate to the Borough any initially
unoccupied conduit. The developer shall be entitled to recover the
cost of such initially unoccupied conduit in the event that the
grantor subsequently leases or sells occupancy or use rights to any
grantee.
(3) The developer shall provide at least 10 working days' notice of the
date that utility trenches will be open to the cable operators that
have agreed to serve the development. When the trenches are
open, cable operators shall have two working days to begin the
installation of their cables and five working days after beginning
installation to complete installation.
(4) The final development map shall not be approved until the
developer submits evidence that:
(a) It has notified each grantee that underground utility trenches
are to open as of an estimated date, and that the grantee will
be allowed access to such trenches, including trenches from
proposed streets to individual homes or home sites, on
specified nondiscriminatory terms and conditions.
(b) It has received a written notification from each grantee that
the grantee intends to install its facilities during the open
trench period on the specified terms and conditions, or such
other terms and conditions as are mutually agreeable to the
developer and the grantee, or has received no reply from a
grantee within 10 days after its notification to such grantee, in
§ 99-19 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-19
99:67
§ 99-20. Technical standards.
which case the grantee will be deemed to have waived its
opportunity to install its facilities during the open trench
period.
(5) Sharing the joint utilities trench shall be subject to compliance with
state regulatory agency and utility standards. If such compliance is
not possible, the developer shall provide a separate trench for the
cable television cables, with the entire cost shared among the
participating cable operators. With the concurrence of the
developer, the affected utilities and the cable operators, alternative
installation procedures, such as the use of deeper trenches, may be
utilized, subject to applicable law.
E. Any cable operator wishing to serve an area where the trenches have
been closed shall be responsible for its own trenching and associated
costs and shall repair all property to the condition which existed prior
to such trenching.
F. In the event that more than one franchise is awarded, the Borough
reserves the right to limit the number of drop cables and/or pedestals
per residence, or to require that the drop cable(s) and/or pedestal(s) be
utilized only by the cable operator selected by the resident to provide
service.
A. The grantee shall construct, install, operate and maintain its system in
a manner consistent with all applicable laws, ordinances, construction
standards, governmental requirements, Federal Communications
Commission technical standards and any standards set forth in its
franchise agreement. In addition, the grantee shall provide to the
Borough, upon request, a written report of the results of the grantee's
periodic proof of performance tests conducted pursuant to Federal
Communications Commission standards and guidelines.
B. Repeated and verified failure to maintain specified technical standards
shall constitute a material franchise violation.
C. All construction practices shall be in accordance with all applicable
sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as
amended, as well as all other applicable local, state and federal laws
and regulations.
D. All installation of electronic equipment shall be in accordance with the
provisions of the National Electrical and Safety Code and National
Electrical Code, as amended, and as may from time to time be
amended.
E. Antennae and their supporting structures (towers) shall be painted,
lighted, erected and maintained in accordance with all applicable rules
and regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration and all other
applicable local, state and federal laws and regulations.
§ 99-19 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-20
99:68
§ 99-21. Trimming of trees.
The grantee shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all
applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon
and hanging over streets, alleys, sidewalks and public places of the Borough
so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with
the wires and cables of the grantee. Borough representatives shall have
authority to supervise and approve all trimming of trees conducted by the
grantee. No trimming shall be done without first obtaining an annual permit
from the Borough of Greencastle Shade Tree Commission, except minor
trimming of trees that is performed in accordance with the specifications of
the Shade Tree Commission and that does not result in a substantial change
in appearance of the trees.
§ 99-22. Use of grantee facilities.
The Borough shall have the right to install and maintain, free of charge,
upon the poles and within the underground pipes and conduits of the
grantee, any wires and fixtures desired by the Borough for the use of the
Borough and any other public institutions or not-for-profit entities in the
Borough, other than for a competitive cable system, to the extent that
such installation and maintenance does not interfere with operations of the
grantee.
§ 99-23. Use of channels.
Cablecasting shall be offered pursuant to the Communications Act of 1934,
as amended. Programming decisions will be at the sole discretion of the
grantee; however, all local commercial and public broadcast services, as
directed by the Federal Communications Commission, will be provided, as
well as such governmental and educational access channels agreed to in any
agreement established under this chapter. All notices of channel changes,
program changes and rate changes will be provided to the Borough at least
F. All of the grantee's plant and equipment, including, but not limited to,
the antenna site, headend and distribution system, towers, house
connections, structures, poles, wire, coaxial cable, fixtures and
appurtenances, shall be installed, located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, replaced, removed, repaired, maintained and operated
in accordance with good engineering practices, performed by
experienced maintenance and construction personnel so as not to
endanger or interfere with improvements the Borough may deem
appropriate to make or to interfere in any manner with the rights of any
property owner, or to unnecessarily hinder or obstruct pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
G. The grantee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and
maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing
failures and accidents which are likely to cause damage, injury or
nuisance to the public.
§ 99-20 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-23
99:69
30 days prior to their implementation, or as otherwise directed by federal
rules and regulations.
§ 99-24. Defense and indemnification.
§ 99-25. Insurance.
The grantee shall provide insurance as specified in the franchise
agreement.
§ 99-26. Records required and grantor's right to inspect.
A. The grantee shall indemnify, hold harmless, release and defend the
Borough, its officers, boards, commissions, agents and employees as
provided in the franchise agreement.
B. The Borough shall promptly notify the grantee of any claims subject to
indemnification by the grantee and shall cooperate with all reasonable
requests by the grantee for information, documents, testimony or other
assistance appropriate to a resolution of such claims. The grantee shall
have full responsibility for and control of any action or undertaking
directed at the resolution of such claims.
A. The grantee shall at all times maintain:
(1) A full and complete set of plans, records and "as-built" maps
showing the location of the cable television system installed or in
use in the Borough, exclusive of subscriber service drops and
equipment provided in subscribers' homes.
(2) If requested by the grantor, a summary of service calls, identifying
the number, general nature and disposition of such calls, on a
monthly basis. A summary of such service calls shall be submitted
to the Borough within 30 days following its request in a form
reasonably acceptable to the Borough.
B. Upon 48 hours' written notice, and during normal business hours, the
grantee shall permit examination by any duly authorized representative
of the Borough, of all franchise property and facilities, together with
any appurtenant property and facilities of the grantee situated within or
without the Borough, and all records relating to the franchise;
provided, they are necessary to enable the Borough to carry out its
regulatory responsibilities under local, state and federal law, this
chapter and the franchise agreement. Such records include all books,
records, maps, plans, financial statements, service complaint logs,
performance test results, records of request for service and other like
materials of the grantee. The grantee shall have the right to be present
at any such examination.
C. If any of the records described in the previous subsection are
proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by state, federal or
local law, upon proper request by the grantee, such information
§ 99-23 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-26
99:70
§ 99-27. Annual reports.
obtained during such an inspection shall be treated as confidential,
making it available only to those persons who must have access to
perform their duties on behalf of the Borough including, but not limited
to, the Division of Finance, the Law Department and Council members.
To the extent any federal requirement for privacy applies to the
information to be submitted, said law shall control.
D. Copies of all petitions, applications, communications and reports
submitted by the grantee or on behalf of or relating to the grantee to
the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and Exchange
Commission, or any other federal or state regulatory commission or
agency having jurisdiction with respect to any matters affecting the
cable system authorized pursuant to this chapter and any franchise
shall be made available to the Borough upon request. Copies of
responses from the regulatory agencies to the grantee shall likewise be
furnished to the Borough upon request.
E. All reports required by the Cable Act under this chapter, except those
required by law to be kept confidential, shall be available for public
inspection in the grantee's offices during normal business hours.
A. The grantee shall submit a written end-of-the-year report to the grantor
with respect to the preceding calendar year containing the following
information:
(1) A summary of the previous year's (or in the case of the initial
reporting year, the initial year's) activities in development of the
cable system, including but not limited to services begun or
discontinued during the reporting year.
(2) A list of the grantee's officers, members of its board of directors
and other principals of the grantee.
(3) A list of stockholders or other equity investors holding 5% or more
of the voting interest in the grantee.
(4) Information as to the number of subscribers and the number of
basic and pay service subscribers.
(5) The Borough, including its agents and representatives, shall have
the authority, during normal business hours, to arrange for and
conduct an inspection of annual reports required pursuant to this
chapter or a franchise agreement. The Borough shall give the
grantee 24 hours' written notice of the inspection request. If the
requested information is proprietary in nature or must be kept
confidential by state, federal or local law, upon proper request by
the grantee, such information obtained during such an inspection
shall be treated as confidential, making it available only to those
persons who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of
the Borough including, but not limited to, the Division of Finance,
§ 99-26 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-27
99:71
§ 99-28. Franchise violation.
If the grantee fails to perform in a timely manner any material obligation
required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder, following notice
from the Borough and an opportunity to cure such nonperformance, the
grantor may act to remedy such violation in accordance with the following
procedures:
§ 99-29. Force majeure; grantee's inability to perform.
In the event the grantee's performance of any of the terms, conditions
or obligations required by this chapter or a franchise granted hereunder
is prevented by a cause or event not within the grantee's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions
shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes
or events not within the control of the grantee shall include, without
the Law Department and Council members. To the extent any
federal requirement for privacy applies to the information to be
submitted, said law shall control.
B. All reports and records required under this chapter shall be furnished
at the sole expense of the grantee, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter or the franchise agreement.
C. The grantee shall, throughout the life of the franchise, keep the
Borough fully informed with respect to the matters specified above, and
the failure to disclose such information during the life of the franchise.
A. The grantor shall notify the grantee of any alleged material violation in
writing by personal delivery or registered or certified mail, and demand
correction within a reasonable time, which shall not be less than 10
days in the case of the failure of the grantee to pay any sum or other
amount due the Borough under this chapter or the grantee's franchise
and 30 days in all other cases.
B. If the grantee fails either to correct the violation within the time
prescribed or to commence correction of the violation within the time
prescribed and thereafter diligently pursue correction of such violation,
the Borough shall then give written notice of not less than 14 days of a
public hearing to be held before the Council. Said notice shall specify
the violations alleged to have occurred.
C. At the public hearing, the Council shall hear and consider relevant
evidence and thereafter render findings and its decision. In the event
the Council finds that a material violation exists and that the grantee
has not corrected the same in a satisfactory manner or has not
diligently commenced correction of such violation after notice thereof
from the grantor and is not diligently proceeding to fully remedy such
violation, the Council may revoke the franchise or impose any other
penalty permitted by the franchise committee.
§ 99-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-29
99:72
limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
restraints imposed by order of a governmental agency or court, failure or
loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies and natural disasters
such as floods, earthquakes, landslides and fires.
§ 99-30. Abandonment or removal of franchise property.
A. In the event that the use of any property of the grantee within the
franchise area or a portion thereof is discontinued for a continuous
period of 12 months, the grantee shall be deemed to have abandoned
that franchise property.
B. The grantor, upon such terms as the grantor may impose, may give the
grantee permission to abandon, without removing, any system facility
or equipment laid, directly constructed, operated or maintained under
the franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise
provided in this chapter, the grantee shall remove all abandoned
aboveground facilities and equipment upon receipt of written notice
from the grantor and shall restore any affected street to its former state
at the time such facilities and equipment were installed so as not to
impair its usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment,
the grantee shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be
made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good
condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially
interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires,
poles or attachments. The grantor shall have the right to inspect and
approve the condition of the public ways, public places, cables, wires,
attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability,
indemnity and insurance provisions of this chapter and any security
fund provided in the franchise shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full compliance by the grantee
with the terms and conditions of this section.
C. Upon abandonment of any franchise property in place, the grantee, if
required by the Borough, shall submit to the grantor an instrument,
satisfactory in form to the Borough, transferring to the Borough the
ownership of the franchise property abandoned.
D. At the expiration of the term for which the franchise is granted, or upon
its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for herein, in any such
case without renewal, extension or transfer, the Borough shall have the
right to require the grantee to remove, at its own expense, all
aboveground portions of the cable television system from all streets and
public ways within the Borough within a reasonable period of time,
which shall not be less than 180 days.
E. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this chapter, the
grantee may abandon any underground franchise property in place so
long as it does not materially interfere with the use of the street or
public rights-of-way in which such property is located or with the use
thereof by any public utility or other cable grantee.
§ 99-29 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-31
99:73
§ 99-31. Extended operation and continuity of services.
Upon expiration or revocation of the franchise, the Borough shall have
discretion to permit and/or require the grantee to continue to operate the
cable television system for an extended period of time not to exceed six
months from the date of such expiration or revocation. The grantee shall
continue to operate the system under the terms and conditions of this
chapter and the franchise and to provide the regular subscriber service and
any and all of the services that may be provided at that time.
§ 99-32. Receivership and foreclosure.
§ 99-33. Rights reserved to grantor.
A. A franchise granted hereunder shall, at the option of the grantor, cease
and terminate 120 days after appointment of a receiver or receivers, or
trustee or trustees, to take over and conduct the business of the
grantee, whether in a receivership, reorganization, bankruptcy or other
action or proceeding, unless such receivership or trusteeship shall have
been vacated prior to the expiration of said 120 days, or unless:
(1) Such receivers or trustees shall have, within 120 days after their
election or appointment, fully complied with all the terms and
provisions of this chapter and the franchise granted pursuant
hereto, and the receivership or trustees within said 120 days shall
have remedied all the faults under the franchise or provided a plan
for the remedy of such faults which is satisfactory to the Borough;
and
(2) Such receivers or trustees shall, within said 120 days, execute an
agreement duly approved by the court having jurisdiction in the
premises, whereby such receivers or trustees assume and agree to
be bound by each and every term, provision and limitation of the
franchise granted.
B. In case of a foreclosure or other judicial sale of the franchise property,
or any material part thereof, the grantor may serve notice of
termination upon the grantee and the successful bidder at such sale, in
which the event the franchise granted and all rights and privileges of
the grantee hereunder shall cease and terminate 30 days after service
of such notice, unless:
(1) The grantor shall have approved the transfer of the franchise, as
and in the manner that this chapter provides; and
(2) Such successful bidder shall have covenanted and agreed with the
grantor to assume and be bound by all terms and conditions of the
franchise.
A. In addition to any rights specifically reserved to the Borough by this
chapter, the Borough reserves to itself every right and power which is
§ 99-31 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-33
99:74
§ 99-34. Rights of individuals.
required to be reserved by a provision of any ordinance or under the
franchise.
B. The Borough shall have the right to waive any provision of the
franchise, except those required by federal or state regulation, if the
Borough determines that it is in the public interest to do so, and that
the enforcement of such provision will impose an undue hardship on the
grantee or the subscribers. To be effective, such waiver shall be
evidenced by a statement in writing signed by a duly authorized
representative of the Borough. Waiver of any provision in one instance
shall not be deemed a waiver of such provision subsequent to such
instance nor be deemed a waiver of nay other provision of the franchise
unless the statement so recites.
A. The grantee shall not deny service, deny access or otherwise
discriminate against subscribers, channel users or general citizens on
the basis of race, color, religion, national origin, age or gender. The
grantee shall comply at all times with all other applicable federal, state
and local laws and regulations relating to nondiscrimination.
B. The grantee shall adhere to the applicable equal employment
opportunity requirements of federal, state and local regulations, as now
written or as amended from time to time.
C. Neither the grantee nor any person, agency or entity shall, without the
subscriber's consent, tap or arrange for the tapping of any cable, line,
signal input device or subscriber outlet or receiver for any purpose
except routine maintenance of the system, detection of unauthorized
service, polling with audience participating or audience viewing
surveys to support advertising research regarding viewers where
individual viewing behavior cannot be identified.
D. In the conduct of providing its services or in pursuit of any collateral
commercial enterprise resulting therefrom, the grantee shall take
reasonable steps to prevent the invasion of a subscriber's or general
citizen's right of privacy or other personal rights through the use of the
system as such rights are delineated or defined by applicable law. The
grantee shall not, without lawful court order or other applicable valid
legal authority, utilize the system's interactive two-way equipment or
capability for unauthorized personal surveillance of any subscriber or
general citizen.
E. No cable line, wire amplifier, converter or other piece of equipment
owned by the grantee shall be installed by the grantee in the
subscriber's premises, other than in appropriate easements, without
first securing any required consent. If a subscriber requests service,
permission to install upon subscriber's property shall be presumed.
Where a property owner or his predecessor has granted an easement
including a public utility easement or a servitude to another and the
§ 99-33 CABLE TELEVISION § 99-34
99:75
§ 99-35. Conflict with other provisions.
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this chapter and a
franchise agreement entered into pursuant to it, the provisions of this
chapter shall control, except as may be specifically otherwise provided in
the franchise agreement.
§ 99-36. Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is held by any court or by any federal
or state agency of competent jurisdiction to be invalid as conflicting with
any federal or state law, rule or regulation now or hereafter in effect,
or is held by such court or agency to be modified in any way in order
to conform to the requirements of any such law, rule or regulation, such
provision shall be considered a separate, distinct and independent part of
this chapter, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability
of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law, rule or regulations
is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so
that the provision hereof which had been held invalid or modified is no
longer in conflict with such law, rule or regulation, said provision shall
thereupon return to full force and effect and shall thereafter be binding
on the grantor and the grantee; provided, that the grantor shall give the
grantee 30 days' written notice of such change before requiring compliance
with said provision or such longer period of time as may be reasonably
required for the grantee to comply with such provision.
Chapter 106
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Board of Appeals — See Ch. 11, Art. IV.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 91.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
servitude by its terms contemplates a use such as the grantee's
intended use, the grantee shall not be required to obtain the written
permission of the owner for the installation of cable television
equipment.
§ 99-34 GREENCASTLE CODE § 99-36
106:76
ARTICLE I
Administration and Enforcement
[Adopted 5-3-2004 by Ord. No. 2004-01]
§ 106-1. Election to administer and enforce.
Borough of Greencastle hereby elects to administer and enforce the
provisions of the Pennsylvania Construction Code, Act 45 of 1999, and
applicable regulations as promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry, as amended from time to time.
§ 106-2. Adoption of standards.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters
401-405, as well as those ancillary codes referenced in Department of Labor
and Industry regulations Section 403.21, as amended from time to time,
is hereby adopted and incorporated herein by reference as the municipal
building code of the Borough of Greencastle.
§ 106-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Borough of Greencastle
shall be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the
Borough Council from time to time by resolution:
§ 106-4. Board of Appeals.12
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough
Council in conformity with the requirements of the relevant provisions
of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set
forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken
A. By the designation of an employee of the Borough to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the Borough;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the Borough;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this code through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this code on behalf of the Borough;
or
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of the
code provisions for structures other than one-family or two-family
dwelling units and utility and miscellaneous use structures.
12.Editor's Note: See Ch. 11, Art. IV, Joint Municipal Board of Appeals.
§ 106-1 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 106-4
106:77
jointly with one or more other municipalities, the Board of Appeals shall be
established by joint action of the participating municipalities.
§ 106-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be subject to a fine of not less than $250 nor more
than $1,000, together with all costs. Each day a violation continues shall be
considered a separate violation.
§ 106-6. Coordination with other municipal ordinances.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances heretofore
adopted by the Borough are hereby repealed.
B. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of the Borough not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
C. When any building or construction activity is contemplated within the
Borough, application shall first be made to the Borough at the Borough
offices on a form to be provided by the Borough for the issuance of a
land use permit. Issuance by the Borough of a land use permit for the
specific project shall be a prerequisite to making application for a
construction permit. No construction permit application will be
accepted without a completed land use permit.
D. All construction permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for
one year, provided construction of the structure being permitted is
commenced within six months of the date of issuance of the
construction permit. If construction is not begun within the said sixmonth
period, the permit shall be void and application for a new permit
must be made prior to the commencement of any construction on the
structure. No extension of the six-month starting period shall be
granted. For reasonable cause shown, the one-year period for
completing the construction authorized by a construction permit may
be extended for an additional one-year period. However, not more than
two such extensions shall be granted.
E. All land use permits issued pursuant to this article shall be valid for 18
months, provided construction on the project is begun within nine
months of the date of issuance of the land use permit. If construction is
not begun within the said nine-month period, the permit shall be void
and application for a new permit must be made prior to the
commencement of any construction on the project. No extension of the
nine-month starting period shall be granted. For reasonable cause
shown, the eighteen-month period for completing the construction
authorized by a land use permit may be extended for an additional
eighteen-month period. However, not more than one such extension
shall be granted.
§ 106-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 106-6
106:78
§ 106-7. Fees.
Fees assessable by the Borough for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be established by the
Borough by resolution from time to time.
F. At the completion of any construction activity for which either a
construction permit or a land use permit is issued, the project owner or
agent of the project owner shall make application for a building
occupancy permit for the structure for which a construction permit has
been issued and application for land use occupancy permit for the
project for which a land use permit has been issued. No land use
occupancy permit shall be issued until a construction occupancy
permit, where required, has been issued. No use or occupancy of the
premises covered by the construction permit and the land use permit
shall occur until both required occupancy permits have been issued.
§ 106-6 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 106-7
106:79
Chapter 110
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
§ 110-1. Curfew established.
It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain within a public place and/or a
vehicle in close proximity to a public place in the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, between the hours of 10:30 p.m., prevailing
time, and 5:00 a.m., prevailing time, the following day, Sunday through
Thursday, and between the hours of 11:00 p.m., prevailing time, and 5:00
a.m., prevailing time, the following day on Friday and Saturday.
§ 110-2. Exceptions.
The following shall be exceptions to the prohibitions set forth in § 110-1,
supra:
§ 110-3. Definitions and word usage.
A. A minor accompanied by a parent, guardian or other adult responsible
for the temporary care and custody of such minor.
B. A minor possessing a written statement, currently dated and signed by
a parent or guardian, specifying the time, place, purpose and necessity
of the minor being in a public place contrary to the prohibitions set
forth in § 110-1, supra.
C. A minor traveling to and/or from an authorized activity of a church,
school or municipality. Such minor shall possess a written certification
from a parent, guardian or other authorized adult person responsible
for the temporary care and custody of said minor.
D. A minor lawfully employed making it necessary to be in a public place
contrary to the prohibition set forth in § 110-1, supra. Such minor shall
possess, from his employer, parent or guardian, a written document
certifying such necessity.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
GUARDIAN — An adult person exercising parental control and
authority over a minor whether or not the same is exercised pursuant
to a court order.
MINOR — Any person under the age of 18 years.
§ 106-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 110-3
110:80
§ 110-4. Parent's responsibility.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other adult, as defined in
§ 110-3, supra, to allow a minor to violate the provisions of this chapter.
§ 110-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than
$50 nor more than $300 or, in lieu of payment of this fine and costs of
prosecution, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 120
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
§ 120-1. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 120-3 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire, or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough of Greencastle.
§ 120-2. Use of air rifles, bow and arrows, or similar devices
restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, BB gun, bow and arrow, or similar device, or
any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind
with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any
place within the Borough, except on a properly constructed target range
and except as provided in § 120-3 of this chapter.
OTHER ADULT — An adult person, other than a parent or guardian,
who is responsible for the care and custody of a minor.
PARENT — The natural mother or father of a minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park, playground,
public building or vacant lot in the Borough of Greencastle.
REMAIN — To stay behind, to tarry or to stay unnecessarily in, or in
close proximity to, a public place.
B. In this section, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 110-3 FIREARMS § 120-3
120:81
§ 120-3. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 120-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Every day that a violation
of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 122
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
A. Persons licensed to hunt in this Commonwealth while actually engaged
in hunting where permitted under the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania;
B. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
Commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or
property belonging to or under the control of such organization; and
C. Any law enforcement officers when used in the discharge of their
official duties.
§ 120-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 120-4
120:82
ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 122-1. Authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act of 1978,13 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Greencastle does hereby
order as follows.
13.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 122-1 FIREARMS § 122-1
120:83

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 122-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 122-3. Applicability.
§ 122-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 122-5. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Greencastle unless a land
use permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not
imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas, will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Greencastle or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
§ 122-2 FIREARMS § 122-5
120:85
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 122-5 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-5
120:86
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 122-6. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Greencastle is hereby appointed
to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred to herein as the
Floodplain Administrator.
§ 122-7. Land use permits required.
A land use permit shall be required before any construction or development
is undertaken within any area of the Borough of Greencastle in accordance
with § 205-35 of the Code of the Borough of Greencastle, as amended from
time to time.
§ 122-8. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a land use permit only after it
has been determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any land use permit, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application for the permit to determine if
all other necessary government permits required by state and federal
laws have been obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);14 the Pennsylvania
Dam Safety and Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);15 the
Pennsylvania Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);16 and the
U.S. Clean Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No land use permit
shall be issued until this determination has been made.
C. (Reserved)
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official may inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she may make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
14.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
15.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
16.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 122-6 FIREARMS § 122-8
120:87
§ 122-9. Application procedures and requirements.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator may
revoke the land use permit and report such fact to the Council of the
Borough of Greencastle for whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain all records associated with
the requirements of this chapter including, but not limited to,
permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
A. In addition to the requirements for the issuance of a land use permit,
applications for a land use permit within a floodplain shall contain:
(1) A listing of other permits required.
(2) A brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including
a breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the
building before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
(3) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
§ 122-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-9
120:88
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and/or
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed land use permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2006 IBC or the 2006 IRC or latest revisions thereof.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood elevation;
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations;
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within a special floodplain area (see § 122-18)
when combined with all other existing and anticipated
§ 122-9 FIREARMS § 122-9
120:89
§ 122-10. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any floodplain district to be considered for approval shall
be submitted by the Zoning Officer to the Franklin County Conservation
District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a land use permit.
The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be considered by
the Zoning Officer for possible incorporation into the proposed plan.
development, will not increase the base flood elevation more
than one foot at any point;
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood elevation. Such statement shall include a
description of the type and extent of flood proofing measures
which have been incorporated into the design of the structure
and/or the development;
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 122-23F, Storage, and § 122-24, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in § 122-23F and § 122-24 which
are intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 122-24
during a base flood.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development";
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
(5) Applications for land use permits within the Floodplain shall be
accompanied by a fee as set by resolution from time to time. The
applicant shall be responsible for any other costs in excess of the
initial permit fee which the Borough may incur in reviewing the
application. The Floodplain Administrator may require the
estimated cost of such additional expense be submitted to the
Borough prior to reviewing the application.
§ 122-9 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-11
120:90
§ 122-11. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 122-12. Changes.
After the issuance of a land use permit by the Floodplain Administrator,
no changes of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of
the plans, specifications or other documents submitted with the application
without the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator.
Requests for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by
the applicant to the Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 122-13. Placards.
In addition to the land use permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue
a placard which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
permit and the date of its issuance and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
§ 122-14. Start of construction.
§ 122-15. Enforcement.
A. Work on the proposed construction and/or development shall begin
within 180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within
12 months after the date of issuance of the land use permit or the
permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the
Floodplain Administrator. Construction and/or development shall be
considered to have started with the preparation of land, land clearing,
grading, filling, excavation of basement, footings, piers, or foundations,
erection of temporary forms, the installation of piling under proposed
subsurface footings, or the installation of sewer, gas and water pipes, or
electrical or other service lines from the street.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the permit,
which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the Floodplain
Administrator to approve such a request.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there
are reasonable grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any
provisions of this chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant
thereto, the Floodplain Administrator shall give notice of such alleged
violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
§ 122-11 FIREARMS § 122-15
120:91
§ 122-16. Appeals.
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Borough of Greencastle of not less than $50 nor more than $600 plus
costs of prosecution. Each day that a violation continues shall be a
separate violation. In addition to the above penalties, the Borough
reserves the right to commence an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter or any other action permitted by law or
equity. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or
noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or
noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations and noncompliance
within the time prescribed by the Floodplain Administrator or Court of
competent jurisdiction. Any development initiated or any structure or
building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered, or relocated in
noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by the Council of the
Borough of Greencastle to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter, may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with
Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of Greencastle.17
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision,
determination or action of the Floodplain Administrator.
17.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 122-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-16
120:92
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 122-17. Identification.
§ 122-18. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
§ 122-19. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
of the Borough of Greencastle where studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision. However,
prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after
the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify the
FEMA of the changes by submitting technical or scientific data.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of
Greencastle, classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the
Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance
Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated January 18, 2012, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof. Including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study.
B. The above referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Greencastle
incorporated herein by reference, and declared to be a part of this
chapter.
A. For the purposes of this chapter, the one-hundred-year flood elevation,
identified as an A Zone on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by
FEMA, shall be used as the basis for regulation. When available,
information from other Federal, State, and other acceptable sources
shall be used to determine the one-hundred-year elevation, as well as a
floodway area, if possible. When no other information is available, the
one-hundred-year elevation shall be determined by using a point on the
boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site in question.
B. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only
by professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
§ 122-17 FIREARMS § 122-20
120:93
§ 122-20. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with Article VIII of the Zoning Ordinance of
the Borough of Greencastle.18 The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
18.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
§ 122-20 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-20
120:94
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 122-21. General.
§ 122-22. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, the FEMA and Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Submit technical or scientific data to FEMA for a letter of map revision
(LOMR) within six (6) months of the completion of any new
construction, development, or other activity resulting in changes in the
BFE.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation in accordance with § 122-18 of this
chapter.
(2) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2006 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2006 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405,
as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
§ 122-21 FIREARMS § 122-22
120:95
§ 122-23. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
accordance with the WI or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the United States Army Corps of Engineers (June
1972, as amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent
standard. All plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall
be accompanied by a statement certified by a registered
professional engineer or architect which states that the proposed
design and methods of construction are in conformance with the
above referenced standards.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) There shall be a minimum of two openings having a net total
area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc. or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
§ 122-22 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-23
120:96
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet, unless
substantiated data, justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all State
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 122-24, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation and/or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
§ 122-23 FIREARMS § 122-23
120:97
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas- and oil-supply systems shall be designed
to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
§ 122-23 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-23
120:98
§ 122-24. Development which may endanger human life.
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401-405), as amended,
and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the above and
other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they
are more restrictive and/or supplement the requirements of this
chapter:
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2006 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2006 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Floodplain Management Act, and
the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises; or will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions. The following list of materials and substances are
considered dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
§ 122-23 FIREARMS § 122-24
120:99
§ 122-25. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in flood hazard areas
where base flood elevation data is not available, shall be supported by
hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 122-26. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
B. Where permitted within any floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall
be elevated or designed and constructed to remain completely dry up to
at least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation and designed to
prevent pollution from the structure or activity during the course of a
base flood elevation. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be
built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
(United States Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972, as amended March
1992), or with some other equivalent watertight standard.
A. Within any identified floodplain area, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
B. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation.
§ 122-24 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-26
120:100
§ 122-27. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A1-30, AH and AE must either:
§ 122-28. Special restrictions in floodplain areas.
The following uses shall be specifically prohibited if located partially or
entirely within any identified floodplain area (FW):
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
C. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the United States Department of Housing
and Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto shall apply and
34 Pa. Code Chapter 401-405.
D. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the most recent revisions thereto and 34
Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and applicable to units where
the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided or were
not established for the units(s) proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; or
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use.
A. Hospitals, public or private.
B. Nursing homes, public or private.
C. Jails.
D. New manufactured home parks and manufactured home subdivisions,
and substantial improvements to existing manufactured home parks
and manufactured home subdivisions.
§ 122-26 FIREARMS § 122-28
120:101

ARTICLE VI
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 122-29. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to structures which lawfully existed prior to the enactment
of this chapter. However, when an improvement is made to any existing
structure, the provisions of § 122-30 shall apply.
§ 122-30. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any floodway area that would cause any increase in the elevation
of the base flood elevation.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any special floodplain area that would, together with all other
existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one
foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement, of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
D. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2006 IBC and the 2006 IRC and any
revisions thereof.
§ 122-29 FIREARMS § 122-30
120:103

ARTICLE VII
(Reserved)
FIREARMS § 122-30
120:105

ARTICLE VIII
Definitions
§ 122-31. Incorporation of definitions.
The definitions set forth in Article XI of the Zoning Ordinance19 of the
Borough of Greencastle and Article II of the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance of the Borough of Greencastle20 are incorporated
herein by reference.
§ 122-32. Interpretation.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 122-33. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the one-hundred-year flood").
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-orgreater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
19.Editor's Note: See Ch. 205, Zoning.
20.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 122-31 FIREARMS § 122-33
120:107
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which
the Federal Emergency Management Agency or Federal Insurance
Administration has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and
the risk premium zones applicable to the community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
GRADE, HIGHEST ADJACENT — The highest natural elevation of the
ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 122-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-33
120:108
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant, partially enclosed
area, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental
storage, in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest
floor of a building, provided that such space is not designed and built
so that the structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design
requirements of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exit way requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the date of Borough of Greencastle's initial FIRM
September 10, 1976, and includes any subsequent improvements thereto.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 122-33 FIREARMS § 122-33
120:109
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) plus
a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet. NOTE: The one-and-one-half-foot
freeboard is an alternative to the basic NFIP elevation requirement.
Municipalities are free to establish freeboard requirements based on
existing conditions, historical data, etc.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or, AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the land use permit was
issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the
pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of
columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of
a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor does
it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first, alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage (or repetitive loss when a repetitive-loss
provision is used) regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term
does not, however, include either:
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
§ 122-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 122-33
120:110
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
§ 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5)21 is presumed to be
in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
21.Editor's Note: See the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, 32 P.S.
§ 679.101 et seq.
§ 122-33 FIREARMS § 122-33
120:111
Chapter 130
NOISE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 132. Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
§ 130-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DEVICE — Any mechanism which is intended to produce, or which does
produce as a result of its operation, noise when used or operated.
EMERGENCY — Any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical trauma or property damage.
EMERGENCY VEHICLE — A motor vehicle used in response to a public
calamity, or to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to
danger.
NOISE — Any sound which annoys or disturbs humans or which causes or
tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans.
PERSON — Any individual, association, partnership or corporation.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing a penalty, "person" includes the
individual members, partners, officers and managers thereof or any of them.
PROPERTY LINE — An imaginary line drawn through the points of contact
of adjoining lands, apartments, condominiums, townhouses and duplexes
owned, rented or leased by different persons; a demarcation or a line
of separate properties; and also, for any two or more buildings sharing
common grounds, the line drawn midway between any two such buildings.
All areas devoted to public rights-of-way shall be deemed to be across the
property line. For the purpose of this definition, the property line includes
all points on a plane formed by projecting the property line in a manner
deemed appropriate by the enforcing police officer.
PUBLIC RIGHT-OF-WAY — Any street, avenue, boulevard, highway,
sidewalk, alley or similar place which is open to public use as a matter of
right.
SOUND — A temporal and spatial oscillation in pressure or other physical
quantity, in a medium with internal forces that causes compression and
rarefaction of that medium, and which propagates at finite speed to distant
points. The description of sound may include any characteristics of such
sound, including duration, intensity and frequency.
§ 122-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 130-2
120:112
§ 130-2. Prohibited actions.
The following actions are specifically prohibited, unless otherwise exempted
in § 130-3:
A. Radios and other amplified music. Use or operation of, or permitting the
use or operation of, any radio, CD player, MP3 player, television set,
musical instrument, stereo (phonograph), or other machine or device
designated or intended to produce or reproduce sound in such a
manner which may reasonably be anticipated to disturb the peace,
quiet, comfort, health or safety of residential inhabitants or at any time
with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing by the
person or persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which
such machine or device is operating and who are voluntary listeners
thereto. The operating of any such machine or device in such manner as
to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the source shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
B. Operation of machinery or equipment. The use or operation of, or
permitting the use or operation of, between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and
7:00 a.m., all types of machinery or equipment, whether indoors or
outside, including but not limited to any machinery or equipment used
in industrial fabrication, manufacture, or assembly, any machinery or
equipment used in the construction, repair, alteration, demolition, or
excavation of property, any machinery or equipment used in the
improvement or maintenance of lawns or gardens, or any other type of
equipment which may reasonably be anticipated to disturb the peace,
quiet, comfort, health or safety of residential inhabitants at a level
which is audible beyond the property line of the property upon which
the machinery or equipment is being used or operated and is at such a
level which may reasonably be anticipated to disturb the peace, quiet,
comfort, health or safety of residential inhabitants. The use or
operation of any machinery or equipment in such manner as to be
plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the property line of the
property upon which the machinery or equipment is being used or
operated shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
C. Vehicles. The repairing, rebuilding, or testing, between the hours of
11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., of any vehicle, including but not limited to
cars, trucks, vans, sport utility vehicles, motorcycles, dirt bikes, allterrain
vehicles, snowmobiles, motorboats, or aircraft in such a manner
which may reasonably be anticipated to disturb the peace, quiet,
comfort, health or safety of residential inhabitants. The repairing,
rebuilding, or testing of any vehicle in such manner as to be plainly
audible at a distance of 50 feet from the property line of the property
upon which the vehicle is being repaired, rebuilt, or tested shall be
prima facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.
D. Animals and birds. Owning, possessing, harboring or controlling any
animal or bird which barks, bays, cries, squawks or makes any other
noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or
§ 130-2 FIREARMS § 130-2
120:113
§ 130-3. Exemptions.
The following uses and activities shall be exempt from the provisions of
§ 130-2:
more or makes such noise intermittently for one-half hour or more,
which may be reasonably anticipated to be a disturbance of any
reasonable person at any time of the day or night, regardless of
whether the animal or bird is situated in or upon private property;
provided, however, that at the time the animal or bird is making such
noise, no person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private
property in or upon which the animal or bird is situated or for any other
legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal or bird.
A. The use of safety signals, warning devices, emergency pressure valves,
or other devices designed to alert persons of an emergency.
B. Public festivals or celebrations, fairs or carnivals, lawful fireworks or
noisemakers, when permitted by the Borough or used in celebration of
an official holiday authorized by the Borough, commonwealth, or
federal government.
C. Concerts, band concerts, block parties, church carnivals or other
performances or similar activities publicly or privately sponsored and
presented in any public or private space, provided that such activities
do not occur between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. Routine and customary ringing of bells or chimes, including ice cream
trucks.
E. Athletic, recreational, or other such outdoor events, including
electronically amplified announcements, from an official Borough,
school district, private school, or other organized league recognized by
Greencastle Borough.
F. Municipal or utility services. The maintenance, repair, or replacement
of any municipal or utility installation in or about the public right-of-way
or any other customary municipal or utility function, including but not
limited to snow removal, refuse collection, tree trimming, and any other
type of municipal or utility function.
G. The use of sirens by any authorized emergency vehicle that is
responding to an emergency or acting in any other official capacity.
H. Emergency work. Work performed for the purpose of preventing or
repairing the physical trauma or property damage.
I. Any train or aircraft being operated pursuant to commonwealth or
federal regulations.
§ 130-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 130-4
120:114
§ 130-4. Administration.
The Greencastle Police Department shall have the authority to administer
the provisions of this chapter and to investigate complaints and prosecute
violations of this chapter.
§ 130-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 and no more than $300 and the cost of prosecution, and in
default of payment of such fines and costs, to imprisonment of not more
than 10 days. Each day a violation occurs or continues shall be considered
a separate offense.
Chapter 132
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 86. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
§ 132-1. Appointment of Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
For the purposes of this chapter, Borough Council shall appoint a Chief Code
Enforcement Officer for enforcement of the Property Maintenance Code.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer shall have the authority to appoint
one or more deputies, who shall have powers as delegated by the Chief
Code Enforcement Officer. Council may choose to contract with a code
inspection agency to assist the Chief Code Enforcement Officer in enforcing
the provisions of this Code.
§ 132-2. Duties of Chief Code Enforcement Officer.
The Chief Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and directed to
enforce the provisions of this Code and shall have the authority to render
interpretations of this Code and to adopt policies and procedures in order
to clarify the application of its provisions; provided, however that such
interpretations, policies and procedures shall be in compliance with the
intent and purpose of this Code.
§ 132-3. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not
inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the
future, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words
in the singular number include the plural number; and the word "shall" is
§ 130-4 FIREARMS § 132-3
120:115
always mandatory and not merely directory. Where terms are not defined
through the methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have
ordinarily accepted meanings such as the context implies.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Greencastle.
DEBRIS — Whole or partial pieces of stone, glass, wood or other material
resulting from destruction, demolition or remnants of building or
construction.
ENCLOSED — Having a wall or walls, window or windows and a door used
as access to the dwelling.
EXTERIOR PROPERTY — The open space on the premises and on adjoining
property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.
GARBAGE — The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
IMMINENT DANGER — A condition which could cause serious or lifethreatening
injury or death at any time.
INFESTATION — The presence within or contiguous to a structure or
premises of insects, rats, vermin, or other pests.
JUNK — Includes, but is not limited to, any discarded material or article,
including, but not limited to, unused or abandoned machinery, equipment,
or appliances and all forms of waste and refuse of any type of materials,
including scrap metal, glass, industrial wastes, and any other salvageable
material, unless for resale. Junk shall not include refuse or garbage kept in
a proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal.
NEGLECT — The lack of proper maintenance for a building or structure.
NONROADWORTHY VEHICLE — A vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reason including, but not limited to, being unlicensed,
wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of being moved
under its own power.
NUISANCE — The unreasonable, unwarrantable, or unlawful use by a
person of his own property, real or personal, or from his own improper,
indecent, or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction or injury
to the property of others or which causes or tends to cause substantial
diminution in the value of other property in the neighborhood in which
such premises are located, and producing such material annoyance,
inconvenience, discomfort or hurt that the law will presume a consequent
damage. A nuisance includes, but is not limited to, the keeping, depositing,
or scattering over the premises any of the following:
A. Dangerous buildings.
B. Nonroadworthy vehicle.
C. Violations of building code provisions.
§ 132-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 132-3
120:116
OWNER — Any person, agent, firm or corporation having a legal or
equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official records of
the state, county or Borough as holding title to the property; or otherwise
having control for the property, including the guardian of any estate of any
such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person
if ordered to take possession of real property by a court.
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
limited liability company, company or any other organization of any kind.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter,
glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.
TRASH — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
has been discarded.
WEEDS — All grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or
shrubs; provided however, this term shall not include cultivated flowers and
gardens.
§ 132-4. Nuisances declared illegal.
Weeds, brush, or grass in excess of 10 inches in height, which are not
edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose.
D.
The keeping, depositing, or scattering over the premises of any:
(1) Junk, trash, or debris.
Abandoned, discarded, or unused objects including, but not limited
to, furniture, appliances, barrels or other containers.
(2)
E.
The keeping or maintaining of furniture or appliances designed for
interior use on a porch, whether or not enclosed, or upon any other
attachment that faces a regularly traveled roadway.
F.
The use of a porch roof or other portion of a structure for a use for
which it was not designed.
G.
The storage of trash or garbage containers on a porch or balcony
facing the roadway or in the front yard, unless such trash or garbage
containers are placed there 24 hours immediately prior to the regularly
scheduled trash collection for that dwelling.
H.
Drainage of roofs and paved areas, yards and open courts, and other
open areas on premises or on adjacent premises discharged in a
manner which causes the erosion of soil, accumulation of stagnant
water, or damage to grass and landscaping.
I.
A. Nuisances, as defined in this chapter, are hereby declared to be illegal.
B. Nonroadworthy vehicle nuisances.
§ 132-3 FIREARMS § 132-4
120:117
(1) Nonroadworthy vehicle nuisances are hereby declared to be illegal.
(2) To determine whether a vehicle is nonroadworthy and a nuisance in
fact, the following conditions shall be considered individually and/
or collectively. It shall be considered whether the vehicle has:
(a) Proper license.
(b) Current registration.
(c) Current inspection.
(d) Broken windshields, mirrors or other glass with sharp edges.
(e) One or more flat or open tires or tubes that could permit
infestation.
(f) Missing doors, windows, hoods, trunks, or other body parts
which could facilitate the harboring of animals and/or other
infestation.
(g) Any body parts with sharp edges, including holes resulting
from rust.
(h) Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor
vehicle.
(i) Upholstery that is torn or open which could permit the
harboring of animals and/or other infestation.
(j) Broken headlamps or tail lamps with sharp edges.
(k) Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle
stored in an unsafe fashion or loose, in or on the vehicle.
(l) Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
(m) Broken vehicle frames suspended from the ground in an
unstable manner.
(n) Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank that could cause fire or
explosion.
(o) Exposed battery containing acid.
(p) Inoperable locking mechanism for doors or trunk or hood.
(q) Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and firewall.
(r) Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter of vehicle.
(s) Broken grill with protruding edges.
(t) Loose or damaged metal trim and clips; broken
communications equipment and antenna.
§ 132-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 132-4
120:118
(u) Suspended on unstable supports.
(v) Such other defects that may threaten the health, safety and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
C. Nuisance enforcement.
(1) Whenever a condition constituting a nuisance is permitted or
maintained upon premises situate in the Borough, the Borough
Manager, any officer of the Police Department or the Code
Enforcement Officer shall cause written notice to be served upon
the owner in one of the following ways:
(a) By personal delivery of the notice to the owner, tenant or lessee
of the premises.
(b) By leaving the notice with an adult upon the premises.
(c) By attaching a copy of the notice to the door at the entrance of
the premises in violation.
(d) By mailing, by certified mail, a notice to the last known address
of owner.
(2) Such notice shall set forth in what respects such conditions
constitute a nuisance and whether removal is necessary and
required by the Borough or whether the situation can be corrected
by repairs, alterations or by boarding or fencing or in some other
manner confining and limiting the nuisance.
(3) Such notice shall require the owner(s) to commence action, in
accordance with the terms thereof, when directed, and thereafter
to complete the work necessary to comply fully with the terms of
the notice as soon as is reasonable, but not later than of the date
directed in said notice, provided that the owner(s) has requested
such an extension within the original term for compliance.
(4) The expense of said compliance shall be at the expense of the
owner; provided, however, that if a violation requires immediate
correction, such notice shall require the owner to immediately
comply with the terms thereof.
(5) Notice required under Subsection C(1) shall be given one time
during a calendar year.
(6) Each day shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
(7) Whenever a condition allegedly constituting a nuisance shall
remain unabated following notice by the Borough in accordance
with Subsection C(1) through (3), then the abatement procedures
of Subsection D shall be instituted.
D. Nuisance abatement.
§ 132-4 FIREARMS § 132-4
120:119
§ 132-5. Unsafe structures and equipment.
(1) The owner, owners, tenants, lessees and/or occupants of any lot or
premises within the Borough upon which a nuisance is found to
exist and also the owner, owners and/or lessees of said persons
involved in such storage (all of whom are hereafter referred to as
"owners") shall jointly and severally abate said nuisance by the
prompt removal of the same.
(2) Additionally, whenever said owner(s) shall fail to abate said
nuisance, the Borough may take such action as is necessary to
abate said nuisance without liability for damage to the property.
The actual costs of abating said nuisance, including actual labor
charges, equipment rental charges, postage and a penalty of 10%
of the total of these costs, shall be collected from the owner of the
premises either by an action in assumpsit or by the filing of a
municipal claim or lien against the real property. Also, the Borough
may, by an action in equity, compel the owner to comply with this
chapter or take such other relief as a court may order.
A. An unsafe structure is one that is found to be dangerous to the life,
health, property or safety of the public or the occupants of the structure
because the structure contains unsafe equipment or is so damaged,
decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe or of such faulty construction
or unstable foundation that partial or complete collapse is possible. The
conditions which may cause a structure to be classified as an unsafe
structure include, but are not limited to, the following:
(1) The walking surface of any aisle, passageway, stairway or other
means of exit is so warped, warn, loose, torn or otherwise is unsafe
as not to provide a safe and adequate means of exit in case of fire or
panic.
(2) Any portion, section or appurtenance of the building or structure
has been damaged by fire, wind, flood or by any other cause to such
an extent that it is likely to partially or completely collapse, fail,
detach or dislodge.
(3) The building or structure, or any part thereof, because of
dilapidation, deterioration or decay; or faulty construction; or the
removal, instability or movement of any portion of ground
necessary for the purpose of such building; or the decay,
deterioration or inadequacy of its foundation; or any other cause, is
likely to partially or completely collapse.
(4) The building or structure has been so damaged by fire, wind, flood
or other causes or has become so dilapidated or deteriorated as to
become an attractive nuisance to children or a harbor of transients
or vagrants.
§ 132-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 132-5
120:120
§ 132-6. Closing and remediation of unsafe structures and
structures unfit for human occupancy.
(5) The building or structure used or intended to be used for dwelling
purposes is unsanitary, unfit for human habitation or in such
condition that it is likely to cause sickness or disease because of
inadequate maintenance, dilapidation, decay, damage, faulty
construction or arrangement, inadequate light, air or sanitation
facilities or other cause.
(6) The building or structure creates a fire hazard by virtue of its
obsolescence, dilapidated conditions, deterioration, damage or
other cause.
(7) Any portion of the building, including the foundation, slab or grade,
or structure remains on a site after the demolition or destruction of
the building or structure.
B. Unsafe equipment includes equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is
a hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of
the premises or structure.
C. A structure is unfit for human occupancy whenever the Code
Enforcement Officer finds that such structure is unsafe, or because of
the degree to which the structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance is
unsanitary, vermin- or rat-infested, contains filth and contamination, or
lacks ventilation, illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other
essential equipment required by this Code, or because the location of
the structure constitutes a hazard to the occupants of the structure or
the public.
A. When, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer, an unsafe
structure or a structure unfit for human occupancy exists, the Code
Enforcement Officer is authorized and empowered to order and require
the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The Code Enforcement
Officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such structure a
notice stating that the structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupation
and occupancy is prohibited by the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. The owner of a building, premises or equipment deemed unsafe by the
Code Enforcement Officer shall abate, or cause to be abated or
corrected, such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation,
demolition or other approved corrective actions. A building permit is
required for all such abatement or corrective actions.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer shall remove the notice stating that the
structure is unsafe or unfit for human occupancy after abatement or
correction of the unsafe condition. Any person who removes the notice
without the approval of the Code Enforcement Officer shall be subject
to penalties provided by this chapter.
§ 132-5 FIREARMS § 132-6
120:121
§ 132-7. Violations and penalties.
Chapter 138
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
D. Whenever the owner of a building, premises, or equipment deemed
unsafe by the Code Enforcement Officer fails to abate, or cause to be
abated or corrected, the unsafe conditions, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall order the necessary work to be done to abate or correct the
unsafe condition without liability for damage to the property. The actual
costs of abating or correcting the unsafe condition, including actual
labor charges, equipment rental charges, postage and a penalty of 10%
of the total of these costs, shall be collected from the owner of the
premises either by an action in assumpsit or by the filing of a municipal
claim or lien against the real property. Also, the Borough may, by an
action in equity, compel the owner to comply with this chapter or take
such other relief as a court may order.
A. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor
more than $300, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
fine and costs, shall be subject to imprisonment for a period not to
exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Any violation of the property maintenance provisions of this chapter is
declared to be a public nuisance and abateable as such.
§ 132-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 132-7
138:122
ARTICLE I
Throwing Objects in Streets
[Adopted 7-1-1985 as Ch. 6, Part 4, of the 1985 Code]
§ 138-1. Prohibited acts.
The throwing of snowballs, stones or any other missile upon or into any of
the public streets, alleys, or sidewalks in the Borough is hereby prohibited.
§ 138-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300, and/or
to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
§ 138-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 138-2
138:123

ARTICLE II
Cruising
[Adopted 11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-3 (Ch. 6, Part 6, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 138-3. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Cruising Ordinance."
§ 138-4. Cruising declared nuisance.
It is hereby declared to be a general public nuisance and threat to the
public safety from the repetitive driving of motor vehicles, also known as
"cruising," in a designated area of the Borough of Greencastle. The purpose
of this article is to reduce the noise, air pollution and congestion resulting
from cruising and to insure access for safety vehicles to and through said
designated areas by restricting the repetitive driving of motor vehicles in
said designated areas.
§ 138-5. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
CRUISING — Driving a motor vehicle on a street past a traffic control
point, designated by a Borough police officer, in the designated areas
under conditions in which traffic is congested at or near times within
any fifteen-minute period from 7:00 a.m., prevailing time, until 3:00 p.m.,
prevailing time, August 15 through June 15 of each calendar year. Passing
the control point a third time under the conditions stated herein shall
constitute unnecessary repetitive driving and therefore a violation of this
article.
DESIGNATED AREA —
TRAFFIC CONTROL POINT — A clearly marked reference point on a
designated street, as determined and marked from time to time by the
Borough of Greencastle Police Department.
§ 138-6. Cruising unlawful in designated areas.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cruise within the designated areas as
defined in this article. For the purposes of this article, the person having
care, custody or control of a motor vehicle shall be considered the person
cruising regardless of whether or not that person was actually operating the
motor vehicle. Additionally, for purposes of this article, the person having
"care, custody or control of a motor vehicle" shall mean either the owner
That part of South Ridge Avenue between Addison Avenue on the north
and Leitersburg Street on the south; and
A.
That part of Addison Avenue between South Ridge Avenue on the east
and South Allison Street on the west.
B.
§ 138-3 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 138-6
138:125
of a said vehicle, if present in the vehicle at the time of the violation, or, if
the owner is not so present, the person actually operating the vehicle at the
time of the violation.
§ 138-7. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to any municipal, school, emergency, police, fire,
ambulance or other governmental vehicle when the same is being operated
in an official capacity. Also, this article shall not apply to any vehicle utilized
for business or commercial purposes.
§ 138-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be
fined not less than $50 nor more than $300 or, in lieu of payment of this
fine, be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.
§ 138-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 138-8
138:126
ARTICLE III
Disturbance of the Peace
[Adopted 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-6]
§ 138-9. Defined; prohibitions.
Disturbance of the peace shall include:
§ 138-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provisions of this article shall be subject to
a fine of $50 for the first offense and a fine of $100 for the second and
subsequent offenses.
A. Obstructing any public street, public highway, public sidewalk, or any
other place or building, by hindering or impeding or tending to hinder
or impede the free and uninterrupted passage of vehicles, traffic or
pedestrians.
B. Committing in or upon any public street, public highway, public
sidewalk or any other public place or building any act or thing which is
an obstruction or interference to the free and uninterrupted use of
property or with any business, or anyone lawfully conducting business,
in or upon or facing or fronting on any public street, public highway,
public sidewalk, or any other public place or building, which prevents
the free and uninterrupted ingress, egress, and regress therein or
thereto.
C. Any person committing or causing any of the conditions set forth in
Subsections A and B herein shall stop committing or causing such
conditions and move on or disperse when ordered to do so by any police
or law enforcement officer. Any person who fails or refuses to obey such
an order or orders shall be guilty of violating this article.
§ 138-9 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 138-10
138:127
Chapter 141
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
§ 141-1. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 3-4-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-4]
§ 141-2. Authorization required; fee; badges. [Amended 3-4-1991 by
Ord. No. 1991-4; 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; 3-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
AUTHORIZATION — Approval, granted by the Chief of Police, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, after submission of an
application as required by this chapter.[Added 3-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
INDIVIDUAL APPLICANT — A natural person employed by,
representing, or engaged in a transient retail business.[Added
3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas.
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm,
trust, corporation, or other legal entity.[Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
PROMOTER — Any person, as defined in this chapter, who organizes
the gathering of five or more persons, as defined in this chapter,
engaged in transient retail business.[Added 3-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Any person(s) which engages in
peddling, canvassing, soliciting or taking of orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise, service, subscriptions,
or seeking to obtain gifts or contributions, upon any public street,
public alley, public sidewalk or public ground or from house to house
within the Borough of Greencastle. It shall not include floral displays,
open sidewalk cafes, or sidewalk sales or displays otherwise permitted
by the provisions of this Code.[Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-02]
B. The singular shall include the plural; the plural shall include the
singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the
Borough of Greencastle without first having obtained from the Police
Chief or his or her delegate authorization to do so, after submission of
the required application and fee as set forth in this chapter.
§ 138-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 141-2
138:128
§ 141-3. Exceptions. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
§ 141-4. Application for authorization. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
B. Every authorization granted under the provisions of this chapter shall
be granted on an individual basis to individual applicants engaging in
transient retail business and every individual shall obtain an
authorization, granted to him or her in his or her name, and the
authorization fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such
individual authorization.
C. All persons engaged in a transient retail business shall wear a badge
prepared and issued by the Greencastle Police Department, which
badge shall be worn at all times while such persons are so engaged.
Failure to wear the badge will be subject to revocation of permit.
D. Authorization to engage in a transient retail business shall not include
properties that display "No Solicitation," "No Trespassing" or other
similar signs indicating that peddlers or solicitors are not welcome.
A. No fee shall be charged for an application for authorization under this
section for the following transient retail businesses:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce or products grown, raised, or
processed at the farmers' agricultural property.
(2) For the sale of housewares, baskets, household items, baked good,
or food items donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof
are to be applied to any charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(3) A charitable organization exempt from taxation under the Internal
Revenue Code, Section 501(c)(3), if all of the proceeds from the
transient retail business activity are remitted to said organization
to further its charitable purpose.
B. All persons exempted hereby from the payment of the fee
accompanying the application for authorization shall not be exempt
from the requirement to obtain authorization from the Police Chief or
his or her delegate; provided, however, that the exemption only applies
to transient retail business activities meeting one of the exemption
criteria above and any other activities of a transient retail business not
meeting the exemption criteria shall be subject to the applicable
application fee.
A. Required information; fee.
(1) A person desiring to engage in a transient retail business within the
Borough shall appear in person at the Greencastle Police
Department during normal business hours to obtain an application
for authorization, in a form established by the municipality from
§ 141-2 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 141-4
138:129
time to time, which will, at a minimum, require the following
information:
(a) A copy of a valid photo ID of the person engaged in the
transient retail business if such person is 18 years of age or
older;
(b) The name and address of the individual applicant's employer or
organization that the individual applicant is representing;
(c) The period of time for which the individual is seeking
authorization to engage in transient retail business within the
Borough; and
(d) Whether the individual applicant has ever been convicted of a
felony or a crime of moral turpitude under the law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any other state, or the United
States of America.
(2) The application, when completed, shall be verified by an oath or
affirmation. An application for authorization shall be required for
each individual applicant who will be engaged in the transient
retail business. Application fee(s), in an amount(s) established by
the Council of the Borough of Greencastle from time to time by
resolution, shall accompany the application for authorization,
unless the transient retail business qualities for an exemption as
set forth in this chapter. Submission of an application for
authorization and payment of the required fee shall not constitute
approval to engage in a transient retail business, and the individual
applicants shall not engage in such transient retail business until
such time as the individual applicant receives written approval of
the application from the Chief of Police along with the required
badge.
B. In the event the transient retail business is represented by a promoter,
the promoter may appear at the Greencastle Police Department during
normal business hours to obtain an application for authorization for the
transient retail business and the five or more individual applicants who
will be engaged in the transient retail business, and may submit such
application on behalf of the individual applicants; however, the
promoter shall be jointly and severally liable for any violations of this
chapter committed by any of the individual applicants for which the
promoter submitted said application. The promoter shall complete the
required application for each individual applicant in the form required
in Subsection A above. An application fee, in an amount established by
the Council of the Borough of Greencastle from time to time by
resolution, shall accompany the application for authorization, unless
the transient retail business qualities for an exemption as set forth in
this chapter. Submission of an application for authorization and
payment of the required fee shall not constitute approval to engage in a
transient retail business, and the individual applicants shall not engage
§ 141-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 141-4
138:130
§ 141-5. Review of application; action on application; display of
badge. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-7; 3-2-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-02]
§ 141-6. Prohibited acts. [Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
in such transient retail business until such time as the individual
applicant receives written approval of the application from the Chief of
Police along with the required badge.
A. Upon receipt of a fully completed application for authorization, the
Chief of Police or his or her delegate shall review the background of the
individual applicants and transient retail business as he or she deems
necessary for the protection of the public welfare.
B. No individual applicant shall be issued authorization to engage in a
transient retail business if the individual applicant has been convicted
of any of the following: a crime of moral turpitude, a sexual offense of
any manner, any offense requiring registration on Megan's List [42
Pa.C.S.A. § 9799.32(1)], a felony offense within the last five years, or a
misdemeanor within the last five years.
C. If as a result of such background review the individual applicant or
transient retail business is found to be unsatisfactory, the Chief of
Police or his or her delegate shall note on such application his or her
disapproval and the reasons for the same and return said application to
the applicant and shall inform the individual applicant or the promoter,
if applicable, of the denial.
D. If as a result of such background review the individual applicant and
transient retail business satisfies the criteria of this chapter, the Chief
of Police or his or her delegate shall endorse on the application his or
her approval and record the name of the applicant, date, duration of
authorization and other data of public interest which he or she deems
relevant in a file entitled "Peddling Authorizations Granted," which shall
be available for public inspection at reasonable times. The Chief or his
or her delegate shall keep a record of all applications made
authorizations granted and authorizations denied tier at least seven
years from the date of the application of approval.
E. No authorization shall be granted until such background review is
complete, but in no event shall authorization be granted later than
three full business days from the date of receipt of the application by
the Greencastle Police Department.
F. Upon authorization, the individual applicant shall, when engaged in
transient retail business, display a badge provided by the Greencastle
Police Department.
§ 141-4 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 141-6
138:131
§ 141-7. Fixed location prohibited; exceptions. [Amended 3-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-02]
No transient retail business shall be conducted for any length of time
from a fixed location within the Borough of Greencastle. Notwithstanding
the foregoing prohibition, a transient retail business shall be permitted to
occupy a fixed location under either of the following circumstances: at a
parade, as defined and authorized by the Borough Council pursuant to the
provisions or parades, provided that the individual applicant shall:
§ 141-8. Suspension and revocation of authorization; appeal.
[Amended 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
A. No person engaging in any transient retail business shall engage in
such business at any time on Sunday, legal holidays, or upon any other
day of the week prior to 10:00 a.m. and after 6:00 p.m., prevailing time.
B. No person shall engage in any transient retail business without
authorization, and no individual application or transient retail business
shall peddle, canvas, solicit or take orders, either by sample or
otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise, service, subscriptions,
or seeking to obtain gifts or contributions not specifically contained in
the authorization.
A. Position himself or herself on the sidewalk, off the cartway of any street
or alley and at least 25 feet from the intersection of streets; and
B. Remain stationary until completion of the parade or until departing
from the event.
A. Authorizations granted under the terms of this chapter may be revoked
by the Chief of Police or his or her delegate for any of the following
causes:
(1) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the
application for authorization.
(2) Fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in the course of
the transient retail business activity.
(3) Any violation of this chapter.
(4) Conduct of a transient retail business that constitutes a breach of
the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general
welfare of the public.
B. Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or his or her
delegate in denying authorization or revocation of authorization shall
have the right of appeal to the Council of the Borough of Greencastle.
Such appeal shall be taken by tiling with the Council, within five days
after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such
person's last address or otherwise placed in his or her possession, a
§ 141-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 141-8
138:132
§ 141-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-7' 3-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-02]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, for each
and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of not more than $1,000 and costs of prosecution including court costs
and reasonable attorney fees, and, in default of payment of such line and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Each day's violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation.
Chapter 148
REAL ESTATE REGISTRY
§ 148-1. Registration of property owners and tenants required.
For the purpose of procuring accurate information in reference to all
persons residing within the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, the following registration is hereby required:
§ 148-2. Report of change in ownership or tenancy.
When the change of ownership of real estate or mobile homes or the change
of tenancy in a landlord-tenant relationship occurs, said change shall be
reported to the Greencastle Borough office within 30 days thereof, by the
new owner or landlord.
§ 148-3. Borough Secretary to keep registry.
The Borough Secretary shall keep a registry in the Greencastle Borough
office, which is now located at 60 North Washington Street, Greencastle,
Pennsylvania, containing the information required by this chapter.
written statement setting forth the grounds for the appeal. Borough
Council shall set a time and place for a hearing on such appeal, which
hearing shall be held not later than 30 days after the date of such filing.
Borough Council may take whatever action with respect to the matter
that it deems appropriate.
A. All owners of real estate and mobile homes shall register the ownership
thereof at the office of the Borough of Greencastle within 60 days from
the date of enactment hereof.
B. All landlords, including the owners of real estate and mobile homes,
shall register the names of the tenants of real estate and mobile homes,
under written or verbal lease, in the Borough of Greencastle within 60
days from the date of enactment hereof.
§ 141-8 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 148-4
148:133
§ 148-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-1-1985]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days.
Chapter 155
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Water — See Ch. 197.
§ 148-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 148-4
148:134
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 155-1. Definitions and word usage.
The following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the
meanings given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used
in the present tense include the future, words in the plural number include
the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural
number, and the word "shall" is always mandatory and not merely directory.
ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE — Any discharge of water or wastewater which
is inadvertent and which results in or increases pollution or contains a
pollutant or is not in compliance with the requirements of any Borough
ordinance.
AUTHORITY — Greencastle, Franklin County, Authority, as presently or
hereafter constituted, which has been created by the Borough Council and
to which has been referred by the Borough Council the management of the
Borough's sewer system.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER — An authorized
representative of an industrial user may be:
BOROUGH — The Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, or the duly constituted and
elected Borough Council thereof.
CONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES — The construction, reconstruction, or
significant alteration of a structure where there are no available sanitary
facilities available on the property.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10]
COUNCIL — The group of elected officials acting, from time to time, as the
governing body of the Borough.
DISCHARGE — The conveyance of any water or wastewater into the sewer
system.
A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the
industrial user is a corporation;
A.
A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
B.
A principal executive officer or director having responsibility for the
overall operation of the discharging facility if the industrial user is
a governmental entity, charitable organization or other such
unincorporated entity;
C.
A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above
if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the
facilities from which the discharge originates.
D.
§ 155-1 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-1
148:135
EMERGENCY — An unforeseen combination of circumstances or the
resulting state that calls for immediate action and/or an urgent need for
assistance or relief.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
GREASE TRAP — An interceptor, separator or trap that separates, collects
or receives fat, oils or grease, including but not limited to those used
by motor vehicle service facilities and food processing and cooking
establishments.[Added 8-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any property used wholly or in part
for the manufacturing, fabricating, processing, cleaning, laundering or
assembly of any product, commodity or article.
INDUSTRIAL USER — Any person who discharges industrial waste into the
sewer system.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or
waterborne wastes or form of energy rejected or escaping from any
industrial, manufacturing, trade or business process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, as distinct from
sanitary sewage.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with
discharges from other sources:
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a public main or
street sewer to curbline or property line if there is no curb, and where the
main or street sewer line is laid under a sidewalk, the word "lateral" shall
mean the "Y" connection from the main or street sewer line.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns.
PLUMBING FIXTURES — Receptacles intended to receive or discharge any
liquid water or water-carried wastes into a service line.
Inhibits or disrupts the processes or operations of the sewage
treatment plant or the sewer system; or sludge-handling processes,
including end use or disposal; or
A.
Is a cause of violation of any requirement of the Borough's NPDES
permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in
compliance with provisions of the Pennsylvania Solid Waste Act or
which results in or increases the severity of a violation of state or
federal environmental statutes, rules or regulations.
B.
§ 155-1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-1
148:136
POLLUTANT — Any substance including but not limited to dredged spoil,
grease, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge,
munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials,
heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and
industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste which, when discharged into
water, results in pollution or increases pollution.
POLLUTION — The contamination of any waters of the state such as will
create or is likely to create a nuisance or to render such waters harmful,
detrimental or injurious to public health, safety or welfare, or to domestic,
municipal, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other
legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other
aquatic life; or contamination of the air, soil, or of the environment so as to
produce or is likely to produce similar deleterious effects.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Real estate which
adjoins, abuts on, or is adjacent to the sewer system.
PUBLIC RECREATIONAL FACILITIES — All public parks and recreation
areas in such parks, including the land, buildings, lakes, pond, streams,
swimming pools, and all other property and buildings designated as a public
recreation area by the Borough.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, commercial and
industrial establishments.
SELF-CONTAINED PORTABLE TOILETS — One or more commercially
manufactured or assembled self-contained toilet facility that is portable
and is not designed or intended for connection to a sewer system with a
standard connection.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWAGE TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the sewer system owned
and operated by the Borough, which is designed to provide treatment of
wastewater and discharge of treated effluent to the environment.
SEWAGE TREATMENT WORKS — An arrangement of devices and
structures used for treating and disposing of sewage.
SEWER MANAGER — Any person who may, from time to time, be placed in
general charge of the sewer system.
SEWER SYSTEM — All facilities operated by the Borough for the collection
and disposal of sanitary sewage and acceptable industrial wastes and shall
include the sewage collection system, sewage treatment plant, and any
sewers that convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant. For the
purposes of this chapter, "sewer system" shall also include any sewers that
convey wastewater to the sewage treatment plant from persons who are, by
contract or agreement with the Borough, users of the sewer system.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — An industrial user who:
A. Has a discharge flow of 15,000 gallons or more per day; or
§ 155-1 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-1
148:137
SLUG LOAD — Any discharge of water or wastewater in which the
concentration of any constituent or the rate of flow exceeds, for any period
of time longer than 15 minutes, five times the average concentration or flow
rate from that source during a normal working day.
SOIL PIPE — Any vertical line of pipe extending through the roof, receiving
the discharge of one or more water closets, with or without other fixtures.
SPECIAL EVENTS — Any temporary civic, religious, or commercial outdoor
gathering of at least 25 individuals, whether on public or private property,
assembled with a common purpose for a period of one hour or longer.
Special events include, but are not limited to, concerts, fairs, carnivals,
circuses, parades, marathons, walkathons, festivals, races, bicycle events,
celebrations, or any other gathering or events similar in nature. Special
events do not include events that are not civic, religious, commercial or
public in nature that are held on residential property such as graduation
parties, wedding receptions, social parties or other similar
functions.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-10]
USER — Any person who contributes, causes or permits the discharge of
wastewater into the sewer system.
VENT PIPE — Any pipe extending through the roof to ventilate the system
of piping and to prevent trap siphonage and backpressure.
WASTE PIPE — Any pipe receiving the discharge from any fixtures except a
water closet.
WASTEWATER — Industrial wastes or domestic wastes from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities, and institutions, together with
any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present,
whether treated or untreated, which enters the sewer system.
WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT — As set forth in Article IV of this
chapter.
WATER AUTHORITY — The Greencastle Area, Franklin County, Water
Authority.
Has an organic or suspended solids loading greater than 30 pounds
per average work day based on any composite sample collected over a
twenty-four-hour period or period of discharge if less than 24 hours; or
B.
Has the potential, as determined by the Borough, to exert impact
or cause interference, either singly or in combination with other
contributors, on the operation of the sewer system, the quality of the
sludge, or air emissions generated by the sewer system.
C.
§ 155-1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-1
148:138
ARTICLE II
Connection to System; Charges
§ 155-2. Connection to sewer system required.
§ 155-3. Prohibited facilities. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-10]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to
the sewer system to erect, construct or use or maintain, or cause to be
erected, constructed, used or maintained, any privy, cesspool, sinkhole,
septic tank or other receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage;
provided, however, that the use of portable, self-contained toilet facilities
shall be permitted on a temporary and limited basis, such as special events,
emergencies, or during construction activities, provided that prior
permission is obtained from the Borough Manager or his designee. The
Borough Manager is authorized to establish regulations for the use and
location of portable, self-contained toilet facilities. The Borough Manager
shall establish an application form, which shall, at a minimum, require the
applicant to provide the following information: the event or activity that the
temporary facilities are intended to accommodate, the general placement
of the facilities, the number of facilities, the times when the facilities
shall be in use (dates and hours), the responsible party for servicing the
facilities both during use and upon removal when the event or activity has
concluded, and such other information as the Borough Council or its agent
may request at the time such application is made. Notwithstanding the
foregoing, Borough Council may allow for the long-term use of portable,
self-contained toilet facilities at properties that the Borough Council has
designated by the Borough Council as public recreational facilities.
§ 155-4. Certain facilities declared nuisance.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system
in violation of this chapter shall be deemed and shall be declared to be
erecting, constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the
Borough is hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided
by law.
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall at their own expense connect such
building with the sewer system.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system.
§ 155-2 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-5
148:139
§ 155-5. Connections to sewer system regulated.
No connection shall be made to, nor shall any industrial waste be
discharged into, the sewer system except in compliance with the ordinances
and resolutions, as well as such rules and regulations, as may, from time to
time, be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by the Borough.
§ 155-6. Grant of easements to sewer authority.
Borough hereby grants to the Authority all and every easement, right-of-way
and any and all other rights necessary or desirable on, over or under the
streets, sidewalks and alleys in the Borough for the purpose of constructing
the sewer system therein.
§ 155-7. Imposition of connection charge. [Amended 8-1-2005 by
Ord. No. 2005-5]
There is hereby imposed upon each owner of property connecting to the
sewer system the following connection charges:22
§ 155-8. Imposition of sewer rent or charge.
There is hereby imposed upon each property, person or user served by the
sewer system and having the use thereof a quarterly sewer rent or charge,
payable as hereinafter provided, for the use, whether direct or indirect,
of the sewer system based on the schedules of classifications and rates
hereinafter set forth.
§ 155-9. Sewage rates.
A. Connection fee: $1,475 per residential connection.
B. Capacity part tapping fee: $1,725 per residential connection.
C. Collection part tapping fee: $1,600 per residential connection.
A. Rates for metered water users. All persons owning property connected
to the sewer system and served with metered water service by
Greencastle Area, Franklin County, Water Authority shall pay a
quarterly rental for sanitary sewage services based on quantity of water
used, as evidenced by meter readings of water meters installed and
maintained by Greencastle Area, Franklin County, Water Authority for
the purpose of measuring water purchased from said Water Authority
and such other meters as may be installed pursuant to any provisions of
this chapter, and subject to the minimum charges hereinafter provided,
all as follows:
22.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided that: "The connection and tapping fees shall
be adopted, from time to time, by resolution of the Borough Council of the Borough of
Greencastle, provided that such fees are based on studies by the Borough’s Engineer and
in compliance with current laws."
§ 155-5 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-9
148:140
§ 155-10. Floor drains.
§ 155-11. Grease traps. [Amended 8-6-2007 by Ord. No. 2007-03]
All hotels, restaurants, boardinghouses and public eating places, before
draining into said sewer system, shall install grease traps in the house
drains. The grease traps shall be approved by the Borough. A grease trap
shall be installed and located to efficiently remove fat, oils or grease and to
be easily and readily accessible for maintenance, cleaning and inspection,
and shall not have sanitary waste directed into it.
(1) Rate per thousand gallons: $7.22. [Amended 2-6-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-04; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14; 12-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-1323]
B. The minimum quarterly charge for sewer service, based on a minimum
quarterly use of 9,000 gallons per quarter, shall be $64.98. [Amended
2-6-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-04; 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-14;
12-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-13]
A. Floor drains shall only be permitted where it can be shown to the
satisfaction of the Borough that their use is absolutely necessary, and
arrangements made to maintain a permanent water-seal in the trap and
be provided with check or back-water valves, where necessary.
B. A permit shall be obtained from the Borough before any floor drain can
be attached to the house drain.
C. No permit for a basement drain shall be granted until the owner of the
building or his agent has executed and signed a written agreement
upon a form furnished by the Borough releasing the Borough from any
damage that may result from the basement being flooded by the
stoppage of sewers, which agreement shall be filed with the sewer
manager. All basement sewer connections shall be provided with a
check valve, and the plumbing waste pipes therein shall be so
connected that the use of fixtures on or above the first floor of said
building shall not be interfered with by the shutting off of said valve.
A. Type, design, and size of grease trap required. The grease trap shall be
of a type, design and capacity acceptable to the Borough. The minimum
capacity for new grease traps shall be 1,000 gallons unless the Borough
issues a written waiver of this requirement.
B. Permit required. A permit issued by the Borough shall be required to
install a new grease trap and to use an existing grease trap. A permit
will be required for each grease trap.
(1) Users required to secure a permit shall complete and file with the
Borough an application in the form prescribed by the Borough, and
23.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided that it would take effect with the first billing
period after 1-1-2016.
§ 155-9 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-11
148:141
new users shall be accompanied by a fee in the amount of $50,
which amount may be later revised by resolution of Borough
Council. The application shall require in part the following
information.
(a) Name of person or entity which will be using the grease trap,
their address and telephone number. The permit will be issued
to this person or entity who will be bound by the terms of the
permit.
(b) Name, address and telephone number of the owner of the
property where the grease trap is located.
(c) Address where the grease trap is located.
(d) Size of the grease trap, type and manufacturer.
(e) Date when the grease trap was installed.
(f) If requested, a copy of the plumbing plan for the facility
showing the location of all drain lines, sinks. For older
structures where a plan is not available, inspection of the
facility by the Borough will be required.
(2) The permit shall be renewed annually. Renewal of the permit shall
not require another application unless the information provided in
the application has changed.
(3) No new permit shall be issued except upon payment of the permit
fee.
(4) Based on the application, the Borough shall specify in the permit
the minimum cleaning frequency for the grease trap. For permit
renewals, this frequency may be adjusted if conditions warrant.
(5) By the permit, permittee and their use of the grease trap shall be
subject to Chapter 155.
(6) All users of existing grease traps shall submit an application within
30 days of the effective date of this section; a timely submitted
application shall authorize use of the grease trap until the permit
application is granted or denied.
C. Installation.
(1) Prior to the installation of a new grease trap or modification of an
existing grease trap, its design and installation diagram must be
approved by the Borough.
(2) At least three business days prior to the start of installation,
permittee shall notify the Borough when installation will occur.
(3) Before backfilling, the grease trap and all plumbing shall be
inspected by the Borough.
§ 155-11 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-11
148:142
D. Test-sampling manhole. All new businesses or connections shall, in
addition to the grease trap permitting requirements herein, install a
test-sampling manhole prior to the connection to the main line.
E. Cleaning requirements.
(1) The grease trap shall be cleaned at a frequency not less than that
specified in the permit.
(2) The method for cleaning the grease trap shall be of the suction
type, unless otherwise authorized by the Borough. The utilization of
chemical or biological additives/degreasers or any product that
may liquefy grease trap wastes is prohibited.
(3) When the grease trap is cleaned, the date of cleaning, the name of
the person who performed the cleaning, the amount removed, and
where the trap's contents were disposed shall be recorded. The
record of the cleaning shall include the ticket provided by the
person cleaning the grease trap and hauling its contents for
disposal. Within five business days after the cleaning of the grease
trap, permittee shall provide to the Borough a copy of the record of
the cleaning.
(4) Records of the cleaning shall be maintained for two years at the site
of the grease trap. The records shall also be provided upon the
request of the Borough.
F. Maintenance. The permittee shall maintain the grease trap in good
working order. If the grease trap becomes inoperative for any reason,
the permittee shall inform the Borough, within 48 hours of the trap first
becoming inoperative, of the corrective measures being taken by the
permittee to restore operation of the grease trap and when these
measures will be completed, which shall not exceed 10 days. Until it is
again in good working order, the grease trap shall not be used.
G. Inspection. In applying for and being issued a permit, permittee
consents to the Borough or the Borough's representative entering the
premises at all reasonable times to inspect the grease trap and areas
where waste grease, oils or fats are disposed and to review the records
of cleaning. On these inspections, the Borough may sample and test the
wastewater discharge and observe the performance of the grease trap.
H. Notification of violation. Whenever the Borough finds that any user has
violated or is violating any prohibition, limitation or requirement
contained in this chapter, the Borough shall serve upon such user a
written notice stating the nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the
date of the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction therefor shall
be submitted to the Borough's rights and powers to immediately
suspend service.
§ 155-11 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-11
148:143
I. Enforcement. Any person or entity violating this section shall be subject
to the enforcement actions and civil penalties prescribed in Chapter
155.
§ 155-11 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-11
148:144
ARTICLE III
Surcharge Provisions
§ 155-12. Surcharge limits.
Any user discharging wastewater into the Borough's sewer system, when
such wastewater contains pollutant concentrations in excess of the
surcharge limits listed below, will be subject to a strength-of-waste
surcharge for each pollutant concentration in excess of the surcharge
limits:
Pollutant
Surcharge Limit
(mg/l)
Biochemical oxygen demand
(BOD)
Total suspended solids
Total Phosphorus, as P
Ammonia-Nitrogen, as N
Total Nitrogen
§ 155-13. Calculation of surcharge amount.
Users discharging wastewater to the Borough's sewer system subject to
the provisions of this chapter shall pay a strength-of-waste surcharge, in
addition to applicable volume charges, equal to the sum of 1/10 of 1%
(0.001 as a decimal) of the quarterly sewer rental charge, for each mg/l
by which the BOD, total suspended solids, total phosphorus, or ammonianitrogen
exceeds the surcharge limits established under this chapter. Each
surcharge amount shall be considered a separate charge, additive to the
quarterly sewer rental billing amount of the user.
§ 155-14. Determining strength of wastewater.
A. The strength of wastewater (i.e., concentration of pollutants) to be used
for establishing the amount of surcharge shall be determined by the
Borough at least once every billing quarter either:
(1) By suitable sampling and analysis of the wastewater for three
consecutive days;
(2) From estimates made by the Borough; or
(3) From known relationships of products produced to strengths of
wastewater for those users where such factors have been
established.
B. When the strength of wastewater is determined by analysis, the
analyses shall be performed in accordance with the procedures outlined
in the latest edition of Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
§ 155-12 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-14
148:145
§ 155-15. Costs associated with monitoring and enforcement of
surcharge provisions.
§ 155-16. General prohibitions.
No user shall discharge or cause to be discharged, directly or indirectly,
any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or
performance of the sewer system. These general prohibitions apply to all
users whether or not the users are subject to any other pretreatment
requirements or discharge limitations.
§ 155-17. Specific prohibitions.
No user may discharge the following substances to the sewer system:
and Wastewater, published jointly by the American Public Health
Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water
Environment Federation. The concentration to be used to calculate the
surcharge amount shall be the arithmetic average of the individual
samples analyzed over each of the three consecutive days of sampling.
A. The cost of monitoring activities performed by the Borough, in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter, shall be the
responsibility of the user, regardless of whether the monitoring results
identify concentrations of pollutants in the user's discharge in excess of
the Borough's surcharge limits. Such costs shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
(1) The costs for the analyses;
(2) Rental of Borough equipment used in performing the monitoring
(i.e., vehicles, samplers, flowmeters, etc.);
(3) Labor costs associated with installation of monitoring equipment
and sample transport; and
(4) Administrative costs associated with tabulation of the surcharge
amount and billing.
B. All costs associated with enforcement of the provisions of this chapter
shall be borne by the user. These costs may include legal and
engineering fees, as well as filing fees and other court costs.
A. Any liquids, solids or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity
are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other
substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to
the sewer system or to the operation of the sewer system. At no time
shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the point
of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more
than 5% nor any single reading over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter. At no time shall the closed cup flashpoint of the
wastewater be less than 140° Fahrenheit. Prohibited materials include,
§ 155-14 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-17
148:146
but are not limited to, the following substances: gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, ethers, alcohols, peroxides, perchlorates, bromates,
and carbides.
B. Solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in
a sewer or other interference with the operation of the sewer system,
such as, but not limited to: animal guts or tissues, paunch manure,
bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes,
cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw,
shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper,
wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining, or
processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.
C. Any wastewater having a pH less than 6.0 or higher than 9.0, or
wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing
damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the
sewer system.
D. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants in sufficient quantity, either
singly or by interaction with other constituents of the wastewater, to
injure or interfere with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a
hazard to humans or animals, or create a toxic effect in the receiving
waters of the sewage treatment plant.
E. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly
or by interaction with other substances normally present in the sewer
system are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewer system for maintenance and
repair.
F. Any substance which results in the formation or release of toxic gases,
vapors or fumes in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
G. Any petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral
oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through, but in
no case exceeding 20 mg/l.
H. Fats, oils, greases or waxes of animal or vegetable origin in amounts
which exceed 100 mg/l.
I. Any substance which may cause the sewage treatment plant's effluent
or any other product of the sewage treatment plant such as residues,
sludges, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to
interfere with the reclamation process. In no case shall a substance
discharge to the sewer system cause the sewage treatment plant to be
in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or
regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the
Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxics Substances
Control Act, or state or federal criteria applicable to the sludge
management method being used.
§ 155-17 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-17
148:147
§ 155-18. Development of local limits.
The Borough reserves the right to develop local limits regulating the
discharge of pollutants to the sewer system. These local limits will apply to
all users of the sewer system, whether or not the users are subject to any
other pretreatment standards or discharge limits.
J. Any substance which will cause the Borough to violate its NPDES and/
or state water quality management permit or applicable receiving
water quality standards.
K. Any wastewater with objectionable color which will pass through the
treatment plant, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
L. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological
activity in the sewage treatment plant resulting in interference, but in
no case wastewater with a temperature at the point of discharge into
the sewer system which exceeds 140° F. (60° C.).
M. Any pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which will cause
interference to the sewage treatment plant or interfere with the
operation of the sewer system. In no case shall a slug load be
discharged.
N. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of such
half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
Borough or applicable state or federal regulations.
O. Any trucked or hauled wastewater or pollutants except those
discharged at points designated by the Borough.
P. Any wastewater which is incompatible with treatment processes in use
at the sewage treatment plant or which may cause interference or pass
through.
Q. Any wastewater containing any compounds or salts of aldrin, dieldrin,
endrin, lindane, methoxychlor, toxaphene, dichlorophenoxyacetic acid,
trichlorophenoxyproprionic acid, or other persistent herbicides,
pesticides or rodenticides.
R. Any garbage, except properly chopped garbage from private residences
only. Such garbage from private residences shall not contain particles
greater than 1/2 inch in length and width, or 1/2 inch in diameter.
"Garbage" shall not be construed to mean industrial waste.
§ 155-17 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-18
148:148
ARTICLE IV
Wastewater Discharge Permits
§ 155-19. Permit required.
§ 155-20. Permit application.
§ 155-21. Permit modifications.
The wastewater discharge permit of a significant industrial user may be
revised by the Borough when:
A. All significant industrial users proposing to connect to or discharge to
the sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit at least 90
days before connecting to or discharging to the sewer system. All
existing significant industrial users connected to or discharging to the
sewer system shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within 45
days after notification from the Borough.
B. Following its review of the information provided, including any
additional information which may be requested by the Borough, the
Borough will issue or deny the issuance of a wastewater discharge
permit to the significant industrial user.
A. Any significant industrial user required to obtain a wastewater
discharge permit shall complete and file with the Borough an
application in the form and containing information as prescribed by the
Borough, and shall submit an administrative fee as established from
time to time by the Borough. The application shall be executed by an
authorized representative of the significant industrial user.
B. The Borough will evaluate the data furnished by the significant
industrial user and may require additional information. After evaluation
and acceptance of the data furnished, the Borough may issue a
wastewater discharge permit subject to terms and conditions provided
therein.
A. Necessitated to protect public health, welfare and safety;
B. In response to a change in process or discharge by the significant
industrial user;
C. In response to a change in Borough, county, state and federal
regulations;
D. In response to a change in Borough's NPDES permit, or any other
permit, or a change in state and federal regulations governing sludge
disposal, air quality, or water quality.
§ 155-19 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-22
148:149
§ 155-22. Permit conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions
of any Borough ordinance and all other applicable regulations, charges and
fees established by the Borough. Permits may contain the following:
§ 155-23. Permit duration.
Permits shall be issued for a time period not to exceed five years and will
expire on a specific date. The significant industrial user shall apply for
permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the
significant industrial user's existing permit. The terms and conditions of the
permit may be subject to modification by the Borough during the term of the
permit as described in § 155-21, supra. The significant industrial user shall
be informed of any proposed change in its wastewater discharge permit at
least 30 days prior to the effective date of change. Any changes or new
conditions in the wastewater discharge permit shall include a reasonable
time schedule for compliance.
A. Limitations on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and
characteristics including but not limited to flow, pollutant
concentrations and mass limits;
B. Limitations on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
C. Requirements of installation and maintenance of inspection, sampling
and monitoring facilities;
D. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling
locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule;
E. Compliance schedule and reporting requirements;
F. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
G. Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to
wastewater discharge as specified by the Borough, and affording
Borough access thereto;
H. Requirements for notification of the Borough of any new discharge of
wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or
character of the wastewater constituents being discharged to the
sewage treatment plant;
I. Requirements for notification of slug loads and accidental discharges;
J. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the Borough to insure
compliance with any Borough ordinance, or state and federal
regulations.
§ 155-22 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-24
148:150
§ 155-24. Permit transfer.
Wastewater discharge permits are issued to a specific significant industrial
user for a specific operation. A wastewater discharge permit shall not
be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user, different
premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
Borough.
§ 155-24 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-24
148:151

ARTICLE V
Compliance Schedules
§ 155-25. Criteria for preparation.
If a compliance schedule is required to be contained or included with
the application for a wastewater discharge permit, or if under any other
circumstances a compliance schedule is required to be submitted to the
Borough, the following criteria shall govern the preparation of the
compliance schedule:
A. The compliance schedule shall clearly show by line items, or clearly
describe by numbered categories, all the major phases or steps which
the applicant reasonably believes will be involved in order, within the
shortest possible period of time: to place a new pretreatment facility or
process into operation and to achieve compliance on a consistent basis;
to bring an existing facility or process into compliance on a consistent
basis; or to achieve compliance in some other respect or under some
other circumstance.
Example: The line item phases or steps which could be involved might
include: a phase for the selection and retention of a consulting
engineer; a phase for the preparation of preliminary design plans; a
phase for the review and evaluation by the Borough of the preliminary
design plans; a phase for the preparation of final design plans; a phase
for the preparation of technical specifications, project manuals and
bid documents; a phase for the invitation and receipt of bids; a phase
for the acceptance of bids and the award and execution of contracts;
a phase for construction or installation; and a phase for testing the
facility or process.
B. A commencement date and a completion date shall be assigned to each
line item phase or step, or to each numbered category or step, referred
to in Subsection A, supra. The period from commencement to
completion of a particular phase or step shall be the shortest possible
period of time. In no event, however, shall any phase or step exceed
nine months in duration from commencement to completion. There
shall be no hiatus or interval between one phase or step and the next.
C. The compliance schedule shall show a final date by which compliance
will be achieved on a consistent basis. Under no circumstances,
however, shall this final date be later than any mandatory compliance
date fixed by the United States Environmental Protection Agency for
compliance with a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard; any
mandatory compliance date fixed by the Borough for compliance with a
prohibition, control, limit, flow equalization standard, pretreatment
standard, or regulation issued or prescribed by the Borough; or any
mandatory compliance date fixed by a governmental agency of the
Commonwealth for compliance with a prohibition, control, limit,
standard, or regulation issued or prescribed by the agency.
§ 155-25 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-26
148:153
§ 155-26. Compliance schedule reports.
If a compliance schedule is approved by the Borough, the applicant shall
submit to the Borough periodic compliance schedule reports. The content
and frequency of these reports shall be prescribed by the Borough.
§ 155-27. Administrative appeals.
Any person, including the industrial user, may petition the Borough to
reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of its
issuance. Such appeal shall be directed to the Public Facilities Committee of
the Borough Council for its review. Upon consideration of the petition, the
Committee shall make its recommendation to the Borough Council, whose
decision regarding the appeal will be final.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater
discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater
discharge permit.
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be
stayed pending the appeal.
D. If the Borough fails to act within 60 days following the presentation of
the petition to the Public Facilities Committee, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to
reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater
discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall
be considered final administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint
with the court of competent jurisdiction.
§ 155-26 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-27
148:154
ARTICLE VI
Monitoring Facilities
§ 155-28. Location.
The Borough may require a significant industrial user to provide and
operate, at the significant industrial user's own expense, monitoring
facilities to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the
discharge from the significant industrial user. The monitoring facility should
normally be situated on the significant industrial user's premises, but the
Borough may, when such a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the significant industrial user, allow the facility to be
constructed in the public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will
not be obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
§ 155-29. Construction and maintenance.
Whether constructed on public or private property, the monitoring facilities
shall be provided in accordance with the Borough's requirements and all
applicable local construction standards and specifications. There shall be
ample room in or near the monitoring facility to allow accurate sampling
and preparation of samples for transport. Construction shall be completed
within 90 days after construction plans have been approved by the Borough,
in accordance with Article VI, § 155-30, of this chapter. The monitoring
facility shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating
condition at the expense of the significant industrial user.
§ 155-30. Detailed plans.
Detailed plans showing the intended facilities shall be submitted to the
Borough for review within the time period approved by the Borough, and
shall be acceptable to the Borough before construction of the facility. The
Borough shall notify the user, in writing, when the detailed plans are
acceptable for construction.
§ 155-31. Inspection and sampling.
The Borough may inspect the facilities of any user to ascertain whether the
purpose of any Borough ordinance is being met and all requirements are
being complied with. Persons or occupants of premises where wastewater
is created or where there is a wastewater discharge shall allow the Borough
or its representative ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of
the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination
or in the performance of any of their duties. The Borough shall have
the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary
to conduct sampling, inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations. Where a user has a security measure in force which would
require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that
upon presentation of suitable identification, the Borough will be permitted
§ 155-28 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-31
148:155
to enter, without delay, for the purpose of performing their specific
responsibilities.
§ 155-31 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-31
148:156
ARTICLE VII
Accidental Discharges and Slug Loads
§ 155-32. Protection from discharge.
Each industrial user shall provide protection from accidental discharge
and slug loads. Facilities, when required by the Borough, to prevent an
accidental discharge or slug load, shall be provided and maintained at the
industrial user's cost and expense.
§ 155-33. Facility plan.
Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this
protection shall be submitted to the Borough for review, and shall be
approved by the Borough before construction of the facility and
implementation of the proposed procedures. All existing industrial users
shall complete a plan, or provide evidence that such a plan is not necessary
for their facility. No industrial user who commences discharge to the sewer
system after the effective date of this chapter shall be permitted to
discharge into the sewer system until this requirement has been fulfilled.
Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not
relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the industrial
user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
§ 155-34. Notification of discharge.
In the case of an accidental discharge or slug load, it is the responsibility
of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the Borough of
the incident. The notification by the industrial user shall include location of
discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions
to mitigate the accidental discharge or slug load.
§ 155-35. Written notice.
Within five days following an accidental discharge or slug load, the
industrial user shall submit to the Borough a detailed written report
describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by
the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the sewer system,
fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this article or other applicable law.
§ 155-36. Notice to employees.
A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of an
accidental discharge or slug load. Employers shall insure that all employees
who may cause or suffer such an accidental discharge or slug load to occur
are advised of the emergency notification procedure.
§ 155-32 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-36
148:157

ARTICLE VIII
Pretreatment and Confidential Information
§ 155-37. Pretreatment requirements.
Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as required
to comply with all Borough ordinances. Any facilities required to provide
pretreatment of wastewater to a level acceptable to the Borough shall
be provided, operated, and maintained at the industrial user's expense.
Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating
procedures shall be submitted to the Borough for review, and shall be
acceptable to the Borough before construction of the facility. The review of
such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the industrial
user from the responsibility of modifying under the provisions of all Borough
ordinances. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or
method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the Borough
prior to the industrial user's initiation of the changes. All records relating to
compliance with all Borough ordinances shall be made available to officials
of the Borough upon request.
§ 155-38. Availability of information.
Information and data on an industrial user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and
from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental
agency without restriction unless the industrial user specifically requests
and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that the
release of such information would divulge information, processes or
methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the
industrial user. The portions of a report which would disclose trade secrets
or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public
but shall nevertheless be made available upon written request to
governmental agencies for uses related to all Borough ordinances, the
NPDES permit, any state disposal system permit and/or the programs under
applicable categorical standards or for use by the Borough, any state,
the Untied States, or any state or federal agency in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the user or the person furnishing the
report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics will not be recognized
as confidential information.
§ 155-39. Industrial user notification.
Before information accepted by the Borough as confidential is transmitted
to any governmental agency by the Borough, a notification to the industrial
user shall be provided listing the confidential information to be transmitted
and the governmental entity requesting such information.
§ 155-37 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-39
148:159

ARTICLE IX
Measurement of Volume
§ 155-40. Methods of measuring volume.
A. Whenever a person purchasing all water used from the Water Authority
discharges sanitary sewage and/or industrial wastes into the sewer
system, the volume of water used, as determined from meter readings
of the Borough, shall be used in computing the sewer rental.
B. In cases where persons have sources of water supply in addition to or
other than from the Water Authority and discharge sanitary sewage
and/or industrial wastes into the sewer system, those persons shall
provide a meter on such additional or other source of supply. The total
amount of water consumed as shown by these meter readings will be
used in computing the sewer rental.
C. In cases where persons use water from the Water Authority and/or from
an independent supply such that all or any part of the water so used is
not discharged into the sewer system, the quantity of water used to
determine the sewer rental shall be computed by one of the following
methods:
(1) By placing a meter or measuring device on the sewer connection.
The readings from this meter or measuring device shall be used in
computing the sewer rental.
(2) By placing a meter or measuring device on the effluent not
discharging into the sewer system. The readings from this meter or
measuring device will then be deducted from the total water meter
readings and the remainder will be used in computing the sewer
rental.
(3) When, in the opinion of the sewer manager, it is not practical to
install measuring devices to continuously determine the quantity of
water not discharged to the sewer system, the sewer manager will
determine, in such manner and by such method as he may
prescribe, the percentage of metered water discharged into the
sewer system and the quantity of water used to compute the sewer
rental shall be the percentage so determined of the quantity
measured by the water meter or meters. Any dispute as to the
estimated amount shall be submitted to the Council after notice of
the estimate, whose decision on the matter shall be final for the
current calendar year.
D. In cases where the Borough provides sanitary sewage services to a
person or persons, user or users, and corporation or corporations,
hereinafter generally referred to as "user," by accepting sanitary
sewage from a main or pipe which is the terminus or end of a sanitary
sewer collection system of such user, the user shall install a meter or
measuring device for the purpose of measuring the quantity of sanitary
§ 155-40 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-40
148:161
§ 155-41. Measuring devices.
All meters or measuring devices not provided by the Water Authority but
required to be used under the provisions of this chapter shall be furnished
and installed by the property owner and shall be under the control of the
Borough, and may be tested, inspected or repaired by Borough employees
whenever Council deems necessary. The owner of the property upon which
such measuring device is installed shall be responsible for its maintenance
and safekeeping, and all repairs thereto shall be made at the property
owner's expense, whether such repairs are made necessary by ordinary
wear and tear or other causes. Bills for such repairs, if made by the
Borough, shall be due and payable at the same time and collected in the
same manner as are the bills for sewer services; such bills from and after
their due date shall constitute a lien upon the property upon which such
measuring device is installed.
§ 155-42. Meter readings.
Borough shall be responsible for the reading of all meters or measuring
devices, and they shall be made available to Borough employees for meter
reading at any reasonable time.
§ 155-43. Time and methods of payment.
The above connection fees set forth in this chapter shall be payable upon
application for permit to make such connection. Sewer rentals or charges
shall be billed and paid quarterly.
§ 155-44. Delinquent sewer rentals and liens.
sewage discharged from said sanitary sewer collection system into the
Borough main and shall be responsible for the maintenance thereof,
subject to the provisions of this chapter.
A. Quarterly charges for sewer service shall be subject to 10% penalty if
not paid within 30 days after they are due. If not paid, the Borough shall
have the right to cut off sewer service from the delinquent premises and
not to restore the same until all delinquent bills against the same and
the cost of cutting off and restoring service shall have been paid.
B. All persons connected to the sewer system must give the Borough their
correct address. Failure to receive bills will not be considered an excuse
for nonpayment nor permit an extension of the period during which bills
are payable at face.
C. All sewer rentals, together with all penalties thereon, not paid on or
before the end of one year from the date of each bill shall be deemed to
be delinquent. All delinquent sewer rentals and all penalties thereon
shall be a lien on the property served and shall be entered as a lien
against such property in the office of the Prothonotary of Franklin
§ 155-40 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-44
148:162
§ 155-45. Segregation of sewer revenues.
The funds received by the Borough from the collection of the connection
charges or from sewer rentals and all penalties thereon, as herein provided
for, and any fines collected by the Borough in connection with the sewer
system shall be segregated and kept separate and apart from all other funds
of the Borough and shall be used only for the purpose of defraying the
expenses of the Borough in the operation, maintenance, repair, alteration,
inspection, depreciation or other expenses in relation to such sewer system
and for such payments as Borough may be required to make under any lease
or agreement it may enter into for and of, or in connection with, said sewer
system, with the Authority, in accordance with the provisions of the Act of
May 2, 1945, P.L. 382, as amended.
§ 155-46. Service during portion of quarter.
Whenever sewer service to any property begins after the first day or
terminates before the last day of any calendar quarter, the sewer rentals for
such period shall be a pro rata amount for that portion of the period during
which said property is served; provided, however, that in making any such
apportionment a fraction of a calendar month, amounting to 1/2 or more of
a calendar month, shall be counted a full month, and a fraction of a calendar
month amounting to less than 1/2 of a calendar month shall be disregarded.
§ 155-47. Rules and regulations.
The Borough reserves the right to, and may from time to time, adopt, revise,
amend and readopt such rules and regulations, by resolution, as it deems
necessary and proper for the use and operation of the sewer system, and all
such rules and regulations shall be and become a part of and enforceable
under this chapter.
County and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for the
filing and collection of such liens.
§ 155-44 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-47
148:163

ARTICLE X
Enforcement
§ 155-48. Notification of violation.
Whenever the Borough finds that any user has violated or is violating
any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained in this chapter, the
Borough shall serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature
of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the notice, a plan for the
satisfactory correction therefor shall be submitted to the Borough by the
user; provided that this provision shall not affect or limit the Borough's
rights and powers to immediately suspend service.
§ 155-49. Suspension of services.
§ 155-50. Civil penalties.
Any user who is found to have failed to comply with any provision of this
chapter may be fined not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each
offense. Each day during which a violation shall occur or continue shall
be deemed a separate and distinct offense. In addition to the penalties
provided herein, the Borough may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court
costs, court reporters' fees and other expenses of litigation by appropriate
suit at law against the user who is found to have violated this chapter.
A. The Borough may suspend services provided by the sewage treatment
plant when such suspension is necessary, in the opinion of the Borough,
in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge which presents or
may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or
welfare of persons or to the environment, causes interference to the
sewer system, or causes the Borough to violate any condition of its
NPDES permit.
B. Any user notified of a suspension of the services provided by the sewage
treatment plant shall immediately stop or eliminate the discharge. In
the event of a failure of the user to comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the Borough shall take such steps, as it may deem
necessary, including, without limitation, immediate severance of the
sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the sewer system
or endangerment to any individuals.
C. The Borough shall reinstate the service provided by the sewage
treatment plant upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge. A detailed written statement submitted by the IU describing
the cause of the noncomplying discharge and the measures taken to
prevent any future occurrence shall be submitted to the Borough within
15 days of the date of the occurrence.
§ 155-48 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 155-51
148:165
§ 155-51. Falsifying information.
Any person who knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document
produced, filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this chapter, or
who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring
device or method required under this chapter, shall, upon conviction, be
punished by a fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not more
than six months, or by both.
§ 155-51 GREENCASTLE CODE § 155-51
148:166
Chapter 158
SKATEBOARDS, ROLLER SKATES AND ROLLER BLADES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 78.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 138.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 190.
§ 158-1. Use on sidewalks in commercial districts prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to ride a skateboard, roller skate or roller blade in the
Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, on any sidewalk
within the Community Commercial (CC) and Highway Commercial (HC)
Zoning Districts.
§ 158-2. Unauthorized use on private property prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to ride a skateboard, roller skate or roller blade at
any time upon private property within the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, without the permission of the property owner.
§ 158-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ROLLER SKATE/ROLLER BLADE — A form of skate on which wheels or
rollers are mounted for traction either side by side or in line, one behind the
other.
SKATEBOARD — A device for riding upon, usually while standing,
consisting of an oblong piece of wood, fiberglass, plastic or similar material,
mounted on skate wheels.
§ 158-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 plus costs of
prosecution (court costs and reasonable attorney fees). Provided, however,
that any person accused of such violation by notice provided to them by a
police officer of the Borough of Greencastle may settle and compromise the
claim against him or her for such violation by paying the Borough the sum
of $25 within 72 hours of such notice being provided to them.
§ 155-51 REAL ESTATE REGISTRY § 158-4
148:167
Chapter 162
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 132.
§ 162-1. Scope.
This chapter shall govern and control all aspects of the collection, storage,
transportation, processing and disposal of municipal waste and recycling in
the Borough of Greencastle. It contains regulations applicable to haulers
of municipal waste, collectors of recyclables, individuals, commercial,
municipal, institutional establishments and community activities.
§ 162-2. Purpose.
This chapter is being enacted in an effort to implement a recycling program
in order to return valuable materials to productive use, to conserve energy
and to protect capacity at municipal waste processing and disposal
facilities.
§ 162-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AGENT — One who performs an act for his immediate family or for another
person gratuitously (without any form of monetary or material
compensation therefor).
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being licensed as a hauler or of being
issued a recyclable collection permit, as the case may be.
AUTHORIZED COLLECTOR — A licensed hauler (as defined herein); a
recyclable collection permittee (as defined herein); or a person who, being
so authorized by the terms of this chapter, removes municipal waste or
recyclables from his own premises, as owner of the building or commercial,
municipal or institutional establishment or community activity conducted
therein, or as an agent (as defined herein) of another person.
BIMETALLIC CANS — Empty food or beverage containers consisting of both
steel and aluminum.
BOROUGH — Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
BULKY ITEMS — Discarded "white goods" (major appliances), televisions,
mattresses, furniture, air conditioners and similar household items.
§ 158-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-3
162:168
COLLECTOR — A general term referring to any person who collects, for
removal from premises, municipal waste or recyclables.
COMMERCIAL — Of or pertaining to any wholesale, retail, industrial,
manufacturing, transportation, financial or professional service or office
enterprise, business or establishment.
COMMUNITY ACTIVITY — An activity or event sponsored or organized
by a public or private nonprofit organization for recreational, educational,
cultural or civic purposes which may be attended by members of the public,
whether or not an entrance or participation fee is charged therefor.
COMPOSTING — The process by which organic solid waste is biologically
decomposed under controlled anaerobic or aerobic conditions to yield
humus-like product.
COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility using land for processing of municipal
waste by composting.
CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with an inner core
shaped in rigid parallel furrows and ridges of the type normally used to
make packaging cartons and boxes.
CURBSIDE COLLECTION — A method of collection of residentially
generated recyclables and municipal waste by which the owners or
occupants of certain residential properties may dispose of their recyclables
by placing them at curbside (within the public right-of-way) fronting along
their property, at the times designated by the Borough of Greencastle, for
collection and removal by an authorized collector therefor for delivery to a
recycling center.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, disposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or on the land or water in a
manner such that the municipal waste or a constituent thereof enters the
environment, is emitted into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL AREA — Any site, location, area, building, structure, transfer
station or premises to be used for municipal waste disposal.
GARBAGE — All putrescible animal and vegetable matter resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All empty food and beverage jars or bottles made
from silica or sand, soda ash and limestone, the product being transparent
or translucent (either clear, green or brown), excluding, however, blue
glass, flat glass, plate glass, glass commonly known as window glass,
automotive glass and ceramic and porcelain products.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — Any white paper other than newsprint,
magazines or other chemically coated paper or corrugated paper, of the
type commonly used for letter writing stationery, note paper, plain paper,
photocopying machines, computer printers and other general purpose
paper, whether or not any printed or written matter is contained thereon.
§ 162-3 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-3
162:169
INSTITUTIONAL — Of or pertaining to any establishment engaged in
service to persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools, universities, churches and social or fraternal societies
and organizations.
LANDLORD — The owner of residential property, or such owner's
authorized agent.
LEAF COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility for composting vegetative
material, including leaves, garden residue and chipped shrubbery and tree
trimmings. The term does not include a facility that is used entirely or partly
for composting grass clippings.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree trimmings
(less than four inches in length), and similar material, but not including
grass clippings.
LICENSED HAULER — A person licensed by the Borough of Greencastle to
collect, haul, transport and dispose of municipal waste and recyclables.
MAGAZINES — Printed matter, also known as periodicals, containing
miscellaneous written pieces published at fixed or varying intervals, printed
on glossy or chemically coated paper. Expressly excluded are newspapers
and all other paper products of any nature whatsoever.
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY — A type of residential property
either under single-family ownership or organized as a condominium or
cooperative form of housing, which contains four or more dwelling units.
MUNICIPAL — Of or pertaining to any office or other property under the
control of any branch or arm of the federal government of the United States
of America, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any political subdivision
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to, the
Borough of Greencastle, any counties, cities, boroughs, townships and
municipal authorities.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — An all-encompassing, most general term meaning
garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office waste and other material
including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material, resulting
from operation of residential, municipal, commercial or institutional
establishments and from community activities, except farming produced
manure, other agricultural waste and food processing waste used on land
where such materials will improve the condition of the soil, the growth of
crops or the restoration of the land for the same purposes and any sludge
not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste" as defined in
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act;24 but
excluding recyclables.
NEWSPRINT — Paper of the type commonly referred to as "newspaper"
and distributed at fixed or stated intervals, usually daily or weekly, having
printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements and
other matters of public interest. The term "newsprint" expressly excludes
24.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 162-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-3
162:170
glossy advertising inserts, magazines, glossy or other chemically coated
paper, office paper and any other paper products of any nature.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal authority,
federal government or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal
entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties. In any provision of this chapter prescribing a fine, imprisonment or
penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the term "person" shall include
the officers and directors of any corporation or other legal entity having
officers and directors.
PLASTIC BEVERAGE CARRIER — Plastic rings or similar plastic connectors
used as holding devices in the packaging of beverages including, but not
limited to, all carbonated beverages, liquors, wines, fruit juices, mineral
waters, soda and beer.
PLASTIC CONTAINERS — Empty plastic food and beverage containers, the
specific types of which may, from time to time, be designated by resolution
of the Borough of Greencastle.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste, or any technology used to convert part
or all of such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer stations, composting facilities and resource
recovery facilities.
RECYCLABLE COLLECTION PERMITTEE — A person authorized by the
Borough, through the issuance of a permit therefor, to collect, transport
and dispose of recyclables exclusively (and not municipal waste) for persons
other than himself, his immediate family or persons for whom he is acting
as an agent (as defined herein).
RECYCLABLES — Materials designated as recyclables in this chapter, or
required by the terms of this chapter (or any amendment hereto) to be kept
separate from municipal waste and recycled.
RECYCLING — The collection, separate maintenance, recovery and sale or
reuse of recyclables which would otherwise be disposed of or processed as
municipal waste (other than through combustion), creation and recovery of
reusable materials other than a fuel for the operation of energy.
RECYCLING CENTER — A facility designated to, and which does, act as a
collection center for the processing, storage and shipment of recyclables.
The term specifically excludes transfer stations and landfills for solid waste
and composting facilities and resource recovery facilities; and specifically
excludes charitable organizations that accept recyclables for collection but
do not process such recyclables.
RESIDENTIAL — Of or pertaining to any dwelling unit used as a place of
human habitation and which is not a commercial, municipal institution or a
community activity. Home occupations incidental to residential use within a
building are considered "residential."
§ 162-3 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-3
162:171
RESOURCE RECOVERY FACILITY — A processing facility that provides
for the extraction and utilization of materials or energy from municipal
waste that is generated off-site including, but not limited to, a facility that
mechanically extracts materials from municipal waste, a combustion facility
that converts the organic fraction of municipal waste to usable energy and
chemical and biological process that converts municipal waste into a fuel
product. The term also includes any facility for the combustion of municipal
waste that is generated off-site, whether or not the facility is operated to
recovery energy. The term does not include:
RUBBISH — Leaves, branches, trees, sawdust, chips, shavings, wood,
woodenware, leather, rags, grass, straw and all solid combustible matter
not included in this section under the definition of "garbage."
SOLID WASTE — Waste including, but not limited to, municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials.
STEEL CANS — Empty food or beverage containers made of steel, tin
coated steel or other ferrous metal food or beverage containers.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such municipal waste. It
shall be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess
of one year constitutes disposal. This presumption can only be overcome by
clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste at any
time after generation thereof.
TRASH — Commonly used as a term for solid waste, similar to refuse, but
not including food waste.
WASTE — A material whose original purpose has been completed and which
is directed to a disposal or processing facility or is otherwise disposed
of. The term does not include source-separated recyclable materials or
material approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Department of
Environmental Protection for beneficial use.
YARD WASTE — Grass clippings, prunings and other discarded materials
from yards and gardens.
YARD WASTE COMPOSTING FACILITY — A facility that is used to compost
grass clippings, including a facility that is used to compost leaf waste.
A. Any composting facility.
B. Methane gas extraction from a municipal waste landfill.
Any separation and collection center, drop-off point or collection center
for recycling, or any source separation or collection center for
composting leaf waste.
C.
Any facility, including all units in the facility with a total processing
capacity of less than 50 tons per day.
D.
§ 162-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-4
162:172
§ 162-4. Dumping and littering.
§ 162-5. Preparation and storage of municipal waste.
§ 162-6. Required collection; hours of collection.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to store, dump, discard or deposit, or
to permit the storage, dumping, discarding or depositing, of any solid
waste or recyclables upon the surface of the ground or underground
within the Borough, except in proper containers for purposes of storage
or collection, and except where the waste or recyclables are of such size
or shape as not to permit their being placed in such containers. It shall
be unlawful for any person to dump or deposit any solid waste or
recyclables in any stream, body of water or on any public right-of-way
within the Borough.
B. The presence of any articles containing a person's name among solid
waste or recyclables shall create a rebuttable presumption, for
purposes of this chapter, that said solid waste or recyclables are the
property of the person whose name is found therein. This presumption
can only be rebutted by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
A. The storage of all municipal waste shall be practiced so as to prevent
the attraction, breeding or harborage of insects or rodents and to
prevent conditions which may create potential hazards to the public
health or which may create fire and other safety hazards, odors,
unsightliness or public nuisance.
B. Any person accumulating or storing municipal waste on private or
public property in the Borough for any purpose whatsoever shall place
the same, or cause the same to be placed, in sanitary closed or covered
containers which shall be of metal, plastic or fiberglass construction.
A. All owners of property within the Borough shall provide for the regular
preparation, collection and removal of all municipal waste generated at
such properties in one of the approved manners set forth herein.
B. If a person, agent or establishment (being so authorized by the terms
hereof) collects and removes their own municipal waste, they shall do
so at a minimum of every 30 days or at shorter intervals, in order to
prevent odors, vectors or accumulations of refuse or garbage that are
unsafe, unsightly or potentially harmful to the public health. Any
municipal waste so removed shall be disposed of in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
C. Every owner or occupant of residential property and every other person
who, or establishment which, does not collect and remove their own
municipal waste, as aforesaid, shall contract with a licensed hauler for
the regular, scheduled curbside collection and removal of the municipal
waste at least once each week. Municipal waste shall be prepared for
collection and be collected and removed from such persons' or
§ 162-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-6
162:173
§ 162-7. Separation of recyclables.
establishments' properties at least once each week, except where
conditions beyond the control of the licensed hauler prevent it. No
person other than a licensed hauler or an agent shall collect or remove
municipal waste from any other person's property.
D. All agreements for collection, transportation and disposition of
municipal waste shall be by private contract between the owner or
occupant of the property where the waste is generated and the licensed
hauler who is to collect such waste. Licensed haulers shall not collect
residential municipal waste from properties within the Borough limits
on Sunday.
E. Nothing herein shall limit the right of the Borough to implement public
collection of solid waste either by entering into contracts or by
engaging in any collection practice permitted by law.
F. Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person from
hauling municipal waste on an irregular and unscheduled basis to a
facility permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Environmental Protection, and which is approved for disposal in the
Franklin County Solid Waste Plan; provided, that such hauling shall be
in addition to and not in place of the regular removal of municipal waste
as required by this section; and, provided, that such is not in violation of
any county or other municipal law or regulation.
A. Recyclables shall be kept separate from and disposed of separately
from municipal waste, to the extent required by the following provisions
and the hauler's guidelines:
(1) Owners and occupants of all residential properties shall keep
separate from other waste, but may commingle (mix), the following
recyclables: clear glass, colored glass and aluminum, steel,
bimetallic cans and tied or bagged newsprint.
(2) Owners and occupants of all commercial, municipal and
institutional establishments and properties and sponsors or
organizers of community activities shall keep separate the
following recyclables: clear glass, colored glass, aluminum, steel
and bimetallic cans, corrugated paper and high grade officer paper
and newsprint.
(3) Alternatively the Borough may, by resolution, enumerate
alternative recyclables which shall be required to be separated
from municipal waste and collected in accordance with this
chapter.
B. Corrugated paper and newsprint shall be placed in easy to manage
bundles not to exceed 40 pounds and kept dry. Glass containers and
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans shall be emptied. Aluminum, steel
and bimetallic cans and glass containers may be mixed together and
§ 162-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-7
162:174
§ 162-8. Disposal or placement for removal of recyclables.
shall be placed in containers which, when full, shall not exceed 40
pounds. High grade office paper shall be placed in containers not to
exceed 40 pounds. Recyclables shall not be placed in the same garbage
can or other container as, or otherwise mixed with, municipal waste
for collection, removal or disposal. Recyclables shall not be placed in
plastic bags or corrugated boxes.
C. Recyclables may be set out for collection in a manner different from the
requirements in Subsection B, above, if an alternative manner is
designated by the collector and which is approved by the Borough.
A. Residential properties other than multifamily housing.
(1) For residential properties other than multifamily housing projects,
all recyclables which are required to be kept separate in residential
properties pursuant to § 162-7, above, shall be placed at the
appropriate location on the premises to be collected at times
designated by the licensed hauler or recyclable collection
permittee. The frequency of such collection shall be not less than
once per month.
(2) If the recyclables are to be collected by a licensed hauler, then the
recyclables shall be set out within the public right-of-way (curb) for
collection.
(3) If the recyclables are to be collected by an authorized collector
other than a licensed hauler, then the recyclables shall be placed at
an area other than within the public right-of-way.
B. Multifamily housing properties.
(1) For multifamily housing properties, all recyclables which are
required to be kept separate, in residential properties pursuant to
§ 162-7, above, shall either be delivered directly to a recycling
center or shall be picked up by a recyclable collection permittee or
a licensed hauler separately from municipal waste, in a
prearranged manner. If any recyclables are picked up by a
recyclable collection permittee, then all recyclables generated at
the property shall be made available to such recyclable collection
permittee for collection. The landlord of every multifamily housing
property shall require, by a clause in the lease or other enforceable
rule or regulation, that the tenants in such property comply with
the requirements of this chapter governing separation and disposal
or placement for removal of recyclables in multifamily housing
properties. Every such landlord shall set up a convenient and
practical collection system in such properties for the collection,
storage and regular disposal or placement for removal of
recyclables generated by the residents of such properties.
§ 162-7 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-8
162:175
§ 162-9. Recycling reports.
(2) The collection system shall include suitable containers for
collecting and sorting materials, easily accessible locations for the
containers and written instructions to the occupants concerning
the use and availability of the collection system.
(3) Owners, landlords and agents of owners or landlords who comply
with the aforementioned requirements relative to multifamily
housing properties shall not be liable for the noncompliance of
occupants of their building.
C. Commercial, municipal and institutional and community activities. All
recyclables which are required to be kept separate in commercial,
municipal and institutional establishments and properties and
community activities pursuant to § 162-7, above, shall either be
delivered directly to a recycling center or shall be picked up by a
recyclable collection permittee or a licensed hauler separately from
municipal waste, in a prearranged manner. If any recyclables are
picked up by a recyclable collection permittee, then all recyclables
generated at the property shall be made available to such recyclable
collection permittee for collection.
A. Recycling reports for multifamily housing properties.
(1) The landlord of every multifamily housing property or his agent
shall complete a form to be designated "Recycling Report -
Multifamily Housing Properties," to be provided by the Borough,
which shall indicate where the property's recyclables are delivered.
(2) The recycling report and all weigh slips obtained from the facility
or facilities to which the recyclables were delivered or taken shall
be submitted quarterly to the Borough. For purposes of submitting
such weight slips and recycling reports quarterly to the Borough,
the collector who removed the recyclables from the property may
be the agent for the landlord and may be responsible for
completing and submitting such to the Borough. Each such
quarterly report shall be submitted on or before the last day of the
first month of each quarter, for the preceding quarter. Quarters
shall run on a calendar-year basis, thus: January through March;
April through June; July through September; and October through
December.
B. Recycling reports for commercial, municipal and institutional
establishments and community activities.
(1) Every commercial, municipal and institutional establishment and
community activity sponsor shall complete a form to be designated
"Recycling Report - Commercial, Municipal and Institutional
Establishments and Community Activities," to be provided by the
§ 162-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-9
162:176
§ 162-10. Collection by unauthorized person.
§ 162-11. Authorization and duties of collectors.
Borough, which shall indicate where the establishment's or
activity's recyclables were delivered.
(2) The recycling report and all weigh slips obtained from the facility
or facilities to which the recyclables were delivered or taken shall
be submitted quarterly to the Borough. For purposes of submitting
such weigh slips and recycling reports quarterly to the Borough,
the collector who removed the recyclables from the property may
be the agent for the operator of the establishment or sponsor of the
activity and may be responsible for completing and submitting such
to the Borough. Each such quarterly recycling report shall be
submitted on or before the last day of the first month of each
quarter as described in Subsection A(2).
A. From the time of placement for collection of residentially generated
recyclable items for collection in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, the items shall be and become the property of the Borough or
its authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person
unauthorized by the Borough to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection in
violation thereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
B. It shall be unlawful for a person to collect, remove or dispose of
municipal waste which contains recyclables required by that person to
be separated, combined therewith.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the Borough, to collect and to transport municipal wastes
of any nature or recyclables within or from the Borough. Authorization
shall be given only as set forth below. Authorization to collect, transport
and dispose of municipal waste or recyclables for persons other than
one's self or for whom one is acting as an agent (as defined in this
chapter) may be given only by the Borough through the issuance of a
"hauler's license" or a "recyclable collection permit." A person who
collects recyclables only shall apply for and obtain a recyclable
collection permit. A person who collects municipal waste exclusively or
in addition to recyclables shall apply for and obtain a hauler's license.
B. All licensed haulers and recyclable collection permittees shall have an
affirmative duty to follow and conduct themselves in accordance with
their current license or permit, and to service each of their customers in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter, any failure of which
shall be a violation of this chapter.
§ 162-9 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-11
162:177
C. Collectors of bulky items, trash and rubbish who collect on an
unscheduled, sporadic basis (such as "you call, we haul" operators)
shall be exempt from these regulations.
D. All application for such licenses or permits shall be evaluated and
approved in accordance with the following criteria:
(1) Hauler's license.
(a) Haulers' licenses may be issued to only those persons who can
comply with the provisions and intent of this chapter.
(b) Applicants for a hauler's license must furnish the following
information on a form to be prescribed and provided therefor
by the Borough:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of the hauler
making application.
[2] A list of all of the applicant's current customers in the
Borough, upon demand made for same by the Borough.
[3] A certificate of the applicant's insurance coverage
certifying the maintenance by the applicant of complete
third-party comprehensive and liability insurance covering
bodily injury and property damage, the limits of which
shall be not less than $300,000/$500,000 for bodily injury
and $50,000 for property damage.
[4] A valid certificate of the applicant's worker's
compensation insurance as required by law.
[5] Any and all additional information which the Borough may
request and deem necessary prior to the issuance of a
license.
(c) The Borough may deny a hauler's license for any of the
following reasons:
[1] If the applicant has previously had a recyclable collection
permit or hauler's license revoked or suspended in this
Borough or elsewhere.
[2] If the applicant has violated, or is violating any ordinance
of the Borough, the Solid Waste Management Act,25 the
Municipal Waste Planning and Recycling Act,26 or any
regulations of the Department of Environmental
Protection relating to the environment and to solid waste,
or has been convicted of any such violation.
25.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 162-11 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-11
162:178
[3] If the applicant has any uncollected judgments filed
against him resulting from lawsuits filed against him by
any customer.
[4] Where, in the Borough or elsewhere, the applicant has
failed to fulfill his duties as a municipal waste collector in
general, or in particular has failed to pick up municipal
waste and recyclables in a workmanlike manner on a
regularly scheduled basis.
(d) Haulers' licenses shall be issued on a calendar-year basis, but
may be revoked at anytime by the Borough in accordance with
the following:
[1] Failure of the licensee to furnish and provide collection
and disposal of municipal waste and recyclables in
accordance with the terms of this chapter and the
conditions under which the license was issued.
[2] Administrative proceedings.
[a] In case of violating or failure to comply with the
provisions of this section, the Borough shall give the
licensee an opportunity for a hearing thereon. Any
licensee so entitled to a hearing shall have 10 days
after notice of his right to a hearing is given to him
pursuant to this section within which to request such a
hearing in writing. Failure of the licensee to so request
a hearing shall be deemed to constitute an admission
of the violation with which he is charged and which
forms the basis of the revocation of his license. In case
the licensee does request a hearing in accordance
with this section, a hearing shall be scheduled before
the Borough Council and the licensee given 10 days'
written notice of the time and place of the hearing at
which he may appear and answer the charge.
[b] Upon determination that a violation did occur, the
Borough may issue a warning or may revoke the
license.
[3] The issuance of a hauler's license under this section does
not grant a vested right to any collector to a continued
right to haul or collect municipal waste and recyclables in
the Borough, and the Borough reserves the right to
contract for municipal waste and recycling services or to
initiate the public collection of municipal waste and/or
recyclables.
(e) Conditions relating to hauler's license.
§ 162-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-11
162:179
[1] An annual fee shall be paid for a hauler's license in
accordance with a schedule of charges established by
resolution of the Borough. The license fee shall not be
proratable. The fee shall be submitted with each
application for a license. Payment shall be made by check
only, payable to "Borough of Greencastle."
[2] Signs. Licensees shall have placed on the door or each side
of the body of each vehicle the name of the hauler,
telephone number of the hauler's office or headquarters
and the type of waste being transported therein (or, if
recyclables are being transported therein, then such to be
indicated). The size of such lettering shall be no less than
six inches in height and clearly legible.
[3] The Borough shall have the right to inspect any vehicles
owned or leased by the applicant prior to the issuance of a
license and during the period the license is in effect.
(2) Recyclable collection permit. No person who is not a "licensed
hauler" as defined in this chapter shall collect, transport or dispose
of recyclables for any person other than himself or for when he is
acting as an agent (as defined in this chapter) unless he has applied
for and obtained a valid recyclable collection permit authorizing
such activity. Applications for such permit shall be made by
submission to the Borough on a form prescribed therefor,
completed by the applicant, accompanied by a fee for such permit
to be set by resolution of the Borough of Greencastle. Recyclable
collection permits shall be obtained annually and issued on a
calendar-year basis.
(a) Recyclable collection permits may be issued to only those
persons who can comply with the provisions and intent of this
chapter.
(b) Applicants for recyclable collection permits must furnish the
following information on a form to be prescribed and provided
therefor by the Borough:
[1] The name, address and telephone number of the permittee
making application.
[2] A list of all of the applicant's current customers in the
Borough, upon demand made for same by the Borough.
[3] A certificate of the applicant's insurance coverage
certifying the maintenance by the applicant of complete
third-party comprehensive and liability insurance covering
bodily injury and property damage, the limits of which
shall be not less than $300,000/$500,000 for bodily injury
and $50,000 for property damage.
§ 162-11 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-11
162:180
[4] A valid certificate of the applicant's worker's
compensation insurance as required by law.
[5] Any and all additional information which the Borough may
request and deem necessary prior to the issuance of a
permit.
(c) The Borough may deny the issuance of a recyclable collection
permit for any of the following reasons:
[1] If the applicant has previously had a recyclable collection
permit or hauler's license revoked or suspended in this
Borough or elsewhere.
[2] If the applicant has violated, or is violating any ordinance
of the Borough, the Solid Waste Management Act,27 the
Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act,28 or any regulations of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection relating to the environment
and to solid waste, or has been convicted of any such
violation.
[3] If the applicant has any uncollected judgments filed
against him resulting from lawsuits filed against him by
any customer.
[4] Where, in the Borough or elsewhere, the applicant has
failed to fulfill his duties as a municipal waste collector in
general, or in particular has failed to pick up municipal
waste and recyclables in a workmanlike manner on a
regularly scheduled basis.
(d) Recycling collection permits shall be issued on a calendar-year
basis, but may be revoked at any time by the Borough in
accordance with the following:
[1] Failure of the permittee to furnish and provide collection
and disposal of recyclables in accordance with the terms of
this chapter and the conditions under which the permit
was issued.
[2] Administrative proceedings.
[a] In case of violating or failure to comply with the
provisions of this section, the Borough shall give the
permittee an opportunity for a hearing thereon. Any
permittee so entitled to a hearing shall have 10 days
after notice of his right to a hearing is given to him
pursuant to this section within which to request such a
27.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
28.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
§ 162-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-11
162:181
§ 162-12. Licensed haulers to provide recyclable removal service.
hearing in writing. Failure of the permittee to so
request a hearing shall be deemed to constitute an
admission of the violation with which he is charged
and which forms the basis of the revocation of his
permit. In case the permittee does request a hearing
in accordance with this section, a hearing shall be
scheduled before the Borough Council and the
permittee given 10 days' written notice of the time
and place of the hearing at which he may appear and
answer the charge.
[b] Upon determination that a violation did occur, the
Borough may issue a warning or may revoke the
permit.
[3] The issuance of a recyclable collection permit under this
section does not grant a vested right to any collector to a
continued right to haul or collect recyclables in the
Borough and the Borough reserves the right to contract
for recycling services or to initiate the public collection of
recyclables.
(e) Conditions relating to recyclable collection permit.
[1] An annual fee shall be paid for a recyclable collection
permit in accordance with a schedule of charges
established by resolution of the Borough. The permit fee
shall not be proratable. The fee shall be submitted with
each application for a permit. Payment shall be made by
check only, payable to "Borough of Greencastle."
[2] Signs. Permittee shall have placed on the doors or each
side of the body of each vehicle the name of the collector,
the telephone number of the collector's office or
headquarters, and an indication that recyclables are being
transported therein. The size of such lettering shall be no
less than six inches in height or clearly legible.
[3] The permittee shall pay all costs charged for the use of any
recycling facilities which he utilizes.
[4] All recyclable collection permittees shall be required to
take all of the recyclable material which they collect from
their customers to a recycling center.
A. For residential properties. Every hauler, as a precondition to being
licensed to do business within the Borough, shall be required to provide
to its residential customers the service of removing recyclables from
their properties at the curbside (within the public right-of-way). Any
such recyclables so removed by licensed haulers shall be kept separate
§ 162-11 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-12
162:182
§ 162-13. Licensed haulers not to accept unlawfully disposed of
recyclables.
§ 162-14. Licensed haulers to provide bulky items removal service.
All licensed haulers doing business within the Borough shall make available
to their customers the service of removal of "bulky items" not less
frequently than once per year in the month of May or October.
§ 162-15. Community-oriented charitable activities.
from municipal waste and shall be taken to a recycling center. Licensed
haulers shall take all of their customers' recyclable materials to a
recycling center.
B. For commercial, municipal and institutional establishments and
properties. Every hauler, as a precondition to being licensed to do
business within the Borough, shall be required to provide to its
commercial, municipal, institutional and multifamily housing property
customers the service of removing recyclables from their properties.
Any such recyclables so removed by licensed haulers shall be kept
separate from municipal waste and shall be taken to a recycling center.
Licensed haulers shall take all of their customers' recyclable material to
a recycling center.
A. No licensed hauler shall accept, pick up or remove any bag or other
container of municipal waste which the hauler knows, or has reason to
believe, contains recyclables required to be separated, combined with
municipal waste.
B. Upon discovery of such recyclables combined with municipal waste
placed at curbside or otherwise placed for pick up, the hauler shall affix
a tag or sticker to the container containing the recyclables (which tag
or sticker will be provided by the Borough), retain a duplicate for his
records, and deliver a triplicate to the designated office of the Borough
within 48 hours. When the hauler utilizes a tag or sticker pursuant to
this section, he shall fill in the information requested thereon, including
the address at which the container is located and the reason which led
him to know or believe the container contained recyclables (e.g., he saw
newspaper or he heard bottles rattling). The hauler shall leave such
container with the tag or sticker placed thereon where he found it.
A. Nothing contained herein shall impair or prohibit any recognized
religious, civil, fraternal, charitable or benevolent organization,
association or society from undertaking or sponsoring voluntary
programs or projects involving the collection of recyclables from the
public. Any such collection activity can only occur prior to the
recyclable materials being placed at curbside or similar location for
collection by an authorized collector. Prior to initiating such activity the
organization shall obtain authorization from the Borough.
§ 162-12 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 162-15
162:183
§ 162-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 nor more than
$1,000 and costs of prosecution, or, in default of payment of such fines and
costs, to undergo imprisonment of not less than 10 days nor more than 30
days; provided, each violation of any provision of this chapter and each day
the same is continued shall be deemed a separate offense. For purposes of
this section, the doing of any act or thing prohibited by any violation of this
chapter, or the failure to do any act or thing as to which any provision of
this chapter creates an affirmative duty, shall constitute a violation of this
chapter, punishable as herein stated.
§ 162-17. Construal of provisions.
The various headings used throughout this chapter are intended only as an
aid in its organization, in order to facilitate ease of reading and are not
to be considered a substantive part of this chapter. In this chapter, unless
the context clearly indicates otherwise, the singular shall include the plural,
the plural shall include the singular; and the masculine shall include the
feminine and neuter.
Chapter 166
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Water — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
B. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prohibit any person from donating or
selling any recyclables to individuals or organizations unless or until
such recyclables are placed at curbside or similar location for collection
by an authorized collector.
§ 162-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 162-17
162:184
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 166-1. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the municipality finds that:
§ 166-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
the Conococheague Creek Watershed by minimizing the damages described
in § 166-1A of this chapter through provisions designed to:
§ 166-3. Statutory authority.
The municipality is empowered to regulate land use activities that affect
runoff by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32
P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as amended, the "Stormwater Management Act," and
the applicable municipal code.
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of the municipality and all the people of
the Commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
A. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems at
their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage recharge of groundwater where appropriate and prevent
degradation of groundwater quality.
D. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in the
watershed.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater management
facilities that are constructed in the watershed.
G. Provide performance standards and design criteria for watershed-wide
stormwater management and planning.
§ 166-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-4
162:185
§ 166-4. Applicability.
§ 166-5. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act, or ordinance.
A. This chapter shall apply to those areas of the municipality that are
located within the Conococheague Creek Watershed, as delineated in
Appendix D, which is hereby adopted as part of this chapter.29
B. This chapter shall only apply to permanent stormwater management
facilities constructed as part of any of the regulated activities listed in
this section. Stormwater management and erosion and sedimentation
control during construction activities are specifically not regulated by
this chapter, but shall continue to be regulated under existing laws and
ordinances.
C. This chapter contains only the stormwater management performance
standards and design criteria that are necessary or desirable from a
watershed-wide perspective. Local stormwater management design
criteria (e.g., inlet spacing, inlet type, collection system design and
details, outlet structure design, etc.) shall continue to be regulated by
the applicable municipal ordinances.
D. The following activities are defined as "regulated activities" and shall
be regulated by this chapter:
(1) Land development.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces (driveways, parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
29.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-5
162:186
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 166-6. Word usage and interpretation.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 166-7. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of man's activity and the natural processes of a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — The work of producing crops and raising
livestock including tillage, plowing, disking, harrowing, pasturing and
installation of conservation measures. Construction of new buildings or
impervious area is not considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result of
the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another; also
the changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer who has filed an application for
approval to engage in any regulated activities as defined in § 166-4 of this
chapter.
BMP (BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE) — Stormwater structures, facilities
and techniques to control, maintain or improve the quantity and quality of
surface runoff.
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender; and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example, but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any other
similar entity.
D. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
E. The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended, designed,
maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or maintained."
§ 166-6 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-7
162:187
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward cutting of
small channels and waterways, due to erosion caused by moderate to large
floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Franklin County Conservation District.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works which carries a stream
under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of the Borough.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in the design and
evaluation of stormwater management systems.
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a
predetermined rate.
DETENTION DISTRICT — Those subareas in which some type of detention
is required to meet the plan requirements and the goals of Act 167.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation, or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes
any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE — The specific tract of land for which a regulated
activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE DISCHARGE — Drainage discharge not confined
to a single point location or channel, such as sheet flow or shallow
concentrated flow.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of the
lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all overland
or pipe flow from the site would be directed towards it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management facility
designed to transmit stormwater runoff and shall include streams, channels,
swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PERMIT — A permit issued by the Borough Council after the
drainage plan has been approved. Said permit is issued prior to or with the
final municipal approval.
§ 166-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-7
162:188
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the stormwater management
system, if any, to be used for a given development site, the contents of which
are established in § 166-19.
EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity including, but not limited to,
construction, mining, timber harvesting and grubbing which alters,
disturbs, and exposes the existing land surface.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water, wind,
ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan that is
designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality which
satisfy Pennsylvania Code Title 25 Environmental Protections, Chapter 93
Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to anti-degradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior to
the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is undeveloped
land, the land use shall be considered as "meadow" unless the natural land
cover is proven to generate lower curve numbers or Rational "C" value, such
as forested lands.
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, rivers,
and other waters of this Commonwealth.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water from
any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of Housing
and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration Flood Hazard
Boundary - Mapped as being a special flood hazard area. Also included
are areas that comprise Group 13 Soils, as listed in Appendix A of the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (PaDEP) Technical
Manual for Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from
time to time by PaDEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplains, which are reasonably required to carry and discharge
the one-hundred-year frequency flood. Unless otherwise specified, the
boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and flood insurance
studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA maps or studies
have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-year frequency floodway, it
is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that the floodway extends from
the stream to 50 feet from the top of the bank of the stream.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high-water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge. The
space is required as a safety margin in a pond or basin.
GRADE —
A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground specified in
percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
A.
§ 166-7 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-7
162:189
GRASSED WATERWAY — A natural or constructed waterway, usually broad
and shallow, covered with erosion-resistant grasses, used to conduct
surface water from cropland.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS — The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Hydrologic Engineering
Center (HEC) - Hydrologic Modeling System (HMS).
HIGH QUALITY WATERS — Surface waters having quality which exceeds
levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and wildlife and
recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania Code Title 25
Environmental Protection, Chapter 93 Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(a).
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface that prevents the percolation of water
into the ground.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff into
the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain. A structure at the diversion
end of a conduit. The upstream end of any structure through which water
may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LAND EARTH DISTURBANCE — Any activity involving grading, tilling,
digging, or filling of ground or stripping of vegetation or any other activity
that causes an alteration to the natural condition of the land.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Conococheague Creek hydrologic
model.
TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment
or bottom of excavation.
B.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts, or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among two
or more existing or prospective occupants by means of, or for
the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups, or other features.
(2)
A.
B. Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C.
§ 166-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-7
162:190
MANNING EQUATION IN (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a watery body
from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from discernible,
confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service (previously "SCS").
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows with an
open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to, natural
and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals, and pipes
flowing partly full.
OUTFALL — Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain.
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake, tidewater or
artificial drain.
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking areas as
temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (CALIBRATED) — The computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the Conococheague Creek
Watershed for the Act 167 Plan. The model has been "calibrated" to reflect
actual recorded flow values by adjoining key model input parameters.
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Greencastle.
PMF (PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD) — The flood that may be expected
from the most severe combination of critical meteorologic and hydrologic
conditions that are reasonably possible in any area. The PMF is derived
from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP) as determined based on
data obtained from the National Oceanographic and Atmospheric
Administration (NOAA).
QUALIFIED DESIGN PROFESSIONAL — A Pennsylvania registered
professional engineer, registered landscape architect or a registered
professional land surveyor trained and certified to develop stormwater
management plans.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate peak
flow.
§ 166-7 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-7
162:191
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions that have an
impact on stormwater runoff and that are specified in § 166-4 of this
chapter.
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of runoff
from a site or subarea to which the postdevelopment peak rate of runoff
must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored and
not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released from the
basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a storm
event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the
twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected to recur on the
average of once every 25 years.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is used
to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design storm.
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin located
and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material transported
by water.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge or any other
introduction of sediment into the waters of the Commonwealth occurring
from the failure to design, construct, implement or maintain control
measures and control facilities in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is directed
for infiltration into the ground.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin, even
layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL-COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SOIL GROUP, HYDROLOGIC — A classification of soils by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service, formerly the Soil Conservation Service,
into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from A soils, which are
very permeable and produce little runoff, to D soils, which are not very
permeable and produce much more runoff.
§ 166-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-7
162:192
SPILLWAY — A depression in the embankment of a pond or basin which
is used to pass peak discharge greater than the maximum design storm
controlled by the pond.
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir routing procedure based
on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow equals the
change in storage) with outflow defined as a function of storage volume and
depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm "event"
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See "return
period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The total amount of precipitation reaching the ground
surface.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITY — Any structure, natural or manmade,
that, due to its condition, design, or construction, conveys, stores,
or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical stormwater management
facilities include, but are not limited to, detention and retention basins,
open channels, storm sewers, pipes, and infiltration structures.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff in the Conococheague Creek Watershed adopted by Franklin County
as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), and known
as the "Conococheague Creek Watershed Act 167 Stormwater Management
Plan."
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN — The plan prepared by the
developer or his representative indicating how stormwater runoff will be
managed at the particular site of interest according to this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses a regulated
water of this Commonwealth.
SUBAREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed for which
stormwater management criteria have been established in the stormwater
management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwellings, shall be exempt.
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff.
§ 166-7 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-7
162:193
TIME-OF-CONCENTRATION (TC) — The time for surface runoff to travel
from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a point of
interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total of overland
flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
WATERCOURSE — A stream of water; river; brook; creek; or a channel or
ditch for water, whether natural or man-made.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes, dammed water,
wetlands, ponds, springs, and all other bodies or channels of conveyance
of surface and underground water, or parts thereof, whether natural or
artificial, within or on the boundaries of this Commonwealth.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that
under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation
typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps,
marshes, bogs, ferns, and similar areas.
§ 166-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-7
162:194
ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 166-8. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in Conococheague Creek Watershed which do
not fall under the exemption criteria shown in § 166-18 shall submit a
drainage plan consistent with the Conococheague Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan to the municipality for review. This
criteria shall apply to the total proposed development even if
development is to take place in stages. Impervious cover shall include,
but not be limited to, any roof, parking or driveway areas and any new
streets and sidewalks. Any areas designed to initially be gravel or
crushed stone shall be assumed to be impervious for the purposes of
comparison to the exemption criteria.
B. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
C. The existing points of concentrated drainage that discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without permission of the
affected property owner(s) and shall be subject to any applicable
discharge criteria specified in this chapter.
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any
applicable discharge criteria in the general direction of existing
discharge, whether proposed to be concentrated or maintained as
diffused drainage areas, except as otherwise provided by this chapter. If
diffused drainage discharge is proposed to be concentrated and
discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document that
adequate downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding or other harm will result from the concentrated
discharge.
E. Where a development site is traversed by watercourses, drainage
easements shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement,
shall be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways. Work within natural drainageways
shall be subject to approval by PaDEP through the joint permit
§ 166-8 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-8
162:195
§ 166-9. Stormwater management districts established.
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PaDEP, through
the general permit process.
G. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located in or adjacent to waters of the Commonwealth or
wetlands shall be subject to approval by PaDEP through the joint permit
application process, or, where deemed appropriate by PaDEP, the
general permit process. When there is a question whether wetlands
may be involved, it is the responsibility of the developer or his agent to
show that the land in question cannot be classified as wetlands,
otherwise approval to work in the area must be obtained from PaDEP.
H. Any stormwater management facilities regulated by this chapter that
would be located on state highway rights-of-way shall be subject to
approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
I. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged strongly,
where soil conditions permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
J. Roof drains must not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches to promote overland flow and infiltration/
percolation of stormwater where advantageous to do so. When it is
more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm sewers, then
it shall be permitted on a case-by-case basis by the municipality.
K. Special requirements for watersheds draining to high quality (HQ) and
exceptional value (EV) waters. The temperature and quality of water
and streams that have been declared as exceptional value and high
quality are to be maintained as defined in Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, Title 25 of Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection Rules and Regulations. Temperature-sensitive BMPs and
stormwater conveyance systems are to be used and designed with
storage pool areas and supply outflow channels and should be shaded
with trees. This will require modification of berms for permanent ponds
and the relaxation of restrictions on planting vegetation within the
facilities, provided that capacity for volumes and rate control is
maintained. At a minimum, the southern half on pond shorelines shall
be planted with shade or canopy trees within 10 feet of the pond
shoreline. In conjunction with this requirement, the maximum slope
allowed on the berm area to be planted is 10 to one. A long-term
maintenance schedule and management plan for the thermal control
BMPs is to be established and recorded for all development sites.
A. Conococheague Creek Watershed has been divided into stormwater
management districts as shown on the Watershed Map in Appendix D.30
§ 166-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-9
162:196
§ 166-10. District implementation provisions (performance
standards).
B. In addition to the requirements specified below, the groundwater
recharge (§ 166-14), water quality (§ 166-15), and streambank erosion
(§ 166-16) requirements shall be implemented.
C. Standards for managing runoff from each subarea in the
Conococheague Creek Watershed are shown below. Development sites
located in each of the A, B, or C Districts must control postdevelopment
runoff rates to predevelopment runoff rates for the design storms as
follows:
District Subareas
Design Storm
Postdevelopment
Design Storm
Predevelopment
A 2-year 1-year
5-year 5-year
10-year 10-year
25-year 25-year
100-year 100-year
B 2-year 1-year
5-year 2-year
10-year 5-year
25-year 10-year
100-year 100-year
C (See below) (See below)
Explanation of District C, Provisional Direct Discharge District.
Development sites which can discharge directly to the Conococheague
Creek main channel or major tributaries or indirectly to the main
channel through an existing stormwater drainage system (i.e., storm
sewer or tributary) may do so without control of postdevelopment peak
rate of runoff. Sites in District C will still have to comply with the
criteria for groundwater recharge (§ 166-14); water quality (§ 166-15);
and streambank erosion (§ 166-16). If the postdevelopment runoff is
intended to be conveyed by an existing stormwater drainage system
to the main channel, assurance must be provided that such system
has adequate capacity to convey the increased peak flows or will be
provided with improvements to furnish the required capacity. When
adequate capacity of downstream system does not exist and will not
be provided through improvements, the postdevelopment peak rate of
runoff must be controlled to the predevelopment peak rate as required
in District A provisions (i.e., ten-year postdevelopment flows to 10
predevelopment flows) for the specified design storms.
30.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-9 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-10
162:197
A. General. Postdevelopment peak rates of runoff from any regulated
activity shall meet the peak release rates of runoff prior to development
for the design storms specified on the Stormwater Management District
Watershed Map (Appendix D31) and § 166-9 of this chapter.
B. District boundaries. The boundaries of the stormwater management
districts are shown on an official map that is available for inspections at
the municipal office. A copy of the official map at a reduced scale is
included in Appendix D. The exact location of the stormwater
management district boundaries as they apply to a given development
site shall be determined by mapping the boundaries using the two-foot
topographic contours (or most accurate data required) provided as part
of the drainage plan.
C. Sites located in more than one district. For a proposed development site
located within two or more stormwater management district category
subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be the
predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea as indicated in
§ 166-9. The calculated peak discharges shall apply regardless of
whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by subarea. An
exception to the above may be granted if discharges from multiple
subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a 100% release rate provided that the
overall site discharge meets the weighted average release rate.
D. Off-site areas. Off-site areas that drain through a proposed development
site are not subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable
peak runoff rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed
to safely convey off-site flows through the development site.
E. Site areas. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed
development activity differs significantly from the total site area, only
the proposed impact area utilizing stormwater management measures
shall be subject to the management district criteria. In other words,
unimpacted areas bypassing the stormwater management facilities
would not be subject to the management district criteria.
F. "No harm" option. For any proposed development site not located in a
provisional direct discharge district, the developer has the option of
using a less restrictive runoff control (including no detention) if the
developer can prove that "no harm" would be caused by discharging at
a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan. The "no harm"
option is used when a developer can prove that the postdevelopment
hydrographs can match predevelopment hydrographs, or if it can be
proved that the postdevelopment conditions will not cause increases in
peaks at all points downstream. Proof of "no harm" would have to be
shown based upon the following "downstream impact evaluation" which
shall include a "downstream hydraulic capacity analysis" consistent
with Subsection G to determine if adequate hydraulic capacity exists.
31.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-10
162:198
The land developer shall submit to the municipality this evaluation
of the impacts due to increased downstream stormwater flows in the
watershed.
(1) The "downstream impact evaluation" shall include hydrologic and
hydraulic calculations necessary to determine the impact of
hydrograph timing modifications due to the proposed development
upon a dam, highway, structure, natural point of restricted
streamflow or any stream channel section, established with the
concurrence of the municipality.
(2) The evaluation shall continue downstream until the increase in flow
diminishes due to additional flow from tributaries and/or stream
attenuation.
(3) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, five-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-,
and one-hundred-year) shall be the values from the calibrated
model for the Conococheague Creek Watershed. These flow values
can be obtained from the watershed plan.
(4) Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas would,
by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to prove "noharm,"
except in conjunction with proposed capacity improvements
for the problem areas consistent with Subsection H.
(5) A financial distress shall not constitute grounds for granting a noharm
exemption.
(6) Capacity improvements may be provided as necessary to
implement the "no harm" option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
(7) Any "no harm" justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV.
G. Downstream hydraulic capacity analysis. Any downstream capacity
hydraulic analysis conducted in accordance with this chapter shall use
the following criteria for determining adequacy for accepting increased
peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion. Acceptable velocities shall be based upon
criteria included in the DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Program Manual.
§ 166-10 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-10
162:199
§ 166-11. Design criteria for stormwater management facilities.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without creating
any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
H. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the study
area, it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for
more than one development site than to provide an individual control
facility for each development site. The initiative and funding for any
regional runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined on a case-by-case basis
using the hydrologic model of the watershed consistent with protection
of the downstream watershed areas. "Hydrologic model" refers to the
calibrated model as developed for the stormwater management plan.
I. "Hardship option." The development of the plan and its standards and
criteria was designed to maintain existing peak flows throughout the
Conococheague Creek Watershed as the watershed becomes
developed. There may be certain instances, however, where the
standards and criteria established are too restrictive for a particular
landowner or developer. The existing drainage network in some areas
may be capable of safely transporting slight increases in flows without
causing a problem or increasing flows elsewhere. If a developer or
homeowner may not be able to possibly meet the stormwater standards
due to lot conditions or if conformance would become a hardship to an
owner, the hardship option may be applied. The landowner would have
to plead his/her case to the Borough Council with the final
determination made by the Borough. Any landowners pleading the
"hardship option" will assume all liabilities that may arise due to
exercising this option.
A. Any stormwater facility located on state highway rights-of-way shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
B. Any stormwater management facility (i.e., detention basin) designed to
store runoff and requiring a berm or earthen embankment required or
regulated by this chapter shall be designed to provide an emergency
spillway to handle flow up to and including the one-hundred-year
postdevelopment conditions. The height of embankment must be set as
to provide a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard above the maximum pool
elevation computed when the facility functions for the one-hundred-
§ 166-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-11
162:200
§ 166-12. Calculation methodology.
Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or a soil-cover-complex methodology.
year postdevelopment inflow. Should any stormwater management
facility require a dam safety permit under PaDEP Chapter 105, the
facility shall be designed in accordance with Chapter 105 and meet
the regulations of Chapter 105 concerning dam safety which may be
required to pass storms larger than the one-hundred-year event.
C. Any facilities that constitute water obstructions (e.g., culverts, bridges,
outfalls, or stream enclosures), and any work involving wetlands as
directed in PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations (as amended or replaced
from time to time by PaDEP), shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 105 and will require a permit from PaDEP. Any other drainage
conveyance facility that does not fall under Chapter 105 regulations
must be able to convey, without damage to the drainage structure or
roadway, runoff from the twenty-five-year design storm with a minimum
1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest point along the top of
the roadway. Roadway crossings located within designated floodplain
areas must be able to convey runoff from a one-hundred-year design
storm with a minimum 1.0 foot of freeboard measured below the lowest
point along the top of roadway. Any facility that constitutes a dam as
defined in PaDEP Chapter 105 regulations may require a permit under
dam safety regulations. Any facility located within a PennDOT right-ofway
must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and permit
submission requirements.
D. Any drainage conveyance facility and/or channel that does not fall
under Chapter 105 Regulations must be able to convey, without damage
to the drainage structure or roadway, runoff from the ten-year design
storm. Conveyance facilities to or exiting from stormwater management
facilities (i.e., detention basins) shall be designed to convey the design
flow to or from that structure. Roadway crossings located within
designated floodplain areas must be able to convey runoff from a onehundred-
year design storm. Any facility located within a PennDOT
right-of-way must meet PennDOT minimum design standards and
permit submission requirements.
E. Storm sewers must be able to convey postdevelopment runoff from a
ten-year design storm without surcharging inlets, where appropriate.
F. Adequate erosion protection shall be provided along all open channels,
and at all points of discharge.
G. The design of all stormwater management facilities shall incorporate
sound engineering principles and practices. The municipality shall
reserve the right to disapprove any design that would result in the
occupancy or continuation of an adverse hydrologic or hydraulic
condition within the watershed.
§ 166-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-12
162:201
A. Any stormwater runoff calculations shall use generally accepted
calculation technique that is based on the NRCS soil-cover-complex
method. Table 1 summarizes acceptable computation methods.32 It is
assumed that all methods will be selected by the design professional
based on the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a
particular site. The municipality may allow the use of the Rational
Method to estimate peak discharges from drainage areas that contain
less than 200 acres. The soil-cover-complex method is recommended
for drainage areas greater than 200 acres.
B. All calculations consistent with this chapter using the soil-covercomplex
method shall use the appropriate design rainfall depths for the
various return period storms according to the region for which they are
located as presented in Table B-1 in Appendix B of this chapter.33 If a
hydrologic computer model such as HEC-HMS, or HEC-1 is used for
stormwater runoff calculations, then the duration of rainfall shall be 24
hours. The alternating block method to develop design hyetographs
described in Figure B-1, Appendix B, of this chapter shall be used for
the rainfall distribution.
C. For the purposes of predevelopment flow rate determination,
undeveloped land shall be considered as "meadow" in good condition,
unless the natural ground cover generates a lower curve number or
Rational "C" value (i.e., forest), as listed in Table B-2 or B-3 in Appendix
B of this chapter.
D. All calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall intensities
consistent with appropriate times-of-concentration for overland flow
and return periods from the Design Storm Curves from Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation Design Rainfall Curves (1986) (Figures
B-3 to B-4). Times-of-concentration for overland flow shall be calculated
using the methodology presented in Chapter 3 of Urban Hydrology for
Small Watersheds, NRCS, TR-55 (as amended or replaced from time to
time by NRCS). Times-of-concentration for channel and pipe flow shall
be computed using Manning's equation.
E. Runoff curve numbers (CN) for both existing and proposed conditions
to be used in the soil-cover-complex method shall be obtained from
Table B-2 in Appendix B of this chapter.
F. Runoff coefficients (c) for both existing and proposed conditions for use
in the Rational Method shall be obtained from Table B-3 in Appendix B
of this chapter.
G. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning equation shall be used
for hydraulic computations, and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Values for Manning's roughness
coefficient (n) shall be consistent with Table B-4 in Appendix B of the
32.Editor's Note: Table 1 is included at the end of this section.
33.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-12 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-12
162:202
§ 166-13. Erosion and sedimentation requirements.
chapter. Outlet structures for stormwater management facilities shall
be designed to meet the performance standards of this chapter using
any generally accepted hydraulic analysis technique or method.
H. The design of any stormwater detention facilities intended to meet the
performance standards of this chapter shall be verified by routing the
design storm hydrograph through these facilities using the storageindication
method. For drainage areas greater than 200 acres in size,
the design storm hydrograph shall be computed using a calculation
method that produces a full hydrograph. The municipality may approve
the use of any generally accepted full hydrograph approximation
technique that shall use a total runoff volume that is consistent with the
volume from a method that produces a full hydrograph.
Table 1
Acceptable Computation Methodologies For Stormwater
Management Plans
Method
Method Developed
By Applicability
TR-20 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-20)
USDA NRCS Applicable where use of
full hydrology computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
TR-55 (or
commercial
computer package
based on TR-55)
USDA NRCS Applicable for land
development plans
within limitations
described in TR-55.
HEC-1/HEC-HMS US Army Corps of
Engineers
Applicable where use of
full hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary.
PSRM Penn State University Applicable where use of
a hydrologic computer
model is desirable or
necessary; simpler than
TR-20 or HEC-1.
Rational Method (or
commercial
computer package
based on Rational
Method)
Emil Kuichling (1889) For sites less than 200
acres, or as approved by
the municipality and/or
Municipal Engineer.
Other methods Varies Other computation
methodologies approved
by the municipality and/
or Municipal Engineer.
§ 166-12 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-13
162:203
§ 166-14. Groundwater recharge (infiltration; recharge; retention).
A. Whenever the vegetation and topography are to be disturbed, such
activity must be in conformance with Chapter 102, Title 25, Rules and
Regulations, Part I, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102, "Erosion Control," and in
accordance with the Franklin County Conservation District.
B. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be or are recommended to be applied where
infiltration BMPs are proposed shall include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed nor receive runoff until
the entire contributory drainage area to the infiltration BMP has
received final stabilization.
A. The ability to retain and maximize the groundwater recharge capacity
of the area being developed is encouraged strongly. Design of the
infiltration/recharge stormwater management facilities shall give
consideration to providing groundwater recharge to compensate for the
reduction in the percolation that occurs when the ground surface is
paved and roofed over. These measures are encouraged, particularly in
hydrologic soil groups A and B and should be utilized wherever feasible.
Soils used for the construction of basins shall have low-erodibility
factors ("K" factors).
B. Infiltration BMPs shall meet the following minimum requirements:
(1) Infiltration BMPs intended to receive runoff from developed areas
shall be selected based on suitability of soils and site conditions
and shall be constructed on soils that have the following
characteristics:
(a) A minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the
facility and the seasonal high water table and/or bedrock
(limiting zones).
(b) An infiltration and/or percolation rate sufficient to accept the
additional stormwater load and drain completely as
determined by field tests conducted by the owner's
professional designer or as otherwise approved by the
Municipal Engineer.
(2) Infiltration BMPs receiving only roof runoff may be placed in soils
having a minimum depth of 24 inches between the bottom of the
facility and the limiting zone.
§ 166-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-14
162:204
(3) The size of the recharge facility shall be based upon the following
equation (DEP):
Rev = [(S) (Rv) (A)]/12
Where:
Rev = Recharge volume (acre-feet)
S = Soil specific recharge factor (inches)
Rv = Volumetric runoff coefficient
A = Site area contributing to the recharge facility (acres)
And:
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009 (I)
Where:
I = percent impervious area
And:
S may be obtained based upon hydrologic soil group based
upon the table below recommended as general values by
DEP. More site specific data may be utilized to determine
recharge if justified by the design engineer and approved by
the Municipal Engineer.
Hydrologic Soil Group Soil Specific Recharge Factor (S)
A 0.38 inches
B 0.25 inches
C 0.13 inches
D 0.06 inches
If more than one hydrologic soil group (HSG) is present at a site,
a composite recharge volume shall be computed based upon the
proportion of total site area within each HSG.
(4) The recharge volume provided at the site shall be directed to the
most permeable HSG available, if feasible.
(5) The recharge facility shall be capable of completely infiltrating the
recharge volume within four days (96 hours).
(6) Infiltration areas should be located a minimum of 10 feet from a
building foundation.
C. A detailed soils evaluation of the project site may be required to
determine the suitability of recharge facilities. The evaluation shall be
performed by a qualified design professional, and at a minimum,
address soil permeability, depth to bedrock, susceptibility to sinkhole
formation, and subgrade stability. The general process for designing the
infiltration BMP shall be:
§ 166-14 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-14
162:205
§ 166-15. Water quality requirements.
(1) Analyze hydrologic soil groups as well as natural and man-made
features within the watershed to determine general areas of
suitability for infiltration practices.
(2) Provide field test to determine appropriate percolation rate and/or
hydraulic conductivity.
(3) Design infiltration structure for required storm volume based on
field determined capacity at the level of the proposed infiltration
surface.
D. Extreme caution shall be exercised where infiltration is proposed in
geologically susceptible areas such as strip mine or limestone areas.
Extreme caution shall also be exercised where salt or chloride would be
a pollutant since soils do little to filter this pollutant and it may
contaminate the groundwater. It is also extremely important that the
qualified design professional evaluate the possibility of groundwater
contamination from the proposed infiltration/recharge facility and
recommend a hydrogeologic justification study be performed if
necessary. Whenever a basin will be located in an area underlain by
limestone, a geological evaluation of the proposed location shall be
conducted to determine susceptibility to sinkhole formations. The
design of all facilities over limestone formations shall include measures
to prevent groundwater contamination and, where necessary, sinkhole
formation. The infiltration requirement in the high quality/exceptional
waters shall be subject to the Department's Chapter 93 and
Antidegradation Regulations. The municipality may require the
installation of an impermeable liner in detention basins. A detailed
hydrogeologic investigation may be required by the municipality. It
shall be the developer's responsibility to verify if the site is underlain by
limestone. The following note shall be attached to all drainage plans
and signed and sealed by the developer's engineer/surveyor/geologist:
"_________________________________________________________, certify that
the proposed detention basin (circle one) is/is not underlain by
limestone."
E. The municipality may require the developer to provide safeguards
against groundwater contamination for uses which may cause
groundwater contamination should there be a mishap or spill.
F. Where pervious pavement is permitted for parking lots, recreational
facilities, nondedicated streets, or other areas, pavement construction
specifications and maintenance schedules shall be noted on the plan.
G. Recharge/infiltration facilities may be used in conjunction with other
innovative or traditional BMPs, stormwater control facilities, and
nonstructural stormwater management alternatives.
§ 166-14 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-15
162:206
A. In addition to the performance standards and design criteria
requirements of Article III of this chapter, the land developer shall
comply with the following water quality requirements of this article
unless otherwise exempted by provisions of this chapter:
(1) Developed areas will provide adequate storage and treatment
facilities necessary to capture and treat stormwater runoff. The
recharge volume computed under § 166-14 may be a component of
the water quality volume. If the recharge volume is less than the
water quality volume, the remaining water quality volume may be
captured and treated by methods other than recharge/infiltration
BMPs.
(2) The water quality volume (WQv) is the storage capacity needed to
treat stormwater runoff produced by "P" inch of rainfall (90% rule)
from the developed areas of the site (for "P" Values, see Appendix
B, Table B-534). The following calculation formula is used to
determine the storage volume, WQv, in acre-feet of storage:
WQv = [(P)(Rv)(A)]/12
Where:
WQv = Water quality volume
P = Rainfall amount [(90% of events producing this
rainfall (Appendix B, Table B-5)]
A = Area in acres
Rv = 0.05 + 0.009(I) where I is the impervious surface
ratio
B. WQv shall be designed as part of a stormwater management facility
which incorporates water quality BMPs as a primary benefit of using
that facility, in accordance with design specifications contained in
"Pennsylvania Handbook of Best Management Practices for Developing
Areas." The following factors shall be considered when evaluating the
suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given development
site:
(1) Total contributing drainage area.
(2) Permeability and infiltration rate of the site soils.
(3) Slope and depth to bedrock.
(4) Seasonal high water table.
(5) Proximity to building foundations and well heads.
(6) Erodibility of soils.
(7) Land availability and configuration of the topography.
34.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-15 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-15
162:207
§ 166-16. Stream bank erosion requirements.
Applying the water quality criteria in § 166-15 above will also help the
stream bank erosion problem. Detain the two-year postdevelopment storm
to the one-year predevelopment storm and detaining the one-year
postdevelopment storm a minimum of 24 hours.
C. The following additional factors should be considered when evaluating
the suitability of BMPs used to control water quality at a given
development site:
(1) Peak discharge and required volume control.
(2) Stream bank erosion.
(3) Efficiency of the BMPs to mitigate potential water quality
problems.
(4) The volume of runoff that will be effectively treated.
(5) The nature of the pollutant being removed.
(6) Maintenance requirements.
(7) Creation/protection of aquatic and wildlife habitat.
(8) Recreational value.
(9) Enhancement of aesthetic and property value.
§ 166-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-16
162:208
ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 166-17. General requirements.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter, the preliminary or final
approval of subdivision and/or land development plans, the issuance of
any building or occupancy permit, or the commencement of any land
disturbance activity may not proceed until the property owner or developer
or his/her agent has received written approval of a drainage plan from the
municipality.
§ 166-18. Exemptions.
Any regulated activity that meets the exception criteria in the following
table is exempt from the provisions of this chapter. These criteria shall apply
to the total development even if development is to take place in phases. The
date of the municipal ordinance adoption shall be the starting point from
which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which future subdivisions and
respective impervious area computations shall be cumulatively considered.
An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from implementing such
measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, and property. This
exemption shall not relieve the applicant from meeting the special
requirements for watersheds draining to high quality (HQ) or exceptional
value (EV) waters (§ 166-8K) and requirements for groundwater recharge
(§ 166-14), water quality (§ 166-15) and streambank erosion (§ 166-16).
An exemption shall not relieve the applicant from providing adequate
stormwater management to meet the purpose of this chapter; however,
drainage plans will not have to be submitted to the municipality.
Stormwater Management Exemption Criteria
Total Parcel Size
Impervious Area Exemption
(sq. ft.)
Less than or equal to 1/4 acre 2,500
Greater than 1/4 acre to 1 acre 5,000
Greater than 1 acre to 2 acres 10,000
Greater than 2 acres to 5 acres 15,000
Greater than 5 acres 20,000
§ 166-19. Drainage plan contents.
The drainage plan shall consist of all applicable calculations, maps, and
plans. A note on the maps shall refer to the associated computations and
erosion and sedimentation control plan by title and date. The cover sheet
of the computations and erosion and sedimentation control plan shall refer
to the associated maps by title and date. All drainage plan materials shall
be submitted to the municipality in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat, and well organized; otherwise, the drainage plan shall be disapproved
§ 166-17 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-19
162:209
and returned to the applicant. The following items shall be included in the
drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications of the materials
to be used for stormwater management facilities.
(3) Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural computations for all
stormwater management facilities.
B. Map(s) of the project area shall be submitted on twenty-four-inch by
thirty-six-inch sheets and shall be prepared in a form that meets the
requirements for recording at the offices of the Recorder of Deeds of
Franklin County. The contents of the maps(s) shall include, but not be
limited to:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(3) Existing streams, lakes, ponds, or other bodies of water within the
project area.
(4) Other physical features including flood hazard boundaries,
sinkholes, streams, existing drainage courses, areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved, and the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site.
(5) The locations of all existing and proposed utilities, sanitary sewers,
and water lines within 50 feet of property lines.
(6) An overlay showing soil names and boundaries.
(7) Proposed changes to the land surface and vegetative cover,
including the type and amount of impervious area that would be
added.
(8) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas, and buildings.
(9) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(10) The name of the development, the name and address of the owner
of the property, and the name of the individual or firm preparing
the plan.
(11) The date of submission.
§ 166-19 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-19
162:210
(12) A graphic and written scale of one inch equals no more than 50
feet; for tracts of 20 acres or more, the scale shall be one inch
equals no more than 100 feet.
(13) A North arrow.
(14) The total tract boundary and size with distances marked to the
nearest foot and bearings to the nearest degree.
(15) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(16) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that would be affected by the project.
(17) Horizontal and vertical profiles of all open channels, including
hydraulic capacity.
(18) Overland drainage paths.
(19) A fifteen-foot-wide access easement around all stormwater
management facilities that would provide ingress to and egress
from a public right-of-way.
(20) A note on the plan indicating the location and responsibility for
maintenance of stormwater management facilities that would be
located off-site. All off-site facilities shall meet the performance
standards and design criteria specified in this chapter.
(21) A construction detail of any improvements made to sinkholes and
the location of all notes to be posted, as specified in this chapter.
(22) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging the
stormwater management system to be a permanent fixture that can
be altered or removed only after approval of a revised plan by the
municipality.
(23) The following signature block for the design engineer:
"(Design Engineer), on this date (date of signature), hereby
certifies that the drainage plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Conococheague Creek Watershed Act 167
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
(24) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities.
C. Supplemental information.
(1) A written description of the following information shall be
submitted:
(a) The overall stormwater management concept for the project.
(b) Stormwater runoff computations as specified in this chapter.
§ 166-19 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-19
162:211
§ 166-20. Plan submission.
For all activities regulated by this chapter, the steps below shall be followed
for submission. For any activities that require a PaDEP joint permit
application and regulated under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and Waterway
Management) or Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of PaDEP's Rules
and Regulations, require a PennDOT highway occupancy permit, or require
any other permit under applicable state or federal regulations, the proof of
application for that, the permit(s) shall be part of the plan. The plan shall be
coordinated with the state and federal permit process.
(c) Stormwater management techniques to be applied both during
and after development.
(d) Expected project time schedule.
(2) A soil erosion and sedimentation control plan, where applicable,
including all reviews and approvals, as required by PaDEP.
(3) A geologic assessment of the effects of runoff on sinkholes as
specified in this chapter.
(4) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes and peak flows)
on adjacent properties and on any existing municipal stormwater
collection system that may receive runoff from the project site.
(5) A Declaration of Adequacy and highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office when utilization of a PennDOT storm
drainage system is proposed.
D. Stormwater management facilities.
(1) All stormwater management facilities must be located on a plan
and described in detail.
(2) When groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches are used, the locations of existing and proposed septic
tank infiltration areas and wells must be shown.
(3) All calculations, assumptions, and criteria used in the design of the
stormwater management facilities must be shown.
A. The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer as part of the
preliminary and final plan submission for the regulated activity.
B. Three copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
C. Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(1) One copy to the municipality.
(2) One copy to the municipal engineers.
(3) One copy to the County Planning Commission.
§ 166-19 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-21
162:212
§ 166-21. Drainage plan review.
A. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for consistency
with the adopted Conococheague Creek Watersheds Act 167
Stormwater Management Plan. The municipality shall require receipt of
a complete plan, as specified in this chapter.
B. The Municipal Engineer shall review the drainage plan for any
submission or land development against the municipal subdivision and
land development ordinance provisions not superseded by this
chapter.35
C. For activities regulated by this chapter, the Municipal Engineer shall
notify the municipality in writing, within 15 calendar days of their
receipt of the plan, whether the drainage plan is consistent with the
stormwater management plan. Should the drainage plan be determined
to be consistent with the stormwater management plan, the Municipal
Engineer will forward a letter of consistency to the Municipal Secretary,
who will then notify the developer.
D. Should the drainage plan be determined to be inconsistent with the
stormwater management plan, the Municipal Engineer will forward a
letter of inconsistency to the Municipal Secretary citing the reason(s)
for the disapproval. The Municipal Secretary shall then notify the
developer of the Municipal Engineer's findings. Any disapproved
drainage plans may be revised by the developer and resubmitted
consistent with this chapter.
E. For regulated activities specified in § 166-4 of this chapter, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify the Municipal Building Permit Officer in
writing, within a time frame consistent with the municipal building code
and/or municipal subdivision ordinance,36 whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the approval/disapproval letter to the Municipal Secretary, who will
then notify the developer. Any disapproved drainage plan may be
revised by the developer and resubmitted consistent with this chapter.
F. For regulated activities requiring a PaDEP joint permit application, the
Municipal Engineer shall notify PaDEP whether the drainage plan is
consistent with the stormwater management plan and forward a copy of
the review letter to the municipality and the developer. PaDEP may
consider the Municipal Engineer's review comments in determining
whether to issue a permit.
G. The municipality shall not approve any subdivision or land development
for regulated activities specified in § 166-4 of this chapter if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer. All
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 106, Construction Codes, Uniform; and Ch. 180, Subdivision and
Land Development.
§ 166-21 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-21
162:213
§ 166-22. Modification of plans.
required permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to approval of any
subdivision of land development.
H. The Municipal Building Permit Officer shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity specified in § 166-4 of this chapter if the
drainage plan has been found to be inconsistent with the stormwater
management plan, as determined by the Municipal Engineer, or without
considering the comments of the Municipal Engineer. All required
permits from PaDEP must be obtained prior to issuance of a building
permit.
I. The developer shall be responsible for completing record drawings of
all stormwater management facilities included in the approved
drainage plan. The record drawings and an explanation of any
discrepancies with the design plans shall be submitted to the Municipal
Engineer for final approval. In no case shall the municipality approve
the record drawings until the municipality receives a copy of an
approved Declaration of Adequacy, highway occupancy permit from the
PennDOT District Office, and any applicable permits from PaDEP.
J. The municipality's approval of a drainage plan shall be valid for a period
not to exceed five years. This five-year time period shall commence on
the date that the municipality signs the approved drainage plan. If
stormwater management facilities included in the approved drainage
plan have not been constructed, or if constructed, and record drawings
of these facilities have not been approved within this five-year time
period, then the municipality may consider the drainage plan
disapproved and may revoke any and all permits. Drainage plans that
are considered disapproved by the municipality shall be resubmitted in
accordance with § 166-23 of this chapter.
A. A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a development site that
involves a change in stormwater management facilities or techniques,
or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater management
facilities, or that is necessary because soil or other conditions are not as
stated on the drainage plan as determined by the Municipal Engineer,
shall require a resubmission of the modified drainage plan consistent
with § 166-20 of this chapter and be subject to review as specified in
§ 166-21 of this chapter.
B. A modification to an already approved or disapproved drainage plan
shall be submitted to the municipality, accompanied by the applicable
review. A modification to a drainage plan for which a formal action has
not been taken by the municipality shall be submitted to the
municipality, accompanied by the applicable municipality review fee.
§ 166-21 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-23
162:214
§ 166-23. Resubmission of disapproved drainage plans.
A disapproved drainage plan may be resubmitted, with the revisions
addressing the Municipal Engineer's concerns documented in writing
addressed, to the Municipal Secretary in accordance with § 166-20 of this
chapter and distributed accordingly and be subject to review as specified
in § 166-21 of this chapter. The applicable municipality review fee must
accompany a resubmission of a disapproved drainage plan.
§ 166-23 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-23
162:215

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 166-24. Schedule of inspections.
A. The Municipal Engineer or his municipal assignee shall observe all
phases of the installation of the permanent stormwater management
facilities as deemed appropriate by the Municipal Engineer.
B. During any stage of the work, if the Municipal Engineer determines that
the permanent stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management
plan, the municipality shall revoke any existing building permits until a
revised drainage plan is submitted and approved, as specified in this
chapter.
§ 166-24 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-24
162:217

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 166-25. Establishment and purpose of fees.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by the municipality to defray review costs
incurred by the municipality and the Municipal Engineer. All fees shall be
paid by the applicant.
§ 166-26. Municipality drainage plan review fee.
The municipality drainage plan review fee is based on the municipality's
actual costs for reviewing drainage plans.
§ 166-27. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. Administrative costs.
B. The review of the drainage plan by the municipality and the Municipal
Engineer.
C. The site inspections.
D. The inspection of stormwater management facilities and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. The final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities and drainage improvements presented in the drainage plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 166-25 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-27
162:219

ARTICLE VII
Maintenance Responsibilities
§ 166-28. Performance guarantee.
The applicant should provide a financial guarantee to the municipality
for the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved stormwater plan and this
chapter equal to the full construction cost of the required controls.
§ 166-29. Maintenance responsibilities.
§ 166-30. Maintenance agreement for privately owned stormwater
facilities.
A. The drainage plan for the development site shall contain an operation
and maintenance plan prepared by the developer and approved by the
Municipal Engineer. The operation and maintenance plan shall outline
required routine maintenance actions and schedules necessary to
insure proper operation of the facility(ies).
B. The drainage plan for the development site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots which are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to the municipality, stormwater
control facilities must be placed in single lot ownership or owned
and managed by an approved homeowners' association.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities shall be the responsibility of the owner
or private management entity.
C. The governing body, upon recommendation of the Municipal Engineer,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the stormwater management
plan. The governing body reserves the right to accept the ownership
and operating responsibility for any or all of the stormwater
management controls.
A. Prior to final approval of the site's stormwater management plan, the
property owner shall sign and record the maintenance agreement
contained in Appendix A37 which is attached and made part hereof,
covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately owned.
37.Editor's Note: Appendixes A through D are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 166-28 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-30
162:221
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined
necessary to guarantee the satisfactory maintenance of all facilities.
The maintenance agreement shall be subject to the review and approval
of the Municipal Solicitor and governing body.
§ 166-30 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-30
162:222
ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 166-31. Right of entry.
Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized representatives of
the municipality may enter at reasonable times upon any property within
the municipality to inspect the condition of the stormwater structures and
facilities in regard to any aspect regulated by this chapter.
§ 166-32. Notification of noncompliance.
In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, or fails to conform to the requirements of any permit issued
hereunder, the municipality shall provide written notification of the
violation. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of these violation(s). Failure to comply
within the time specified shall subject such person to the penalty provisions
of this chapter. All such penalties shall be deemed cumulative and resort
by the municipality from pursuing any and all remedies. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner of the real property on which any regulated
activity is proposed to occur, is occurring, or has occurred, to comply with
the terms and conditions of this chapter.
§ 166-33. Enforcement.
The municipal governing body is hereby authorized and directed to enforce
all of the provisions of this chapter. All inspections regarding compliance
with the drainage plan shall be the responsibility of the Municipal Engineer
or other qualified persons designated by the municipality.
A. A set of design plans approved by the municipality shall be on file at the
site throughout the duration of the construction activity. Periodic
inspections may be made by the municipality or designee during
construction.
B. Adherence to approved plan. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or
corporation to undertake any regulated activity under § 166-4 on any
property except as provided for in the approved drainage plan and
pursuant to the requirements of this chapter. It shall be unlawful to
alter or remove any control structure required by the drainage plan
pursuant to this chapter or to allow the property to remain in a
condition which does not conform to the approved drainage plan.
C. At the completion of the project, and as a prerequisite for the release of
the performance guarantee, the owner or his representatives shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, surveyor or
other qualified person verifying that all permanent facilities have
been constructed according to the plans and specifications and
approved revisions thereto.
§ 166-31 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-33
162:223
§ 166-34. Violation deemed public nuisance.
(2) Provide a set of as-built (record) drawings.
D. After receipt of the certification by the municipality, a final inspection
shall be conducted by the Municipal Engineer or designated
representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
E. Prior to revocation or suspension of a permit, the governing body will
schedule a hearing to discuss the noncompliance if there is no
immediate danger to life, public health or property.
F. Suspension and revocation of permits.
(1) Any building permit issued by the municipality may be suspended
or revoked by the governing body for:
(a) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of
the permit.
(b) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other
applicable law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the
project.
(c) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act
during construction or development which constitutes or
creates a hazard or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the
life or property of others.
(2) A suspended building permit shall be reinstated by the governing
body when:
(a) The Municipal Engineer or his designee has inspected and
approved the corrections to the stormwater management and
erosion and sediment pollution control measure(s), or the
elimination of the hazard or nuisance; and/or
(b) The governing body is satisfied that the violation of the
ordinance, law, or rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) (Ac)permit that has been revoked by the governing body cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
G. Occupancy permit. An occupancy permit shall not be issued unless the
certification of compliance has been secured. The occupancy permit
shall be required for each lot owner and/or developer for all
subdivisions and land development in the municipality.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 166-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-35
162:224
§ 166-35. Violations and penalties.
§ 166-36. Appeals.
A. Anyone violating the provisions of this chapter shall be subject to a fine
of not more than $500 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than 30 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
B. In addition, the municipality, through its Solicitor, may institute
injunctive, mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at
law or in equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of
competent jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders,
temporary or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate
forms of remedy or relief.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough of Greencastle or its
designee may appeal to the Borough Council within 30 days of that
action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Borough Council may appeal to
the County Court of Common Pleas in the county where the activity has
taken place within 30 days of the municipal decision.
§ 166-35 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 166-36
162:225
Chapter 169
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 78.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Skateboards, roller skates and roller
blades — See Ch. 158.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Trees — See Ch. 187.
Fees — See Ch. A207, Art. II.
§ 166-36 GREENCASTLE CODE § 166-36
162:226
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
[Adopted 12-8-1902 by Ord. No. 3-02; amended in its entirety
7-1-1985 (Ch. 21, Part 5, of the 1985 Code)]
§ 169-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS DAY — Any day not a Sunday or a national holiday.
BUSINESS HOURS — Hours between 9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. on any
business day.
CARTWAY — Portion of a street or highway improved, designed, or
ordinarily used for vehicular travel, exclusive of the berm or shoulder.
CORPORATION — Natural person, partnership, corporation, association, or
any other legal entity.
SIDEWALK — Portion of a street between the curb lines, or the lateral
lines of a cartway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for use by
pedestrians.
STREET OR HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of
a way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular travel.
§ 169-2. Responsibility for removal of snow and ice from sidewalks.
Every person in charge or control of any building or lot of land fronting or
abutting on a paved sidewalk, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee,
or otherwise, shall remove and clear away or cause to be removed or
cleared away, snow and/or ice from a path of at least 30 inches in width from
so much of said sidewalk as is in front of or abuts on said building or lot of
land.
A. Except as provided in Subsection B hereof, snow and ice shall be
removed from sidewalks within 24 hours after the cessation of any fall
of snow, sleet or freezing rain. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-09]
B. In the event snow and/or ice on a sidewalk has become so hard that it
cannot be removed without likelihood of damage to the sidewalk, the
person charged with its removal shall, within the time mentioned in
Subsection A hereof, cause enough sand or other abrasive to be put on
the sidewalk to make travel reasonably safe; and shall, as soon
thereafter as weather permits, cause to be cleared a path in said
sidewalk of at least 30 inches in width.
§ 169-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-3
162:227
§ 169-3. Responsibility for removal from roofs. [Amended 11-2-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-09]
Every person in charge or control of any building or other structure,
whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall remove and
clear away, or cause to be removed and cleared away, any accumulation of
snow and ice on said building or other structure which is liable to fall on
any sidewalk, roadway, or other public way. Such work shall be completed
within a reasonable time, but not later than 24 hours after the cessation of
any fall of snow, sleet, or freezing rain.
§ 169-4. Depositing of snow and ice restricted.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited any snow or ice on or
immediately next to a fire hydrant or on any sidewalk, roadway, or loading
and unloading areas of a public transportation system, except that snow
and ice may be mounded by the Borough on public cartways incident to the
cleaning thereof or mounded on curbs incident to the clearing of sidewalks
in business districts.
§ 169-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-2-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-09]
A. Any owner who or which shall violate, fail, neglect or refuse to comply
with the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $450, plus costs of prosecution
and reasonable attorney fees and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to imprisonment for not more than five days, provided that each
day's violation shall constitute a separate offense, and notice to the
offender shall not be necessary in order to constitute an offense.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee(s) and the Borough
police officers are hereby duly authorized to issue a ticket in a form
established by the Borough to any owner violating the provisions of this
chapter. The ticket shall identify the address of the property where the
violation exists, as well as the nature of the violation. The ticket may
either be handed to an owner or occupant of the property, or may be
affixed to a door on the primary structure on the property where the
violation exists fronting a right-of-way, or otherwise conspicuously
posted on the property. The ticket shall instruct such violator that if he,
she or it reports to the Borough Office and pays to the Borough the sum
of up to $100 for a first offense, $200 for a second offense, and $300 for
each subsequent offense within a calendar year, within 10 days of the
date of issuance of the ticket, then such payment shall save such
violator from prosecution by a citation, which prosecution may result in
court costs and attorney fees being assessed against the violator in
addition to the fine. In any event, if a ticket is not paid in full within 10
days of issuance, the official authorized to issue tickets shall issue a
citation to the violator, or initiate other appropriate enforcement action.
§ 169-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-5
162:228
C. Officials authorized to issue tickets may, in their sole and absolute
discretion, issue a citation or institute other appropriate enforcement
action instead of a ticket.
§ 169-5 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-5
162:229

ARTICLE II
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 3-3-1952 by Ord. No. 3-52; amended in its entirety
7-1-1985 (Ch. 21, Part 1, of the 1985 Code)]
§ 169-6. Permit required.
No railroad shall hereafter be constructed upon any road, nor shall any
railroad crossings, nor any gas pipe, water pipe, electric conduits or other
piping be laid upon or in, nor shall any telephone, telegraph or electric light
or power poles or any other obstruction be erected upon or in any portion of
a street, except under such conditions, restrictions and regulations relating
to the installation and maintenance thereof, as may be prescribed in permits
granted for such purpose; provided, the conditions, restrictions and
regulations prescribed in such permits do not abrogate the power of
eminent domain of a public utility corporation provided for in the Business
Corporation Law, P.L. 364, Act of May 5, 1933, Section 1322, 15 P.S. § 1322
(1982), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 169-7. Permit application.
The application for a permit shall be on a form prescribed by the Borough
of Greencastle and submitted to the Borough in triplicate. The application
shall be accompanied by two fees: an application fee in accordance with the
schedule of fees set forth by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
for high occupancy permits, and an inspection fee set by the Council of the
Borough of Greencastle.
§ 169-8. Issuance of permit.
A permit shall be issued to the applicant after all the aforementioned
requirements have been filled.
§ 169-9. Inspection of work.
Upon completion of the work authorized by the permit, the permittee shall
give written notice thereof to the Borough of Greencastle. The appointed
agent of the Borough shall inspect the work and, when necessary, enforce
compliance with the conditions and regulations prescribed by the permit.
In addition to such inspection, the Borough may reinspect the work not
more than two years after its completion, and if any defect shall appear in
the work contrary to regulations of the Borough, the Borough may enforce
compliance therewith.
§ 169-10. Rectification of defects.
If the permittee shall fail to rectify any defect in the work within 60 days
after written notification to do so, the Borough may do the work and impose
§ 169-6 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-10
162:231
upon the permittee the cost thereof and 20% of such cost to be collected in
the manner provided by law.
§ 169-11. Emergency repairs.
Where repairs are necessary for public safety or the restoration or
continuance of a public service, a permit, as required by this article, shall
not be submitted in advance, but application for such permit and the
accompanying fees shall be submitted as therein prescribed within five days
after completion of such repairs. Sections 169-9 and 169-10 above apply in
emergency situations.
§ 169-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $300, and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 169-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-12
162:232
ARTICLE III
Obstructions
[Adopted 11-7-1966 by Ord. No. 14-66 (Ch. 21, Part 3, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 169-13. Restrictions on placing materials on streets. [Amended
7-1-1985]
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to place or permit
to be placed or to let or leave on the streets, alleys, curbs or sidewalks of
the Borough of Greencastle, Pennsylvania, any dirt, mud, stone, sand, slag,
cinders or other solid material, or any oil, chemical or other liquid material,
except water. This article shall not prevent the placing of stone, sand, slag,
cinders, salt or chemicals on streets, alleys or sidewalks during periods of
snow or ice for control of snow or ice, nor the use of road building materials
in the construction, reconstruction or repair of streets or alleys.
§ 169-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-1-1985]
§ 169-15. Costs of correcting condition.
In addition to the foregoing penalty, the Mayor and Borough Council of
the Borough of Greencastle, Pennsylvania, shall have the right to collect
from any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article
all costs of restoring the street, alley, curb or sidewalk to their or its
conditions immediately previous to the placing of the foreign substance
thereon, whether said substance is placed thereon before or after the
aforesaid written warning.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more than $300; and/
or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
B. If more than one person, firm or corporation is engaged in any
construction project or undertaking, the aforesaid written warning
shall be given only to the general contractor on said project or
undertaking, after which any violation of this article by any
subcontractor or supplier shall be deemed a violation subject to the
penalties set forth herein.
§ 169-13 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-15
162:233

ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk and Curb Repair and Construction
[Adopted 6-1-1970 by Ord. No. 8-70; amended in its entirety
6-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-06]
§ 169-16. Definitions. [Added 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-0638]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PUBLIC STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway or other ways intended to be used by vehicular traffic or
pedestrians, But Not including a minor street which provides secondary
access to the back or side of properties otherwise abutting a street.
§ 169-16.1. Conformity required.
Any new construction, repairing, or relaying of sidewalks or curbs shall
be in strict conformity with this chapter and these regulations; provided,
however, that the Board of Appeals may make minor adjustments or alter
these regulations where special or unusual topographic and/or physical
conditions exist or where other physical circumstances or safety conditions
render sidewalks impractical or infeasible. Decisions of the Board of
Appeals shall be by a majority of its members and shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 11, Article V, of this Code.
§ 169-17. Responsibility of property owners. [Amended 10-5-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-06]
Every owner of land abutting any public street or public alley in the
Borough shall maintain existing sidewalks and curbs abutting such land in
a safe condition as the Borough shall deem appropriate and in conformity
with standards and specifications that the Borough Council may from time
to time designate by resolution or written policy.
§ 169-18. Notice to construct, repair or relay.
A. Every owner of property abutting any public street in the Borough shall
construct, repair or relay sidewalk and/or curb upon service of a written
notice to do so by the Borough. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-06]
B. Notice to construct, pave, repave and repair sidewalks, curbs or gutters
shall be given by registered or certified mail to abutting property
owners, and such owners shall have 30 days to comply with said notice
in conformity with the standards and specifications established by
resolution unless said notice shall specifically provide for a longer
period of time to comply. However, if the sidewalks, curbs, or gutters
38.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the renumbering of former § 169-16 as
§ 169-16.1.
§ 169-16 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-18
162:235
§ 169-19. New construction.
may cause an immediate public danger, as determined by the Borough,
the Borough may require immediate abatement. In no case shall the
time period specified exceed 90 days, except during inclement or
unseasonable weather in which case the party responsible for the
repair/replacement or installation shall post a financial guarantee in
lieu of the repair period.
C. Upon failure of any property owner to comply with § 169-18A and B
above within 10 days after the expiration of a notice to construct, the
Borough may cause such construction, repairing or relaying, as the
case may be, either by letting the work to contractors after
advertisements, if required, or by employees of the Borough. The cost
thereof and an additional 10%, together with all charges and expenses,
as well as interest from the date of completion of the work at the rate of
6% per annum. In the event the property owner fails to remit said costs
and expenses to the Borough, said costs and expenses as well as
attorney fees and court costs shall be collected from such owner by
filing a municipal claim/lien therefor and by action of assumpsit.
Interest on the municipal claim/lien shall be collectible at the rate of
10% per annum from the date of the filing of the municipal claim/lien.
[Amended 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-05]
A. All owners of real estate in the Borough of Greencastle who hereafter
secure a land use permit for the construction of any building within the
Borough shall, within six months after the securing of such permit,
construct a concrete curb and sidewalk along the public street on which
said real estate abuts, said curb and sidewalk to be constructed at the
location designated by the Borough Manager or his/her designee. Said
owners of real estate shall include with the building permit application
a sidewalk permit application and curb/sidewalk deposit in an amount
the Borough Council may from time to time determine by resolution.
Upon failure of the owner of the real estate to construct a concrete curb
and sidewalk within 60 days following issue of a certificate of
occupancy, the Borough, after proper notice in accordance with
§ 169-18 above, may cause the installation of curb and sidewalk to be
done. [Amended 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-06]
B. Unless required sooner by resolution or written policy, currently
developed properties that do not have sidewalks or curbs shall install
sidewalks and curbs, as required by this article, in conjunction with a
capital improvement to the property in excess of $20,000 in value, as
determined by the value of the improvement on the building permit,
subject however to any other exemptions of this article.
C. In the event of change in ownership of currently developed properties,
the new property owner shall have three years from the date of the
closing on the property to install sidewalks and/or curbs, as required by
this article, subject however to any other exemptions of this article.
§ 169-18 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-20
162:236
§ 169-20. Permit required.
A permit must first be obtained from the Borough prior to any construction
of new sidewalks or curbs and prior to any repairing or relaying of
sidewalks or curbs.
§ 169-21. Permit conditions.
A permit shall not be valid until such fees as the Borough Council may
establish from time to time by resolution have been paid. Any permit issued
shall become invalid if the authorized work is not commenced within six
months after issuance of the permit or if the authorized work is suspended
or abandoned for a period of six months after the time of commencing
the work. The Borough may revoke a permit or approval issued under
the provisions of this chapter in case of any false statement or
misrepresentation of fact in the application or on the plans on which the
permit or approval was based.
§ 169-22. Inspections.
All curbs and sidewalks, when formed, shall be inspected by the Borough
prior to the pouring of concrete. A minimum 24 hours' notice shall be
given prior to the start of concrete placement. Upon completion of the
construction, repair or relay of the same, the Borough shall be contacted in
order that a final inspection of the forms can be made for approval.
§ 169-23. Data furnished by Borough.
The Borough shall provide line, grade and specifications for all new
construction, repairing and relaying of sidewalks except that the Borough
shall not be responsible for establishing line and grade in new
developments.
§ 169-24. Conformance with specifications required.
§ 169-24.1. Violations and penalties; appeals.
A. All curbing hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall be constructed
or reconstructed, as the case may be, in conformity with the official
specifications for curbing as adopted by the Borough Council from time
to time by resolution.
B. All sidewalks hereafter constructed or reconstructed shall be
constructed or reconstructed, as the case may be, in conformity with
the official specifications for sidewalks as adopted by the Borough
Council from time to time by resolution.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000,
plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment thereof, to
§ 169-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-24.1
162:237
§ 169-24.2. Safety precautions.
During the excavation, construction, repair or relay, curing and backfilling
of any curb and/or sidewalk, the owner shall place and maintain, or cause
to be placed or maintained, adequate hazard warnings to vehicular and
pedestrian traffic by means of barricades, flares, lights or similar means.
The owner shall be solely responsible and liable for the adequate placement
of such hazard warnings.
§ 169-24.3. Establishment of inspection program.
The Borough may, at its discretion, establish a program of inspecting
sidewalks and curbs within the Borough to ensure that existing sidewalks
and curbs are maintained in a safe and functional manner in conformity
with the Borough's established grades, lines and specifications. Said
program may provide for dividing the Borough into zones, with different
zones being inspected periodically.
imprisonment of not more than 30 days. Each day the violation occurs
shall constitute a new and separate violation.
B. An owner may, within 10 days of the Borough mailing notice in
accordance with § 169-18, or of receiving a notice of violation as set
forth herein, notify the Borough Office, in writing, of an intent to appeal
the notice or determination, and such appeal shall be reviewed by the
Board of Appeals appointed by the Borough and such determination
may be modified or reversed entirely by the Board in the event it
appears that such work would either be impractical or unnecessary in
view of the purpose of the sidewalk and curbing and under the
topographical and other physical circumstances of the property in
question. Decisions of the Board of Appeals shall be by a majority of its
members and the Board shall render its decisions within 15 days of
receipt of the appeal notice to the Borough. The notice of intent to
appeal shall be in such form and contain such information as may be
required by the Board of Appeals.
§ 169-24.1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-24.3
162:238
ARTICLE V
Use of Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-1-1985 as Ch. 21, Part 4, of the 1985 Code]
§ 169-25. Applicability.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to the sale, storage or display
of newspapers or periodicals.
§ 169-26. Restrictions on sidewalk sales.
It shall be unlawful for any vendor of groceries, fruits or produce, or
any kind of foodstuffs or merchandise, except peddlers duly licensed or
authorized and farmers, to store, display, exhibit or sell his said wares on
public highways, including the sidewalk or cartway, or any portion thereof,
or to make use of the sidewalk or cartway or any portion thereof, as a place
for salesmen, clerks or customers to stand while transacting business, or
in anywise to obstruct the sidewalk or cartway, or any portion thereof, and
prevent the free use of the same by the general public.
§ 169-27. Vending machines.
The placing, maintaining or operating of any coin-operated vending
machine on any sidewalk of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby prohibited.
§ 169-28. Illegal to obstruct sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful to put or place any box, boxes, barrels, merchandise
or other articles that obstruct the free use of any sidewalk upon any of
the sidewalks, except articles temporarily placed thereon for the purpose of
loading or unloading, removing or storing away.
§ 169-29. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not more
than $300 and/or to imprisonment for a term not to exceed 90 days. Each
day that a violation of this article continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 169-25 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-29
162:239

ARTICLE VI
Sidewalk Construction Standards
[Adopted 12-5-1988 (Ch. 21, Part 2B, of the 1985 Code)]
§ 169-30. Construction of cement sidewalks.
A. These specifications shall cover the construction of cement concrete
sidewalks within the Borough.
B. Materials.
(1) Bed course material. Shall consist of approved gravel, crushed
stone or slag meeting the gradation requirements of § 703.2 of
PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(2) Concrete. Shall be Class A conforming to the requirements of § 704
of PennDOT Specifications, Form 408. Concrete mixes will be
subject to inspection and tests at the mixing plants for compliance
with quality requirements.
(3) Expansion joint filler (preformed). Shall conform to § 705.0 of the
PennDOT Specifications, Form 408.
(4) All materials will be subject to inspection for acceptance as to
condition at the latest practicable time that the Borough of
Greencastle has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or
during incorporation of materials in the work.
C. Construction requirements.
(1) Subgrade preparation. The subgrade shall be constructed true to
grade and shall be watered if required. All soft and yielding
material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material. The
subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted before placement of the
bed course materials.
(2) Bed course material. Shall be placed six inches in depth on the
completed subgrade and compacted.
(3) Forms. Shall be of wood or metal and shall extend for the full depth
of the concrete. All forms shall be straight, free from warp and of
sufficient strength to resist the pressure of concrete without
displacement. Bracing and staking of forms shall be such that
forms remain in both horizontal and vertical alignment until their
removal. All forms shall be cleaned and oiled before using.
(4) Placing concrete. The foundation and surfaces shall be thoroughly
moistened immediately prior to the placing of the concrete. All
concrete shall be mixed in accordance with Class A of the PennDOT
Specifications, Form 408. The concrete shall be deposited in one
course four inches in depth in such a manner as to prevent
segregation. The surface shall be finished with a wooden float.
§ 169-30 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-30
162:241
§ 169-31. Construction of brick sidewalks.
Form outside edges and joints with a 1/4 inch radius edging tool.
Form transverse dummy joints at four foot intervals, approximately
1/8 inch wide and at least one inch deep. Sidewalks shall be sloped
a minimum of 0.5% and a maximum of two percent toward the
street.
(5) Expansion joints. Place 1/2 inch premolded, expansion joint
material for the full depth of the sidewalk opposite expansion joints
in adjacent curb, between the sidewalk and curb and between the
sidewalk and rigid structures.
(6) Ramps for the handicapped. Construct at the corners of all blocks
and where directed by the Borough of Greencastle.
(7) Curing. Concrete shall be cured for at least 72 hours. Curing shall
be by means of moist burlap, membrane curing compound, vapor
barrier or another approved method. During the curing period, all
traffic, both pedestrian and vehicular, shall be excluded. Do not
remove side forms for at least 12 hours after placing concrete.
A. These specifications shall cover the construction of brick sidewalks.
Either rigid brick paving or flexible brick paving shall be permitted.
B. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
FLEXIBLE BASE — Compacted gravel or a damp, loose, sand-cement
mixture tamped in place. Only flexible brick paving may be placed over
this type of base.
FLEXIBLE BRICK PAVING — Brick units laid over the base material
with no mortar below or between the units.
RIGID BASE DIAPHRAGM — A reinforced concrete slab on grade over
a bed course. Rigid or flexible brick paving may be placed over this type
of base.
RIGID BRICK PAVING — Brick units laid in a bed of mortar with mortar
joints between the units.
C. Materials.
(1) Bed course material. Shall consist of approved gravel, crushed
stone or crushed slag meeting the gradation requirements of
§ 703.2 of PennDOT Specifications, Form 408, or bed course shall
consist of a dry mixture of sand or Portland cement. Sand shall
meet the requirements of ASTM C 144 aggregate for masonry
mortar. One part Portland cement shall be mixed with three to six
parts damp, loose sand.
(2) Cushion material. Shall be sand, chat, pea gravel or stone
screenings.
§ 169-30 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-31
162:242
(3) Mortar. Shall be a Type M Portland cement and lime mortar for
drymix or grout type mortar.
(4) Concrete base. Shall be Class A conforming to the requirements of
§ 704 of PennDOT Specifications, Form 408. Concrete mixes will be
subject to inspection and tests at the mixing plants for compliance
with quality requirements.
(5) Bricks. Shall be dense brick meeting or exceeding the
requirements of ASTM Specification C62 or C216, grade SW, or
shall meet or exceed the following physical properties:
(a) For extruded brick. Minimum average compressive strength of
8,000 psi, maximum average cold water absorption of 8% and
maximum saturation coefficient of 0.78.
(b) For molded brick. Minimum average compressive strength of
4,500 psi, maximum average cold water absorption of 8% and
maximum saturation coefficient of 0.78.
(6) Expansion joint filler (preformed). Shall conform to § 705 PennDOT
Specifications, Form 408.
(7) All materials will be subject to inspection for acceptance as to
condition at the latest practicable time that the Borough of
Greencastle has the opportunity to check for compliance prior to or
during incorporation of materials in the work.
D. Construction requirements.
(1) Subgrade preparation. The subgrade shall be constructed true to
grade and shall be watered if required. All soft and yielding
material shall be removed and replaced with suitable material. The
subgrade shall be thoroughly compacted before placement of the
bed course material.
(2) Bed course material. Shall be placed six inches in depth on the
compacted subgrade and compacted.
(3) Concrete bases. Concrete bases shall conform to the specifications
for cement concrete sidewalks within the Borough of Greencastle.
If a mortar leveling bed is used to set the brick units on the
concrete slab, the slab surface shall have a raked finish to facilitate
a good bond. If noncementitous types of leveling beds or cushions
are used, the surface need only be screeded.
(4) Cushion material. Shall be placed between the base and the pavers
in a one or two inch layer and shall function as a leveling layer to
help refine the finished grade. Cushion beds are required only
under flexible brick paving.
§ 169-31 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-31
162:243
§ 169-32. Defective curbs, concrete sidewalks and brick sidewalks.
Curbs, concrete sidewalks and brick sidewalks shall be deemed defective
and require replacement upon the Borough's representative finding that:
(5) Setting bed. Shall be a mortar mix placed between the concrete
base slab and the paving units. The bed shall be 1/2 inch to one inch
thick.
(6) Placement of brick paving units. All brick sidewalks shall be
installed to slope of minimum of 1/8 inch to the foot and a maximum
of 1/4 inch to the foot toward the street.
(a) Rigid brick paving. Shall be set on a mortar setting bed with
joints butted with mortar. All joints shall be full of a width
between 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch. Joints shall be struck flush with
the top face of the brick and/or tooled. An alternate method
shall be to set the brick paving units on the mortar leveling bed
with a 3/8 inch to 1/2 inch gap between the units. A grout
mixture shall then be poured in the space between the units.
(b) Flexible brick paving. Shall be set on the cushion base and the
joints shall be swept full with a dry sand or sand and cement
mixture. In cases where the edge of the sidewalk does not abut
a curb, building wall or retaining wall, an interior brick or
concrete curb shall be constructed to prevent horizontal
movement of the brick paving units. Brick curbs shall consist of
brick soldier coursing set in concrete. Curbs shall be
constructed prior to the placement of the paving units. In no
case shall a brick curb be permitted along the street edge of
the sidewalk.
(7) Expansion joints. Place 1/2 premolded, expansion joint material for
the full depth of the sidewalk opposite expansion joints in adjacent
curb, between the sidewalk and curb and between the sidewalk and
rigid structures.
(8) Ramps for the handicapped. Construct at the corner of all blocks
and where directed by the Borough of Greencastle.
A. The sidewalk, because of frost heave, root upheaval or settlement, has
caused the sidewalk to separate one inch horizontally or vertically; or
B. The sidewalk slopes from the back toward the street at a rate greater
than one inch per foot; or
C. The sidewalk does not match the grades of abutting properties; or
D. The sidewalk does not maintain a constant slope between the abutting
property ends; or
E. The sidewalk does not properly drain and standing water becomes
evident; or
§ 169-31 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-32
162:244
§ 169-33. Permit required.
Before any property owner shall construct, reconstruct or repair the
sidewalk or curb in front of or along his property he shall obtain the line and
grade therefor from the Borough Secretary or Borough Engineer. Before
commencing such construction the property owner or his designated agent
shall obtain a permit from the Borough Secretary, for which he shall pay a
fee to the Borough of Greencastle in the amount of $5.
F. The curb impedes on the proper drainage of the adjacent street; or
G. The curb or sidewalk, in the opinion of the Borough's representative,
creates a hazardous condition to the general public.
§ 169-32 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 169-33
162:245
Chapter 180
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 91.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Trees — See Ch. 187.
Water — See Ch. 197.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 169-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 169-33
162:246
ARTICLE I
Purposes; Interpretation; Title
§ 180-1. Purposes.
This chapter is enacted for the purpose of assuring sites suitable for
building purposes and human habitation and to provide for the harmonious
development of Greencastle Borough; for the coordination of existing
streets with proposed streets; for adequate open space for traffic,
recreation, light and air, for proper distribution of population and
conformity with the Borough Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 205), thereby
creating conditions favorable to the health, safety, morals, and general
welfare of the citizens of Greencastle Borough.
§ 180-2. Interpretation.
The provisions of the chapter shall be held to be minimum requirements
to meet the above stated purposes. Where the provisions of this chapter
impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other ordinance, or
regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail. Where the provisions
of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater restrictions
than those of this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance, or
regulation shall prevail.
§ 180-3. Short title. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
This chapter may be cited as "The Greencastle Borough Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance."
§ 180-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-3
162:247

ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 180-4. Definitions and word usage. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-3]
As used in this chapter words in the singular include the plural, and those
in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes corporation,
unincorporated association and partnership, as well as an individual. The
word "building" includes the meaning of "structure" and shall be construed
as if followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The following words as used
in this chapter shall have the meaning indicated below:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final required to be filed and approved prior to
start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BLOCK — An area bounded by three streets.
CARTWAY — The paved portion of a street right-of-way intended for
vehicular use.
CLEAR-SIGHT DISTANCE — A line of unobstructed vision from a point 4 1/
2 feet above the center line of a street to the nearest point on the top of an
object four inches high on the same center line.
CLEAR-SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center lines.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CONDOMINIUM — For the purposes of this chapter, the definition of a
"condominium" shall be the same as that set forth in the Uniform
Condominium Act in § 3103, 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3103.
CROSSWALK — A right-of-way for pedestrian travel across or within a
block.
CUL-DE-SAC — A residential street with access closed at one end and with
a vehicular turnaround at the closed end.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
§ 180-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-4
162:249
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DRAINAGE — The flow of water or liquid waste and the methods of
directing such flow.
EASEMENT — A right granted for the use of private land for certain public
or quasi-public purposes; also the land to which such right pertains.
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer or any consultant designated by the
Borough Council to review a subdivision plan and perform the duties of
engineer on behalf of the Borough.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an amusement park is defined
as a tract or area used principally as a location for permanent
amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to
newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial plans
for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 180-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-4
162:250
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly contained in one unit, or
in two or more units designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipalities
Authority Act of 1945."39
PLANTING STRIP — The unpaved portion of a street right-of-way between
the sidewalk pavement and the property line.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et
seq.40
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
39.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 180-4 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-4
162:251
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Land set aside for public use as a street, crosswalk, or
other common means of communication and travel.
SANITARY SEWER FACILITY — A public sanitary sewer system, or a
comparable common or package sanitary sewer facility approved by the
appropriate governmental agency.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose whether immediate or
future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs or devisees,
transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided, however,
that the division by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of
more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, or
any residential dwelling shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based of the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
§ 180-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-4
162:252
ARTICLE III
Control of Subdivisions; Recording; Dedications
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-5. Control of subdivisions.
§ 180-6. Modifications.
A. From and after the effective date of this chapter no subdivision of any
lot, tract, or parcel of land within the Borough shall be made, and no
street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water main or other facility in
connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened or
dedicated for public use or travel or for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit
to erect, alter or repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be
issued, and no building may be erected in a subdivision unless and until
a plan for the subdivision has been approved by the Borough Council
and recorded, and until the improvements required by the Borough
Council in connection therewith have either been constructed in strict
accordance with the standards and specifications of the Borough or
guaranteed as provided in § 180-23F of this chapter. Said standards and
specifications, particularly as presented in Article VIII of this chapter,
are declared to be a minimum guarantee that all streets shown on any
proposed plan are of sufficient width and proper grade and so located
as to accommodate the probable volume of traffic thereon, afford
adequate light and air, facilitate fire protection, provide access for fire
fighting equipment to buildings and provide a coordinated system of
streets conforming to the Borough's official plan of streets; and further,
that the land whereon buildings are to be constructed is of such
character that it can be used for building purposes without danger to
health or peril from fire, flood or other hazard.
B. Any subdivision or land development occurring within a floodplain as
identified in Chapter 122, the Floodplain Management Ordinance, as
amended from time to time, shall be in strict conformity with the
provisions of the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance and the
Floodplain Management Ordinance. [Added 1-3-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-0241]
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
41.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-18-2012.
§ 180-5 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-6
162:253
§ 180-7. Recording plats and deeds.
§ 180-8. Effect of plat approval on Official Map.
After a plat has been approved and recorded as provided in this chapter, all
streets and public grounds on such plat shall be, and become a part of the
Official Map of the Borough without public hearing.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
E. If literal compliance with any of this article’s requirements or the
subdivision and land development requirements contained within the
Floodplain Management Ordinance42 would result in an excessive
hardship upon any prospective builder, developer, or landowner, the
Borough Council may, upon written request, grant relief from the
requirement in question. Notwithstanding any of the following
procedures, all structures shall be designed and constructed to
withstand the one-hundred-year flood. [Added 1-3-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-0243]
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall within 90 days of
such final approval record such plat in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of Franklin County. The Recorder of Deeds shall not accept any
plat for recording unless such plat officially notes the approval of the
Borough Council, and review by the County Planning Commission.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Floodplain Management.
43.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-18-2012.
§ 180-6 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-8
162:254
ARTICLE IV
General Procedure and Jurisdiction
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-9. Plan-approving authority.
All subdivision or land development plans shall be subject to approval,
modification, or rejection by the Borough Council; in the event such a plan is
disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing and given to
the applicant. Prior to action by the Borough Council, all subdivision or land
development plans shall be referred to the Borough Planning Commission
for its review and recommendations.
§ 180-10. Submittal of plans.
The applicant shall submit preliminary and final copies of subdivision or
land development plans to the Borough Secretary, and the Borough
Secretary shall distribute the required number of copies to the Borough
agencies concerned, as provided for in Articles V, VI, and VII. All plans
when first submitted shall be considered preliminary plans. If the applicant
makes substantial revisions in his plans after they have been approved in
preliminary form, such revised plans shall be treated as preliminary plans
when resubmitted.
§ 180-11. Review of plans.
Subdivision and land development plans shall be reviewed by the Borough
Planning Commission at its first regular meeting following the date of
submittal, providing that such plans are submitted at least 10 days prior
to the meeting. Meetings of the Planning Commission at which plans are
reviewed shall be open to the public. Applicants shall be given reasonable
notice of the time and place at which their plans are to be reviewed.
§ 180-12. Approval of plans; hearing.
Approval of preliminary plans by the Borough Council shall be considered
approval of the arrangement and dimensions of streets, lots and other
features shown on the plans and may be made conditionally on specified
changes to be incorporated in the plans. The Council's approval of the final
plans shall be given only after the requirements and conditions indicated
on or in connection with the preliminary plans have been met; and said
approval shall constitute final Borough approval for the purpose of
recording the plans in the office of the County Recorder of Deeds. Before
acting on any subdivision or land development plan, the Borough Council
may arrange for a public hearing thereon after giving such notice as it may
deem necessary and desirable in each case.
§ 180-9 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-13
162:255
§ 180-13. Waiver or modification of requirements.
When an entire tract of land is divided into not more than two lots with
frontage on a paved street of sufficient width and none of the lots is
intended for further subdivision, the requirements for submittal of final
plans may be waived upon written application of the applicant and that final
approval be granted on the basis of the preliminary plan as submitted. The
application must include a statement that none of the lots to be created is
intended for further subdivision or land development as well as a plan to
scale giving all of the boundary dimensions of the tract and of the proposed
lots, the location of proposed buildings, and the width of abutting streets.
§ 180-14. Schedule of fees.
§ 180-15. Review fees.
A. The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits,
occupancy permits, special exceptions, variances and appeals, and
other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Zoning Officer and may be altered or
amended only by the Borough Council.
B. No action shall be taken on any application or appeal until all
application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full.
A. Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough's professional consultants or Engineer for review and report to
the Borough, and shall be set by resolution. Such review fees shall be
reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary charges
by the Borough Engineer or consultant for similar service in the
community, but in no event shall the fees exceed the rate or cost
charged by the Engineer or consultant to the Borough when fees are
not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on applicants.
B. In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review fees,
the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify the Borough
that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough shall not delay
or disapprove a subdivision or land development application due to the
applicant's request over disputed fees.
C. In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on the
amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary, then the
fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another professional
engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and chosen mutually
by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The estimate certified
by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and reasonable and shall
be the final estimate. In the event that a third engineer is so chosen,
fees for the services of said engineer shall be paid equally by the
Borough and the applicant or developer.
§ 180-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-16
162:256
§ 180-16. Exemptions.
The following are exempt or partially exempt from the provisions of this
chapter:
§ 180-17. Effect of changes in this chapter.
Changes in this chapter shall affect plats as follows:
A. The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or singlefamily
semidetached dwelling into not more than three residential
units, unless such units are intended to be a condominium;
B. The addition of an accessory building, including farm buildings, on a lot
or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
C. The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines of
an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park. For the
purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is defined as a tract
or area used principally as a location for permanent amusement
structures or rides. This exclusion shall not apply to newly acquired
acreage by an amusement park until initial plans for the expanded area
have been approved by proper authorities.
A. From the time an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary
or final, is duly filed as provided in this chapter, and while such
application is pending approval or disapproval, no change or
amendment of this chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or
plan shall affect the decision on such application adversely to the
applicant and the applicant shall be entitled to a decision in accordance
with the provisions of the governing ordinances or plans as they stood
at the time the application was duly approved. The applicant shall be
entitled to final approval in accordance with the terms of the approved
preliminary application as hereinafter provided. However, if an
application is properly and finally denied, any subsequent application
shall be subject to the intervening change in governing regulations.
B. When an application for approval of a plat, whether preliminary or final,
has been approved without conditions or approved by the applicant's
acceptance of conditions, no subsequent change or amendment in this
chapter, zoning or other governing ordinance or plan shall be applied to
affect adversely the right of the applicant to commence and to complete
any aspect of the approved development in accordance with the terms
of such approval within five years from such approval.
C. Where final approval is preceded by preliminary approval, the aforesaid
five-year period shall be counted from the date of the preliminary
approval. In the case of any doubt as to the terms of a preliminary
approval, the terms shall be construed in the light of the provisions of
this chapter or the governing ordinance or plans as they stood at the
time when the application for such approval was duly filed.
§ 180-16 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-17
162:257
§ 180-18. Amendment procedure.
D. Where the landowner has substantially completed the required
improvements as depicted upon the final plat within the aforesaid fiveyear
limit, or any extension thereof as may be granted by the Borough
Council, no change of any ordinance or plan enacted subsequent to the
date of filing of the preliminary plat shall modify or revoke any aspect of
the approved final plat pertaining to zoning classification or density, lot,
building, street or utility location.
E. In the case of a preliminary plat calling for the installation of
improvements beyond the five-year period, a schedule shall be filed by
the landowner with the preliminary plat delineating all proposed
sections as well as deadlines within which applications for final plat
approval of each section are intended to be filed. Such schedule shall be
updated annually by the applicant on or before the anniversary of the
preliminary plat approval, until final plat approval of the final section
has been granted and any modification in the aforesaid schedule shall
be subject to approval of the Borough Council in its discretion.
F. Each section in any residential subdivision or land development, except
for the last section, shall contain a minimum of 25% of the total number
of dwelling units as depicted on the preliminary plan, unless a lesser
percentage is approved by the Borough Council in its discretion.
Provided the landowner has not defaulted with regard to or violated any
of the conditions of the preliminary plat approval, including compliance
with landowner's aforesaid schedule of submission of final plats for the
various sections, then the aforesaid protections afforded by
substantially completing the improvements depicted upon the final plat
within five years shall apply and for any section or sections, beyond the
initial section, in which the required improvements have not been
substantially completed within said five-year period the aforesaid
protections shall apply for an additional term or terms of three years
from the date of final plat approval for each section.
G. Failure of landowner to adhere to the aforesaid schedule of submission
of final plats for the various sections shall subject any such section to
any and all changes in this chapter, zoning, and other governing
ordinance enacted by the Borough subsequent to the date of the initial
preliminary plan submission.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit the
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days
§ 180-17 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-18
162:258
prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit
the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of
the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough Council
shall publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven
days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council shall,
at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 180-18 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-18
162:259

ARTICLE V
Voluntary Preapplication Consultation
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-19. Consultation with Planning Commission.
§ 180-20. Sketch plan submission.
It is suggested that prior to the voluntary preapplication consultation with
the Planning Commission the applicant, developer, landowner or subdivider
prepare a sketch plan of his proposed land development, lot, project and/
A. Before submitting an application for development or taking steps to
acquire land or subdivide, the applicant, developer, landowner or
subdivider shall be familiar with all applicable laws, statutes,
ordinances and/or regulations, and may consult with the Planning
Commission about the following factors:
(1) The suitability of the site for development.
(2) The demand for a development of the type proposed in the
particular location proposed.
(3) The accessibility of the site.
(4) The availability of public facilities (schools, parks, water, sanitary
and storm sewerage, etc.) and public services (police, fire, refuse
disposal, etc.).
(5) The effect on the application, land development, lot, project and/or
subdivision of any contemplated improvements or the proposals of
any comprehensive plan.
(6) The requirements of this chapter.
(7) The requirements of the Borough Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 205).
(8) The sewage facilities requirements of the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection and the Borough.
(9) Erosion and sedimentation plans and permits as required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection and as
required by the Franklin County Conservation District.
(10) Precautionary measures to preserve or protect historic and natural
features.
(11) Approvals by all appropriate state and federal agencies.
B. Any voluntary preapplication consultation shall be kept as confidential
as possible. Such voluntary preapplication consultation shall not be
binding upon the Planning Commission or Borough Council, nor shall
any such consultation constitute an official application for development.
§ 180-19 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-20
162:261
or subdivision and submit sufficient data to the Planning Commission for
purposes of generally illustrating and discussing the same. Any such sketch
plan or information shall not constitute an official application for
development. An example of such a sketch plan is contained in Appendix A
of this chapter.44
44.Editor's Note: Appendixes A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 180-20 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-20
162:262
ARTICLE VI
Preliminary Plans
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-21. Plan requirements.
The Planning Commission may require that the following materials shall be
submitted with an application for review and approval of preliminary plans:
A. Eight copies of the plan in the form of a map or series of maps drawn to
a scale not smaller than 200 feet to the inch and showing the following:
(1) The limits and dimensions of the tract to be subdivided or
developed and the proposed name or identifying title of the
subdivision or land development. The date, scale and North point.
(2) Existing and proposed streets, including the name, widths of the
right-of-way and cartway.
(3) The location and dimensions, where applicable, of existing
buildings, railroads, easement, right-of-way, public lands, tree
masses, streams and other features, and monuments.
(4) The location and dimensions of proposed easements, existing
property lines, rights-of-way, and land reserved for public
purposes; and the location, course, and dimensions of existing and
proposed sanitary and storm sewer and water facilities.
(5) Existing topographic contours at not more than ten-foot intervals
or at such intervals that the contours shall have a maximum
spacing of 100 feet. The Planning Commission may also require
supplemental plans showing proposed final contour.
(6) The name and address of the applicant. The name, seal, and
signature of the engineer, architect, or surveyor who prepared the
plan. The name and address of the owner of the tract and the
names of the owners of adjoining tracts.
B. Eight copies of a sketch or map, drawn approximately to scale, showing
the location of the proposed subdivision or land development in relation
to adjacent properties and existing streets, and showing any proposed
connection with existing sewer and water facilities and a summary
table of the number of structures and dwelling units proposed.
C. Eight copies of a statement of proposed improvements, including
streets, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, including a typical cross-section
diagram of proposed street construction, and including the proposed
means of water supply and sanitary drainage.
D. In the event that the plans propose the enlargement of utility or any
other services extending from another municipality, a statement or
certificate indicating that the proposal has been reviewed by the
§ 180-21 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-21
162:263
§ 180-22. Review procedure.
municipality or municipal authority concerned and is considered to be
reasonable.
E. Whenever a single tract or parcel of land is to be subdivided into three
or more lots, the applicant shall prepare, for the use of the Borough,
four copies of a formal revision to the Borough's Official Liquid Wastes
Disposal Plan, pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection. Such revision shall include
but shall not be limited to the following information:
(1) A preliminary plot plan indicating within the site the location of
existing and proposed buildings, lot lines, sewage or sewerage
systems, all sources of water supply such as wells and springs,
ponds, streams, and other bodies of water, rights-of-way, streets,
roadways, highways, and access routes.
(2) Information relating to the type of water supply and sewage supply
provided or to be provided including soil conditions and limitations
for on-lot sewage disposal if applicable.
(3) Information relating to adjacent property, buildings, sources of
water supply, ponds, streams, sewage or sewerage systems, rightsof-
way, streets, that may have a significant effect on the
environmental and sanitary aspects of the proposed subdivision.
(4) Direction to North, direction of slopes, and degree of slope.
(5) Direction and distance of the nearest sewage treatment plant and
information as to its present or future accessibility in terms of time,
finances and load capacity as well as the sources of this
information.
A. Upon receipt of the required plans and application materials, the
Borough Secretary shall forward four copies of the plan and supporting
data to the Borough Planning Commission, one copy of the plan and
supporting data to the Engineer, and one copy to the Zoning Officer;
and one copy to the County Planning Commission.
B. The Engineer shall review the plans from the standpoint of engineering
requirements and considerations and shall transmit them to the
Planning Commission with a copy of his report, and the Zoning Officer
shall review the plans to determine compliance with pertinent Borough
ordinances and shall transmit the plans and a report to the Planning
Commission.
C. The County Planning Commission shall review and report on the plans
at county expense. The Borough shall not approve the plans until the
county report is received or until the expiration of 30 days from the date
the application was forwarded to the county.
§ 180-21 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-22
162:264
D. The Borough Planning Commission shall take official action on a
preliminary subdivision plan within 60 days of Borough receipt of the
plans and data. The Commission shall note its action on five copies of
the plans. The five noted copies of the plan shall then be forwarded to
the Borough Council along with a recommendation concerning
preliminary approval. Upon its approval of the preliminary plans the
Commission shall recommend to the Borough Council that the revision
to the Borough Official Liquid Waste Disposal Plan be formally adopted
and submitted to the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection for their review.
E. All applications for approval of a preliminary plat shall be acted upon by
the Borough Council and its decision communicated to the applicant not
later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Borough Council or the Planning Commission (whichever first reviews
the application) next following the date the application is filed, provided
that should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall
be measured from the 30th day following the day the application has
been filed.
(1) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed the decision
shall specify the defect found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
to the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(4) Public hearing. Before acting on any application, the Borough
Council may hold a public hearing hereon after giving public
notice.
§ 180-22 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-22
162:265

ARTICLE VII
Final Record Plans
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-23. Plan requirements.
The Planning Commission may require that the following materials shall
be submitted with an application for approval of a final plan. Final plans
shall conform in all important details with preliminary plans as previously
approved, and any conditions specified in the approval of preliminary plans
shall be incorporated in the final plans.
A. Eight copies of the subdivision or land development plan in the form of
a map or series of maps, drawn to a scale of not smaller than 200 feet to
the inch on sheets 8 1/2 by 11 inches, 18 by 24 inches or 24 by 36
inches. Where more than one sheet is required, an index map of the
entire subdivision or land development at a smaller scale shall be
shown on a sheet of the same size. The Planning Commission may
require final plans at a scale of 50 feet to the inch as a condition of
preliminary plan approval to assure legibility in cases warranted by the
complexity of the proposal. At least one copy of such map shall be made
on linen, or acetate, or comparable materials, and the error of closure
shall not be more than one part in 10,000. Such final subdivision plans
shall show:
(1) The items required to be shown in preliminary subdivision plans, as
specified in § 180-21A.
(2) Final topographic contours at not more than ten-foot intervals so
that the contours shall have a maximum spacing of 100 feet.
(3) The location of all proposed monuments, street lights, and street
signs.
(4) The location of minimum building setback line.
B. Eight copies of a utility map or maps showing tract boundaries, existing
and proposed streets, lot lines, sanitary and storm water sewer
facilities, water pipes, curbs, sidewalks, fire hydrants, and manholes.
C. Eight copies of profile and cross-section maps or diagrams of streets
showing proposed grades of curbs, sanitary and storm water sewers,
water pipes and other underground utilities.
D. A statement of the type of types of structures to be erected, and a
summary table of the number of structure and dwelling units proposed.
E. Evidence that the plans are in conformity with building, zoning,
sanitation and other applicable Borough ordinances and regulations
and with the regulations governing the extension of utility services into
the Borough. In any instance where such plans do not conform,
§ 180-23 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-23
162:267
§ 180-24. Review procedure.
evidence shall be presented that an exception has been officially
authorized.
F. Evidence that the applicant has installed the necessary streets and
other improvements as required in § 180-29 in accordance with
Borough standards and specifications, or that the applicant has
furnished the Borough with guarantee or surety in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter for the completion of said improvements.
A. One copy of each subdivision plan and one copy of utility maps and
streets profiles received by the Borough Secretary shall be transmitted
to the Borough Planning Commission for its review, or for review by its
subdivision committee. The Commission or its committee shall report
back to the Borough Secretary whether the final plans as submitted are
in sufficient agreement with previously submitted preliminary plans to
warrant detailed engineering in review.
B. On receipt of the Planning Commission's favorable report, the Borough
Secretary shall forward one copy of the subdivision plan and one copy
of utility maps and street profiles to the Engineer for his review as to
the adequacy and estimated cost of construction of required public
improvement. In the event that the Planning Commission finds that the
applicant has made substantial changes in his plans since the
preliminary plans were approved, the Commission shall so notify the
Borough Secretary and shall review the plans according to the
procedure for preliminary plans.
C. On receipt of the Engineer's report, the Borough Secretary shall notify
the Borough Solicitor to prepare proper forms of agreement between
the Borough and the applicant concerning the matters described in
§ 180-23F, above, and in § 180-32U, if appropriate.
D. The Borough Secretary shall not place consideration of the plan on the
agenda of the Borough Council prior to receipt by the Borough of a
favorable report from the Department of Environmental Protection
regarding the official plan revision. However upon receipt of said
favorable report the Borough Secretary shall notify the applicant of the
time and place of the meeting at which the plans shall be considered,
but in no event shall said plans be considered at a meeting later than
provided in Subsection E hereof.
E. All applications for approval of a final plat shall be acted upon by the
Borough Council and its decision communicated to the applicant not
later than 90 days following the date of the regular meeting of the
Borough Council or the Planning Commission (whichever first reviews
the application) next following the date the application is filed, provided
that should the said next regular meeting occur more than 30 days
following the filing of the application, the said ninety-day period shall
§ 180-23 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-24
162:268
§ 180-25. Completion of improvements or guarantee thereof
prerequisite to approval.
be measured from the 30th day following the day the application has
been filed.
(1) The decision of the Borough Council shall be in writing and shall be
communicated to the applicant personally or mailed to him at his
last known address not later than 15 days following the decision.
(2) When the application is not approved in terms as filed the decision
shall specify the defect found in the application and describe the
requirements which have not been met and shall, in each case, cite
to the provisions of the statute or ordinance relied upon.
(3) Failure of the Borough Council to render a decision and
communicate it to the applicant within the time and in the manner
required herein shall be deemed an approval of the application in
terms as presented unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time or change in the prescribed manner of
presentation of communication of the decision, in which case,
failure to meet the extended time or change in manner of
presentation of communication shall have like effect.
(4) Public hearing. Before acting on any application, the Borough
Council may hold a public hearing thereon after giving public
notice.
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, street lights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common amenities
including basins and other related drainage facilities, recreational
facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen plantings
which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days unless a
§ 180-24 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-25
162:269
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal or Commonwealth chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
Commonwealth.
E. Such bond, or other security shall provide for, and secure to the public,
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this Commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
§ 180-25 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-25
162:270
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development subject to such requirements or guarantees as to
improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
§ 180-25 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-25
162:271
§ 180-26. Release from improvement bond.
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing, with the Borough Council, and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing by certified or registered
mail of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved and the developer shall be released
from all liability, pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
§ 180-25 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-26
162:272
complete the same and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Borough Council and as from time to time amended. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for work
performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall
the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant
to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed Engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or if at the time there be no President Judge,
then the senior active judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
§ 180-26 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-26
162:273
§ 180-27. Remedies to effect completion of improvements.
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final plat
the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any corporate
bond, or other security by appropriate legal and equitable remedies. If the
proceeds of such bond, or other security are insufficient to pay the cost of
installing or making repairs or corrections to all the improvements covered
by said security, the Borough Council may, at its option, install part of
such improvements in all or part of the subdivision or land development
and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action to recover the
moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the improvements. All of
the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or from any legal or
equitable action brought against the developer, or both, shall be used solely
for the installation of the improvements covered by such security, and not
for any other Borough purpose.
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
§ 180-26 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-27
162:274
ARTICLE VIII
Design Standards
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-28. Application of standards.
The standards of design in this article shall be used to judge the adequacy
of subdivision and land development proposals.
§ 180-29. Construction of improvements.
The applicant shall grade and pave the streets and install all other
necessary improvements at no expense to the Borough including, where
required, curbs, sidewalks, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers, street
lights, fire hydrants, street name signs, and other facilities and utilities
required by the Council, in strict accordance with the requirements of this
article and the standards and specifications of the Borough. Construction
and inspection of all such facilities and utilities shall be subject to inspection
by appropriate Borough officials during the progress of the work. The
applicant shall not begin work on structures in any part of the subdivision or
development until the streets in that part have been graded to within four
inches of the finished grade.
§ 180-30. General standards.
§ 180-31. Blocks and lots.
A. Land. No land shall be subdivided or developed for residential purposes
unless all hazards to life, health, or property from flood, fire and
disease, shall have been eliminated or unless the plans for the
subdivision or development shall provide adequate safeguards against
such hazards.
B. Development. Proposed subdivisions or developments shall be
coordinated with existing nearby neighborhoods so that the community
as a whole may develop harmoniously.
A. Block length. Residential and commercial blocks shall be not less than
500 feet long nor more than 1,000 feet long.
B. Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough for two tiers of lots and shall
not generally be less than 300 feet wide between right-of-way lines.
C. Through lots. Double frontage lots are to be avoided and generally will
not be permitted unless the lots are a minimum of 200 feet deep. Along
intercommunity or major highways, through reverse frontage lots,
served entirely by a separate residential service or neighborhood
feeder street, may be required in order to protect the character of the
major street.
§ 180-28 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-31
162:275
§ 180-32. Streets, alleys and sidewalks.
D. Grading. Blocks and lots shall be graded to sufficient elevation to
secure drainage away from buildings and to prevent the collection of
storm water in pools. Roof drainage shall be provided for according to
recommendations of the Engineer or such other official as may be
designated by the Borough Council. Topsoil shall be preserved and
redistributed as cover and shall be suitably planted with perennial
grasses or ground cover.
E. Lot size. The minimum lot size and lot width requirements shall be as
required in the Borough of Greencastle Zoning Ordinance (Chapter
205).
F. Lot lines. Lot lines shall be approximately at right angles or radial to
street lines so long as reasonably shaped lots result.
G. House numbers. House numbers shall be assigned to each lot by the
Borough.
H. Residential parking. At least two off-street parking spaces with access
to a public street shall be provided for each proposed dwelling unit.
Where such access is to other than a residential service street,
adequate turnaround space shall be provided on the lot.
I. Exceptions. Blocks in commercial and industrial districts may vary from
the elements of design contained in this section if the nature of the use
requires special treatment. Off-street parking and loading space shall
be provided along with safe and convenient access to the street system.
A. Street pattern. The proposed street pattern shall be integrated with
existing and/or officially planned streets and it shall be related to
topography to produce usable lots and reasonable street grades.
B. Design and purpose. Streets shall be designed according to their
function and laid out to preserve the integrity of their design in
accordance with the following functional classifications:
(1) Minor service street. A street, usually within a development,
intended primarily to serve only the properties along it. Standards
assume light traffic flow and street parking along one side. When
such a street is intended to serve row or multifamily structures, the
standards provide for parking on both sides and light traffic flow.
Such streets should be laid out to discourage through traffic.
(2) Collector street. A street which connects residential service streets
to intercommunity streets or to neighborhood facilities. Standards
assume medium traffic flow and parking on both sides of the street.
(3) Major highway or street. A street connecting regional centers and
only incidentally of local use.
§ 180-31 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-32
162:276
(4) Alley and service drive. A minor street which provides a secondary
means of access to the back or side of properties otherwise
abutting a street. Standard assumes infrequent use by heavy
vehicles at low speed.
C. Street widths. Streets shall be laid out according to the following
minimum schedule:
Class of Street
Right-of-Way Width
(feet)
Minimum Pavement
Width
(feet)
Minor street 50 34
Collector street 60 40
Major highway or
street
State Highway
Department standards
State Highway
Department standards
Alley and service
drive
20 16
D. Street pavement. Minimum pavement width shall be improved with
macadam or other hard surface.
E. Continuations. Where reasonable and practicable, new streets shall be
laid out to continue existing streets at no reduction in width. Greater
widths may be required.
F. Street names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known by the
same name; but names for other streets shall not duplicate or closely
resemble names for existing streets in the Borough.
G. Access. Streets shall be laid out to make provision for access to all lots
and to adjacent undeveloped areas, and the applicant shall improve
these access streets to the limits of the subdivision.
H. Reserve strips. Reserve strips controlling access to the subdivision or
land development or adjacent areas are prohibited.
I. Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets are prohibited unless constructed
as cul-de-sacs not exceeding 600 feet in length, with a turnaround
having a minimum of 100 feet diameter right-of-way and a minimum of
80 feet diameter of paving.
J. Clear-sight distance. Clear-sight distance along the center lines of
residential and neighborhood streets shall be maintained at not less
than 150 feet; along secondary or intercommunity streets at not less
than 250 feet; and along major streets at not less than 450 feet.
K. Directional changes. Changes in street direction shall be made by
horizontal curves with a minimum radius of 500 feet for major streets,
300 feet for collector streets, and 100 feet for minor streets. These radii
§ 180-32 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-32
162:277
are to be measured at the center line. Shorter radii may be permitted
on recommendation of the Engineer.
L. Grades. There shall be a minimum center-line grade of 0.5% on all
streets. Grades shall not exceed 6% on all major and secondary traffic
streets and 10% on minor and collector streets. Steeper grades may be
permitted on rural and residential streets for short distances if no
gentler slope is possible.
M. Vertical curves. Changes in grade shall be joined by vertical curves; and
the maximum rate of change of grade shall be 5% per 100 feet of road,
provided that the clear-sight distances specified above are maintained
at all points.
N. Crown. The slope of the crown on minor and collector streets shall be
more than 1/8 inch per foot and less than 1/3 inch per foot as directed
by the Engineer.
O. Curbs. Curbs and gutters shall be constructed for the full length of all
streets.
P. Side slopes. Streets cuts and fills shall be provided with side slopes no
steeper than one vertical to 1 1/2 horizontal. Such slopes shall be
suitably planted with perennial grasses or other vegetation to prevent
gullying and erosion.
Q. Sidewalks. Sidewalks shall be required for residential and commercial
areas. Sidewalk paving shall not be less than four feet wide. The
Planning Commission may recommend wider pavements in high-density
areas and in commercial areas. The location of sidewalks relative to
planting strips shall be in accordance with Borough requirements.
R. Materials and construction standards. Materials and construction
standards for streets, curbs and gutters, and sidewalks, shall conform
to regulations and standards of the Borough.
S. Storm sewerage. Provision of storm sewerage inlets, catch basins and
manholes shall meet the requirements of the Borough as regards both
design and location. All catch basins shall be connected to a manhole.
T. Intersections. Street intersections shall be designed according to the
following standards:
(1) No more than two streets shall cross at the same point. Street
intersections shall be at right angles whenever possible, and
intersections of less than 60° (measured at the center lines of the
streets) will not be permitted.
(2) Intersecting streets shall not enter into the same side of collector
or major streets at intervals of less than 800 feet. Minor streets
entering another street from opposite sides should be directly
opposite each other; or, if necessary, they may be separated by at
least 125 feet between center lines measured along the center of
§ 180-32 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-32
162:278
§ 180-33. Utilities.
the cross street. Greater offset may be required by the Planning
Commission depending on the importance of the cross street.
(3) Maximum grade within any intersection shall not exceed 5% in any
direction, and approaches to any intersection shall follow a straight
course within 100 feet of the intersection; grades within 100 feet of
an intersection shall not exceed 10%.
(4) Curb radii at intersections shall be according to the following
schedule of minimum lengths: 15 feet for intersections of alleys and
all streets; 20 feet for minor streets; and 30 feet for major and
collector streets. Where streets of different categories intersect,
requirement for the more important one shall hold. The street
right-of-way line shall be parallel to the curb line. In zones where
buildings are permitted to abut the right-of-way line, a diagonal
cutoff may be employed, provided sidewalk width and corner
visibility are unimpaired.
(5) Except where buildings are permitted to front on property lines, a
seventy-five-foot clear-sight triangle shall be provided, in which no
building or structure, wall, fence, hedge, tree, shrub or other
growth shall be placed except for utility poles, light standards,
street signs and fire hydrants.
U. The following standards shall apply to the design and location of alleys
and service drives:
(1) Alleys shall not be permitted in residential developments except by
permission of the Borough. No part of any dwelling, garage, or
other structure may be located within 16 feet of the center line of
an alley.
(2) Alleys or secondary service drives serving commercial and
industrial establishments are required unless other provisions for
service are provided.
A. All newly constructed properties shall be connected to the municipal
sanitary sewer system as required by the Greencastle Borough
ordinance, and to the municipal water system.
B. Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a Certificate of
Public Convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
§ 180-32 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-33
162:279
§ 180-34. Other public facilities.
C. Installation of all sewers, water mains, street lights, manholes and
other utilities, shall be in strict accordance with the engineering
standards and specifications of the Borough, municipal authority, or
other public utility concerned.
D. Fire hydrants, when provided, shall be located so that the distance from
any building frontage to a fire hydrant is not more than 600 feet
measured along the curb.
E. Where common utility lines are installed in or over undedicated land, a
public easement 7 1/2 feet on each side of the line shall be required.
Suitable easements may also be required along the course of streams
for the future installation of sewers. Where feasible, telephone and
electric lines shall be installed below ground.
A. Land requirements. Areas set aside for recreational or school purposes
shall be reasonably compact parcels, placed to serve all parts of the
subdivision or development, accessible from a public street, and not
excessively irregular in terrain.
B. Landmarks. Wherever possible, applicants shall preserve trees more
than four inches in diameter measured 4 1/2 feet above the average
ground level at the trunk, groves, waterways, scenic points, historic
spots, and other community assets and landmarks.
C. Playgrounds. In subdivisions or land developments which provide or are
intended to provide housing facilities for more than 50 families, the
Planning Commission shall consider the need for suitable open areas
for recreation. Standards to be used by the Planning Commission as
guides in requesting the reservation of space for recreation shall be as
follows:
Families to be Served Playground Acreage
50 - 174 1.50
175 - 374 2.75
375 - 624 3.25
625 - 800 4.00
D. Monuments. Permanent monuments shall be placed throughout the
subdivision or development in accordance with Borough specifications,
to give full surveying control for each block and for all areas of
dedicated land or public easement. Monuments shall not be set in the
ground until final grading is completed.
§ 180-33 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-34
162:280
ARTICLE IX
Mobile Home Park Regulations
§ 180-35. Procedure. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
§ 180-36. Approval of mobile home park plan; objectives. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-3]
In considering and acting upon mobile home park plans, the Planning
Commission and Borough Council shall take into consideration the public
health, safety and welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in
general and of the residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular,
and may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be
required in order that the result of its action may, to the maximum extent
A. No person, firm or corporation shall construct, maintain, or operate a
mobile home park within the Borough without obtaining a mobile home
park permit.
B. Mobile home park permit. Prior to the issuance of a mobile home park
permit, a plan shall be submitted to and approved by the Borough
Council and the Borough Planning Commission in accordance with the
requirements and procedures of Articles V, VI and VII of this chapter
regarding the preapplication consultation, preliminary plans and final
record plans, and the following conditions:
(1) Said plan shall include areas within which mobile homes may be
located, the spacing of mobile homes, open spaces and their
landscaping, off-street parking spaces, and streets, driveways,
utilities, watercourses, and any other physical features relevant to
the proposed plan.
(2) Borough Council's public hearing. Before acting on any preliminary
mobile home park plan, the Borough Council shall arrange for a
public hearing. Such public hearing shall be held after reviewing
the recommendations, if any, of the Planning Commission, and
within 20 days of receipt of the said recommendations. This
hearing shall be held according to public notice and notice of said
hearing shall be posted by certified mail to the owners of property
abutting the site and directly across an adjoining street and to any
other persons that the Council may feel to be particularly affected.
(3) Borough Council action. The Borough Council shall take official
action on a preliminary mobile home park plan after it has received
the report of the Borough Planning Commission and after the
required public hearing. The Borough Council shall note its action
on three copies of the plans. One copy shall be returned to the
developer and two copies shall be retained for Borough use.
(4) Fees. Fees for filing a preliminary and final plan shall be in
accordance with §§ 180-14 and 180-15 of this chapter.
§ 180-35 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-36
162:281
possible, further the expressed intent of this chapter and the
accomplishment of the following objectives in particular:
§ 180-37. Park site.
The park site shall be well drained and have such grades and soil as to make
it suitable for the purpose intended. All such parks shall be planned as a
unit and shall be located on a tract of land at least 10 acres in size. The area
of said site shall be in single ownership or under unified control.
§ 180-38. Lot requirements.
A. Traffic access. That all proposed traffic access and ways are adequate
but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade, alignment and
visibility; not located too near street corners or other places of public
assembly; and other similar safety considerations.
B. Circulation and parking. That adequate off-street parking and loading
spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of vehicles of
any persons connected with or visiting the use and that the interior
circulation system is adequate to provide safe accessibility to all
required off-street parking lots.
C. Landscaping and screening. That all playground, parking and service
areas are reasonably screened at all seasons of the year from the view
of adjacent residential lots and streets and that the general landscaping
of the site is in character with that generally prevailing in the
neighborhood. Existing trees over four inches in diameter measured
4 1/2 feet above the average ground level shall be retained to the
maximum extent possible.
D. Illumination. That lighting from the installation of outdoor flood or spot
lighting and illuminated signs will be properly shielded so that such
lighting will not adversely affect any abutting property or public street.
A. All lots in any mobile home park shall be well drained and graded to a
point where mobile homes may be parked so that the parking of the
same shall result in safety to all concerned. In all instances as much
natural vegetation as is reasonably possible shall be preserved by any
mobile home park developer.
B. Individual mobile home lots located in a mobile home park shall contain
at least 5,000 square feet of lot area and shall not be less than 50 feet
wide at the building setback line exclusive of easements.
C. The maximum number of mobile home lots that may be approved in a
mobile home park shall be computed by subtracting from the total gross
area a fixed percentage of 10% of said area for usable open space and
dividing the remaining 90% of the area by the minimum lot
requirements set forth above.
§ 180-36 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-38
162:282
§ 180-39. Yard and setback requirements.
§ 180-40. Park street system.
D. In computing the maximum number of mobile home lots that may be
created, any lands which are located within a floodplain area, which are
subject to either periodic flooding or occasional chronic wetness, which
are occupied by public utility easements or which have a slope in excess
of 25% in such a manner as to limit their use or prevent their use or
prevent their development shall not be considered part of the total
gross area.
E. All mobile home lots shall be given street numbers and all park streets
shall be given names. Continuations of existing streets shall be known
by the same name; but names for other streets shall not duplicate or
closely resemble names for existing streets in the Borough.
A. All mobile homes shall be located at least 75 feet from any street rightof-
way which abuts a mobile home park boundary and at least 100 feet
from any other boundary of the park.
B. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual
mobile home and adjoining pavement of a park street or common
parking area or other common areas.
C. All mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings by at least 20 feet.
A. Park access. Access to mobile home parks shall be designed to minimize
congestion and hazards at the entrance or exit and allow free
movement of traffic on adjacent streets. Each mobile home park shall
be provided with at least two points of ingress and/or egress and a
distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between center lines of
access streets.
B. Lot access. All mobile home parks shall be provided with safe and
convenient paved access streets to and from each and every mobile
home lot. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to
topography.
C. Streets. All streets within any mobile home park shall have a minimum
right-of-way width of 50 feet, a minimum cartway width of 36 feet, and a
minimum pavement width of 24 feet, except that one-way streets shall
have a minimum cartway width of 28 feet and a minimum pavement
width of 12 feet. All streets shall be paved in accordance with Borough
specifications and shall be kept in good repair.
D. Intersections. Not more than two streets shall intersect at any one point
and a distance of at least 150 feet shall be maintained between center
lines of offset intersecting streets.
§ 180-38 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-41
162:283
§ 180-41. Required off-street parking. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-3]
§ 180-42. Utility improvements.
§ 180-43. Usable open space.
§ 180-44. Buffer strips.
A suitably screened or landscaped buffer strip at least 10 feet wide,
approved by the Commission, shall be provided by the developer along all
of the property and street boundary lines separating the park from adjacent
uses.
A. Paved off-street parking areas shall be provided in all mobile home
parks for the use of park occupants and guests. Such areas shall be
furnished at the rate of at least two vehicular parking spaces for each
mobile home lot.
B. Each off-street parking space shall contain at least 300 square feet and
shall not exceed a distance of 300 feet from the mobile home lot that it
is intended to serve.
A. Water distribution. All mobile home parks shall provide to each
separate mobile home lot line a continuing supply of safe and potable
water as approved by the State Department of Environmental
Protection.
B. Sewage disposal. All mobile home parks shall provide to each separate
mobile home lot a connection to a centralized sanitary sewage disposal
system which shall be approved by the State Department of
Environmental Protection.
C. No mobile home park permit shall be issued until the sewage disposal
and water distribution systems for the mobile home park have been
approved by the State Department of Environmental Protection.
Pollution of any natural watercourse shall be prohibited.
A. All mobile home parks shall provide not less than 10% of the total land
area for usable open space purposes. Usable open space shall be so
located as to be free of traffic hazards and should, where the
topography permits, be centrally located and easily accessible to all
park residents.
B. Exposed ground surfaces in all parts of every park shall be paved, or
covered with stone screenings, and other solid material, or protected
with a vegetation growth that is capable of preventing soil erosion and
the emanation of dust during dry weather.
C. Park grounds shall be maintained free of vegetation growth which is
poisonous or which may harbor rodents, insects, or other pests harmful
to man.
§ 180-41 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-45
162:284
§ 180-45. Walkways.
§ 180-46. Signs and lighting.
§ 180-47. Other site improvements.
A. General requirements. All parks shall be provided with safe,
convenient, all season pedestrian walks of adequate width for intended
use, durable and convenient to maintain, between individual mobile
home lots, the park streets and all community facilities provided for
park residents. Sudden change in alignment and gradient shall be
avoided.
B. Common walk system. A common walk system shall be provided and
maintained between locations where pedestrian traffic is concentrated.
Such common walks shall have a minimum width of four feet.
C. Individual walks. All mobile home lots shall be connected to common
walks, to paved streets, or to paved driveways or parking spaces
connecting to a paved street. Such individual walks shall have a
minimum width of two feet.
A. Signs may be permitted subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
B. All means of ingress, egress, walkways, streets, and parking lots shall
be adequately lighted.
A. One fire alarm box or public telephone shall be provided for each
mobile home park. The park operator shall require that a fire
extinguisher of a type approved by the Commission shall be maintained
in each mobile home and in all public service buildings under park
control.
B. Provision shall be made by the park operator to have garbage and
waste collected at least once every week. Any refuse disposal site
proposed within the mobile home park shall be subject to the approval
of the State Department of Environmental Protection.
C. Each mobile home lot shall be provided with a four-inch concrete slab
on a stable surface at least 10 feet by 18 feet in size for use as a terrace
and so located so as to be adjoining and parallel to the mobile home.
Such slab shall contain an electrical outlet to which the electrical
system of the mobile home shall be connected.
D. Individual tenants at the mobile home park may construct attached
enclosures or covered patios to individual mobile homes, provided that
such enclosure does not exceed the slab area noted in Subsection C,
and is confined to same. Planning Commission approval shall be
required for such enclosures in each case.
E. There shall be provided in each mobile home park such other
improvements as the Commission may require whereby such
§ 180-45 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-47
162:285
§ 180-48. Park areas for nonresidential uses.
§ 180-49. Existing mobile home parks. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-3]
The operators of existing mobile home parks shall have six months from
date of enactment of this chapter to comply with the provisions of this
chapter.
requirements shall at all times be in the best interests of the park
residents.
F. An enclosure of compatible design and material shall be erected around
the entire base of each mobile home. Such enclosure shall provide
sufficient ventilation to inhibit decay and deterioration of the structure.
A. No part of any mobile home park shall be used for a nonresidential
purpose, except such uses that are required for the direct servicing and
well being of park residents and for the management and maintenance
of the park.
B. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed as prohibiting the
sale of a mobile home located on an individual lot and connected to the
pertinent utilities.
§ 180-47 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-49
162:286
ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 180-50. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-3]
§ 180-51. Preventive remedies. [Amended 7-1-1985]
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the District Justice. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the District Justice determining that there
has been a violation further determines that there was a good-faith
basis for the person, partnership, or corporation violating this chapter
to have believed that there was no such violation, in which event there
shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the District
Justice and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings brought
under this section.
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
§ 180-50 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-51
162:287
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
§ 180-51 GREENCASTLE CODE § 180-51
162:288
Chapter 185
TAXATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Compensation of Tax Collector — See Ch. 43,
Art. I.
Real estate registry — See Ch. 148.
§ 180-51 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 180-51
162:289

ARTICLE I
(Reserved)45
§ 185-1. through § 185-10. (Reserved)
45.Editor's Note: Former Art. I, Per Capita Tax, adopted 12-18-1967 by Ord. No. 15-67, as
amended, was repealed 12-10-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-13.
§ 185-1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-1
162:291

ARTICLE II
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 11-27-1972 by Ord. No. 6-72 (Ch. 24, Part 2, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 185-11. Short title; effective date and continuation.
This article shall be known and may be cited as "Earned Income Tax
Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall first become effective on January
1, 1973, and shall remain in effect on a calendar-year basis without annual
reenactment.
§ 185-12. Definitions and word usage.
A. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall have, for
the purpose of this article, the meanings indicated in this section:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, joint venture or
any other form of unincorporated group of two or more persons.
BOROUGH or BOROUGH OF GREENCASTLE — The political
subdivision or municipality within the corporate limits of the Borough
of Greencastle, which was incorporated by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Greencastle.
BUSINESS — An enterprise, activity, profession or any other
undertaking of an unincorporated nature conducted for profit, or
ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an individual, partnership,
association, or any other entity.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association organized
under the laws of the United States, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or any other state, territory, or foreign country or
dependency.
CURRENT YEAR — The calendar year for which the tax is levied.
DOMICILE — The place where one lives and has his permanent home
and to which he has the intention of returning whenever he is absent.
Actual residence is not necessarily domicile, for domicile is the fixed
place of abode which, in the intention of the taxpayer, is permanent
rather than transitory. Domicile is the place in which a man has
voluntarily fixed the habitation of himself and his family, not for a mere
special or limited purpose, but with the present intention of making a
permanent home, until some event occurs to induce him to adopt some
other permanent home. In the case of businesses, or associations, the
domicile is that place considered as the center of business affairs and
the place where its functions are discharged.
EARNED INCOME — Salaries, wages, commissions, bonuses, incentive
payments, fees, tips and other compensation received by a person or
his personal representative for services rendered, whether directly or
§ 185-11 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-12
162:293
through an agent, and whether in cash or in property; not including,
however, wages or compensation paid to persons on active military
service, periodic payments for sickness and disability other than
regular wages received during a period of sickness, disability or
retirement or payments arising under workmen's compensation acts,
occupational disease acts and similar legislation, or payments
commonly recognized as old age benefits, retirement pay or pensions
paid to persons retired from service after reaching a specific age or
after a stated period of employment or payments commonly known
as public assistance, or unemployment compensation payments made
by any governmental agency or payments to reimburse expenses or
payments made by employers or labor unions for wage and salary
supplemental programs, including, but not limited to, programs
covering hospitalization, sickness, disability or death, supplemental
unemployment benefits, strike benefits, social security and retirement.
EMPLOYEE — Any person who renders services to another for a
financial consideration of its equivalent, under an express or implied
contract, and who is under the control and direction of said other
person, and shall include persons employed on a temporary,
provisional, casual or part-time basis.
EMPLOYER — A person, partnership, association, corporation,
institution, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity
employing one or more persons for a salary, wage, commission or other
compensation.
INCOME TAX OFFICER or OFFICER — The person, official, public
employee, private agency or firm designated by resolution or ordinance
of the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, to collect and administer the tax on
earned income received and net profits earned, or any successor, or
agent so appointed.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, except corporations, after provision for
all costs and expenses incurred in the conduct thereof, determined
either on a cash or accrual basis in accordance with the accounting
system used in such business, profession, or other activity, but without
deduction of taxes based on income.
NONRESIDENT — An individual, partnership, association, or other
entity, domiciled outside of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania.
PERSON or INDIVIDUAL — Every natural person. Whenever used in
any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty, the term "person," as
applied to an association, shall mean the partners or members thereof,
and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — Any city, borough, town, township or
school district existing under the laws of the Commonwealth of
§ 185-12 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-12
162:294
§ 185-13. Imposition of tax; applicability and exemptions.
[Amended 5-26-1981 by Ord. No. 1-81]
Pennsylvania as they shall be deemed subject to this article by the laws
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
PRECEDING YEAR — The calendar year before the current year.
RESIDENT — An individual, partnership, association or other entity,
domiciled in the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
SUCCEEDING YEAR — The calendar year following the current year.
TAXPAYER — A person, whether an individual, partnership, association
or any other entity, required hereunder to file a return of earned income
or net profits, or to pay a tax thereon.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the neuter.
A. A tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1/2% per year is
hereby imposed on the following:
(1) Earned income received on and after January 1, 1973, by residents
of the Borough of Greencastle.
(2) Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1973, by residents of the
Borough of Greencastle.
(3) Earned income received on and after January 1, 1973, in the
Borough of Greencastle by nonresidents of the Borough of
Greencastle.
(4) Net profits earned on and after January 1, 1973, in the Borough of
Greencastle by nonresidents of the Borough of Greencastle.
B. The tax levied under Subsection A(1) and (3) herein shall relate to, but
is not limited to, and is imposed upon earned income paid by an
employer or on his behalf to a person who is employed by him. The tax
levied under Subsection A(2) and (4) herein shall relate to and be
imposed on the net profits of any business, profession or other activity
carried on by any person or persons.
C. The tax levied under Subsection A(3) and (4) herein shall not apply to
earned income received and net profits earned by nonresidents of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, after December 31, 1980, in the
Borough of Greencastle.
D. Every corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania Corporate Net
Income Tax or exempt from the Pennsylvania Corporate Net Income Tax
and every foreign corporation which is subject to the Pennsylvania
Franchise Tax or exempt from the Pennsylvania Franchise Tax shall be
exempt from the tax imposed by this article.
§ 185-12 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-13
162:295
§ 185-14. Filing return and payment of tax.
§ 185-15. Collection at source; withholding of tax; bulk reporting;
return and payment of withheld tax by employers. [Amended
5-7-1973 by Ord. No. 3-73; 7-11-1977 by Ord. No. 4-77; 5-26-1981
by Ord. No. 1-81]
E. The tax levied by this article shall be applicable to earned income
received and to net profits earned beginning January 1, 1973, which are
subject to this tax, and shall continue on a calendar-year basis. The first
year shall end December 31, 1973; however, the tax shall remain
effective for each full calendar year thereafter until the same is
repealed.
A. Every taxpayer shall, on or before April 15 of the succeeding year, make
and file with the Income Tax Officer, on a form prescribed or approved
by the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, a final return showing the amount of
aggregate earned income received (before any deductions) or net
profits earned during the period beginning January 1 of the current
year and ending December 31 of the current year, the total amount of
tax due thereon, the amount of tax paid thereon, the amount of tax
thereon that has been withheld pursuant to the provisions hereof
relating to collection at the source, and the balance of tax due. At the
time of filing the final return, the taxpayer shall pay the balance of the
tax due, or shall make demand for a refund or credit in the event that
the amount of tax withheld is greater than the amount of tax due.
B. Every taxpayer who discontinues business prior to December 31 of a
current year shall, within 30 days after the discontinuance of business,
file a final return as hereinabove required and pay the tax due.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse,
or other place of business within the Borough of Greencastle who
employs one or more residents or nonresidents of the Borough of
Greencastle, other than employees performing domestic services in the
employer's home, for a salary, wage, commission or other compensation
shall, within 15 days after the effective date of this article or within 15
days after becoming an employer, register with the Income Tax Officer
his name, address, number of employees, and such other information as
the Officer may require.
B. Deduction and remittance.
(1) Every employer described in Subsection A above shall deduct from
each employee's salary, wage, commission or other compensation,
at the time of payment thereof, the tax imposed thereon by this
article and shall remit the same to the Income Tax Officer,
accompanied by returns on forms prescribed and approved by the
Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, at the following times:
§ 185-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-15
162:296
For Quarter Comprising the
Following Months in Which
Wages are Paid
Payment Due On or
Before
January, February, March April 30
April, May, June July 31
July, August, September October 31
October, November, December January 31
(2) Effective December 31, 1980, employers shall not deduct the tax
imposed by this article from the salary, wage, commission or other
compensation of employees who are nonresidents of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(3) Employers' returns for each quarter shall state, with respect to that
quarter, the aggregate wages from which, and number of
employees from whom, reported tax was withheld, the aggregate
amount of tax withheld, the commission (if any) which the employer
is entitled to deduct, the net amount of tax remitted and any other
pertinent information which may be required by the Officer.
C. Returns and statements.
(1) On or before February 28 of each succeeding year, every employer
shall file with the Income Tax Officer:
(a) An annual return showing the total amount of earned income
paid, the total amount of tax deducted, and the total amount of
tax paid to the Officer for the period beginning January 1, of
the current year and ending December 31 of the current year;
and
(b) A return withholding statement for each employee employed
during all or any part of the period beginning January 1 of the
current year and ending December 31 of the current year
setting forth the employee's name, address and social security
or account number, the amount of tax deducted, the political
subdivision or subdivisions imposing the tax upon such
employee, and the amount of tax paid to the Officer. Every
employer shall furnish two copies of the individual return to
the employee for whom it is filed.
(2) Any employer who discontinues business (or his legal
representatives) shall file a final quarterly return and annual
return, and pay tax, covering periods not previously reported,
within 30 days following such discontinuance.
D. Any taxpayer subject to the tax imposed by this article may report and
pay said tax through a qualified and approved bulk reporter, that is, a
qualified and approved natural person, partnership, association,
corporation, governmental body or unit or agency, or any other entity
§ 185-15 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-15
162:297
reporting and/or paying tax for persons subject to the tax, who shall,
on behalf of the Borough and the Income Tax Officer, issue a receipt
therefor. Bulk reporters shall register with the Officer such bulk
reporter's name and address and such other information as the Officer
may require, on or before April 30, 1973, or within 15 days after
becoming a bulk reporter and shall maintain complete records of the
taxpayers for whom reporting is made for a period of six years, in such
form as to enable the Income Tax Officer to determine the liability of the
taxpayers for whom bulk reporting is being made, the actual amount
transmitted to the Officer and such other information available to such
bulk reporters as will enable the Officer to carry out his responsibilities.
Bulk reporters shall file with the Income Tax Officer quarterly reports
and annual returns on the same dates and for the same periods as
are provided for with respect to employers in subsections 2 and 3
of this section. Annual returns filed by bulk reporters shall show the
full name and address of the employer and the employee for whom
bulk reporting and payment is being made, said employees' social
security numbers and/or account numbers and the total wages paid
to all employees during the preceding calendar year for whom bulk
reporting and payment is being made, together with such other
information and reconciliations of quarterly reports as the Officer may
require. At the time bulk reporters register with the Income Tax Officer
they shall sign a form or agreement indicating that they are willing to
pay for an annual audit of their bulk reports by an auditor approved by
the Borough.
E. Any nonresident employer beyond the limits of this Borough who
desires, for the convenience and with the consent of his employees
residing in this Borough, to deduct tax hereunder from such employees'
wages, shall be entitled to the commission hereafter allowed, and shall
become subject to all obligations of timely filing of returns, reports and
remittances, and of maintaining and disclosing records, and to all
interest and penalties, with respect to such tax as he may actually
deduct, in all respects, and with the same incidents, as though he were
a resident employer; but no such deduction shall obligate such
employer to continue to make future deductions.
F. Tax deducted from wages by any employer shall at all times be and
remain the property of this Borough, and shall constitute a trust fund in
the employer's hands until remitted to the Officer; and deduction of tax
from wages shall, as between the employee and this Borough,
constitute payment of the tax by the employee, regardless of any
insolvency or failure to remit on the employer's part.
G. Every employer who willfully or negligently fails or omits to make the
deductions required by this article shall be liable for payment of the
taxes which he was required to withhold to the extent that such taxes
have not been recovered from the employee.
H. The failure or omission of any employer to make the deductions
required by this article shall not relieve any employee from liability for
§ 185-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-15
162:298
§ 185-16. Optional fiscal year.
Any taxpayer, for his convenience, and subject to any adjustments required
by the Officer for previous or future returns made on the basis of a calendar
year or different fiscal year, may elect to report and pay tax hereunder
on the taxpayer's fiscal-year basis instead of on the calendar-year basis
provided for in §§ 185-14 and 185-15. Such election shall be filed with
the Officer and shall contain a written agreement by the taxpayer that
his earned income for such fiscal year shall be deemed in all respects to
constitute, and shall be a substitute for, earned income of the calendar year
which is subjected to tax by this article. Such election shall be at the risk
of the taxpayer with respect to any adjustments of tax paid to or claimed
by other taxing districts with respect to the same income. A fiscal-year
taxpayer shall report and pay tax in full, in one payment, on or before the
105th day after the close of his fiscal year.
§ 185-17. Failure to receive forms.
Failure of a taxpayer or employer to receive forms or returns shall not
excuse any failure to file any reports or returns which may be required, or
to pay any tax due, hereunder.
§ 185-18. Powers and duties of Officer.
payment of the tax or from the duty to comply with the requirements of
this article relating to the filing of returns.
A. It shall be the duty of the Income Tax Officer to collect and receive the
taxes, fines and penalties imposed by this article. It shall also be his
duty to keep a record showing the amount received by him from each
person or business paying the tax and, if paid by such person in respect
of another person, the name of such person and the date of such
receipt.
B. Each Officer, before entering his official duties, shall give and
acknowledge a bond to the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough
of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, which shall be
conditioned and shall provide for all rights and obligations on the
respective parties as set forth in The Local Tax Enabling Act, 1965,
December 31, P.L. 1257, as amended. Said bond shall be delivered to
the Secretary of the Mayor and Borough Council of the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, maintained with its
records, or at such place as is required by law.
C. The Income Tax Officer is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article and is hereby empowered
to prescribe, adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations
relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and enforcement
of this article, including provisions for the reexamination and correction
of returns, and of payments alleged or found to be incorrect, or as to
which an overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, and to
§ 185-15 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-18
162:299
§ 185-19. Compensation of Officer.
The Income Tax Officer shall receive such compensation for his services
and expenses as shall be determined and fixed by the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, and
as shall be permitted by law. In fixing such compensation, said municipality
may, pursuant to a resolution or ordinance, enter into such written
agreements for such compensations as shall be deemed necessary.
§ 185-20. Suit for collection of tax.
make refunds in cases of overpayment, for any period of time not to
exceed six years subsequent to the date of payment of the sum involved,
and to prescribe forms necessary for the administration of this article.
No rule or regulation of any kind shall be enforceable unless it has been
approved by resolution or ordinance of the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania. A copy of such rules and regulations
currently in force shall be available for public inspection.
D. The Officer shall refund, on petition of and proof by the taxpayer,
earned income tax paid on the taxpayer's ordinary and necessary
business expenses, to the extent that such expenses are not paid by the
taxpayer's employer.
E. The Officer and agents designated by him are hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers and records of any employer or of any
taxpayer or of any person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be an
employer or taxpayer, in order to verify the accuracy of any return, or if
no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due. Every employer and every
taxpayer, and every person whom the Officer reasonably believes to be
an employer or taxpayer, is hereby directed and required to give to the
Officer, or to any agent designated by him, the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination and investigations as are hereby
authorized.
F. Any information gained by the Officer, his employees, agents, or by any
other official or agent of the Borough, as a result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
article, shall be confidential, except for official purposes and except in
accordance with a proper judicial order, or as otherwise provided by
law.
G. Any person aggrieved by any action of the Income Tax Officer shall have
the right of appeal as provided by law.
A. The Income Tax Officer may sue in the name of the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
for the recovery of taxes due and unpaid under this article.
B. Any suit brought to recover the tax imposed by this article shall be
begun within three years after such tax is due, or within three years
§ 185-18 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-20
162:300
§ 185-21. Interest and penalties.
If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6% per
annum on the amount of said tax, and an additional penalty of 1/2% of the
amount of the unpaid tax for each month or fraction thereof during which
the tax remains unpaid, shall be added and collected. Where suit is brought
for the recovery of any such tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition,
be liable for the costs of collection and the interest and penalties herein
imposed.
§ 185-22. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-1-1985]
after the declaration or return has been filed, whichever date is later;
provided, however, that this limitation shall not prevent the institution
of a suit for the collection of any tax due or determined to be due in the
following cases:
(1) Where no return was filed by any person although a return was
required to be filed by him under provisions of this article, there
shall be no limitation.
(2) Where an examination of the return filed by any person, or of other
evidence relating to such return in the possession of the Officer,
reveals a fraudulent evasion of taxes, there shall be no limitation.
(3) In the case of substantial understatement of tax liability of 25% or
more, and no fraud, suit shall be begun within six years.
(4) Where any person has deducted taxes under the provisions of this
article, and has failed to pay the amounts so deducted to the Officer
or where any person has willfully failed or omitted to make the
deductions required by this article, there shall be no limitation.
(5) This section shall not be construed to limit the governing body from
recovering delinquent taxes by any other means provided by this
article.
C. The Officer may sue for recovery of an erroneous refund provided such
suit is begun two years after making such refund, except that the suit
may be brought within five years if it appears that any part of the refund
was induced by fraud or misrepresentation of material fact.
A. Any person who fails, neglects or refuses to make any return required
by this article, any employer who fails, neglects or refuses to register or
to pay the tax deducted from his employees, or fails, neglects or refuses
to deduct or withhold the tax from his employees, any person who
refuses to permit the Officer, or any agent designated by him, to
examine his books, records and papers, and any person who knowingly
makes any incomplete, false or fraudulent return or attempts to do
anything whatsoever to avoid the full disclosure of the amount of his net
profits or earned income in order to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax imposed by this article, shall, upon conviction
§ 185-20 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-22
162:301
§ 185-23. Payment and refunds.
The Income Tax Officer is hereby authorized to accept payments of the
amount of tax claimed by the Borough in any case where any person
disputes the validity or amount of the Borough's claim for the tax. If it is
thereafter judicially determined by a court of competent jurisdiction that
there has been an overpayment to the Income Tax Officer, the amount of the
overpayment shall be refunded to the person who paid.
§ 185-24. Applicability.
thereof before any District Justice, or the Franklin County Court in
event of appeal, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $500
for each offense, and costs, and/or to be imprisoned for a period not
exceeding 30 days in the Franklin County Prison.
B. Any person who divulges or permits to be divulged any information
which is confidential under the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before any District Justice, or the Franklin County
Court in the event of appeal, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$500 for each offense, and costs, and/or to be imprisoned for a period
not exceeding 30 days in the Franklin County Prison.
C. The penalties imposed under this section shall be in addition to any
other penalty imposed by any other section of this article.
D. The failure of any person to receive or procure forms required for
making the returns required by this article shall not excuse him from
making such return.
A. The tax imposed by this article shall not apply:
(1) To any person as to whom it is beyond the legal power of the Mayor
and Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, to impose the tax provided for under the
Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) To the net profits of any institution or organization operated for
public, religious, educational or charitable purposes, to an
institution or organization not organized or operated for private
profit, or to a trust of a foundation established for any of the said
purposes.
B. This section shall not be construed to exempt any person who is an
employer from the duty of collecting the tax at the source from his
employees and paying the amount collected to the Mayor and Borough
Council of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
under the provisions of this article.
§ 185-22 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-25
162:302
§ 185-25. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted pursuant to the procedures and authority of, and as
set forth in, the Act of the General Assembly of December 31, 1965, P.L.
1257, Act No. 511, as amended, known as "The Local Tax Enabling Act."46
46.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.
§ 185-25 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-25
162:303

ARTICLE III
Tax on Deeds
[Adopted 5-21-1984 by Ord. No. 3-84 (Ch. 24, Part 3, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 185-26. Statutory authority; imposition of tax; administration.
§ 185-27. Definitions and word usage.
A. This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act
of 1965, approved December 31, 1965, Act No. 511, effective January 1,
1966 (53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.), its amendments and supplements, and
shall be known as the "Tax on Deeds Ordinance."
B. The Borough of Greencastle adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the
Tax Reform Code of 1971 and imposes a realty transfer tax as
authorized under that article subject to the rate limitations therein. The
tax imposed under this section shall be at the rate of 1%. Greencastle
Borough re-adopts Ordinance No. 3-84, subject to the changes and
modifications set forth herein. [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
C. The tax imposed under Subsection B and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511, as amended, known as "The
Local Tax Enabling Act," provided that, if the correct amount of the tax
is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, the Borough
of Greencastle, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of
1971 (72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of
Revenue of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect
and enforce the tax, interest and penalties. [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord.
No. 2008-01]
A. The following words when used in this article shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form
of unincorporated enterprise, owned or conducted by two or more
persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — The Recorder of Deeds of Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
CORPORATION — A corporation or joint stock association, organized
under the laws of this Commonwealth, the United States or any other
state, territory or foreign country or dependency, including but not
limited to banking institutions.
§ 185-26 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-27
162:305
§ 185-28. Imposition of tax.
On and after the effective date of this article, on every document, whereby
any lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or other realty sold, or any interest
therein, shall be granted, bargained, sold, transferred, conveyed or
otherwise vested in the purchaser or purchasers, grantee or grantees, or
any other person or persons, by his, her or their direction, lying, being
or situate wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania delivered on or subsequent
to July 1, 1984, a tax for general Borough purposes is hereby imposed,
assessed and levied on each such deed at the rate of 1% of the value of
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing whereby any lands,
tenements or hereditaments within the Borough or any interest therein
shall be granted, bargained, sold, transferred or otherwise conveyed to
the grantee, purchaser or any other person, but does not include wills,
mortgages, transfers between husband and wife, transfers between
parent and child.
PERSON — Every natural person, association, firm or corporation.
Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or
imprisonment, or both, the term "person" as applied to associations,
partnerships or firms shall mean the partners or members thereof, and,
as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
TRANSFEREE — The person buying, acquiring, or otherwise receiving
ownership of real property or any interest therein.
TRANSFEROR — The person selling, granting, conveying or otherwise
transferring ownership of real property or any interest therein.
VALUE — In the case of any document granting, bargaining, selling,
transferring or otherwise conveying any land, tenement, hereditament,
or interest therein, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
including all liens, mortgages, or other encumbrances thereon. Actual
consideration shall be construed to mean for the purposes of this
article the cash paid for the execution and delivery of the document,
together with the face value of all liens, judgments, mortgages, or other
encumbrances secured on the real estate conveyed or transferred by
the said document, together with any other evidence of indebtedness or
promises, either oral or written, given by or on behalf of the grantee to
grantor, or any one on his behalf, as full or part consideration for the
said document of conveyance; provided; that where such document or
documents shall set forth a small or nominal consideration, or in the
case of a gift, the "value" thereof shall be determined from an actual
monetary worth of the property including improvements granted,
bargained, sold, transferred or otherwise conveyed, which, in either
event, shall not be less than the amount of the highest assessment of
such lands, tenements, or hereditaments for local tax purposes.
B. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and neuter.
§ 185-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-28
162:306
the real estate, lands, tenements, or hereditaments or any interest therein
which is conveyed or transferred by the said document; provided that,
where any lands, tenements or hereditaments being situate partly within
and partly without the boundaries of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin
County, Pennsylvania, are conveyed by the document, such tax so levied
shall be calculated on the valuation of that portion of such lands and
tenements lying within the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 185-29. Persons liable for tax.
The tax hereby imposed, assessed and levied shall be paid by the transferor,
but nothing herein contained shall be construed as prohibiting the payment
of the tax by the transferee. Payment of the tax by the transferee shall
discharge the transferor's obligation and liability for payment of the tax.
§ 185-30. Payment due when transfer recorded.
The tax hereby imposed, assessed and levied shall be payable when the
sale, transfer or conveyance of the real property, tenement, hereditament or
other interest in real property shall be completed and must be paid at the
time of the recording of the document evidencing the transfer.
§ 185-31. Evidence of payment.
The payment of the tax imposed, assessed and levied by this article shall
be evidenced by a stamp certificate impressed by the Collector on every
document.
§ 185-32. Responsibility for stamp certificates.
The Collector shall furnish the necessary stamp certificate to be impressed
upon every document, and the said Collector may appoint persons within
or without said Borough as his agents for affixing to every deed said stamp
certificate to be signed by said agent in the name of said Collector.
§ 185-33. Collector responsible for enforcement.
The Collector is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions of
this article, and is hereby authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt,
promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to:
§ 185-34. Prohibited acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to:
A. The methods and means to be used in affixing a stamp certificate to
every document.
B. Any other matter or thing pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of the provisions of this article.
§ 185-28 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-34
162:307
§ 185-35. Interest on unpaid taxes. [Amended 1-7-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-01]
Any tax imposed under this article that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207 No. 153) (53 P.S. §§ 7101, et
seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. §806), as amended, known as "The Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
§ 185-36. Penalty for nonpayment when due.
If any tax imposed, assessed and levied pursuant to this article shall not
be paid when due, there shall be added to the tax a penalty of 10% of the
amount of the tax due, in addition to the interest set forth in § 185-35, supra.
§ 185-37. Exemptions.
Any bargain, sale, transfer or conveyance of real estate, tenement,
hereditament, or interest therein which is exempt from the tax imposed by
the Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Act (72 P.S. § 8101-C) shall also be exempt
from the tax imposed by this article.
§ 185-38. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be liable to a
penalty not exceeding $500 for each and every offense, and further shall be
required to pay the amount of the tax, together with interest and penalty as
is otherwise provided for in this article, which should have been paid on the
said document or documents, and, upon default in the payment of the same
for 10 days, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
A. Fail to pay the tax imposed by this article.
B. Fail, neglect, or refuse to comply with, or violate the rules and
regulations prescribed, adopted, and promulgated by the Collector
under the provisions of this article.
C. Fraudulently affix to any document, upon which the tax is imposed by
this article, any stamp certificate which has been cut, torn, or removed
from any other document upon which a tax is imposed by this article, or
any forged or counterfeited stamp certificate, or any impression of any
forged or counterfeited stamp certificate.
D. Knowingly or willfully prepare, keep, sell, offer for sale, or have in his
possession any forged or counterfeited stamp certificate.
§ 185-34 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-39
162:308
§ 185-39. Collector to furnish bond.
The Collector shall furnish to the Borough a proper bond in an amount to
be fixed by said Borough with such surety or sureties as it may approve,
conditioned upon the effective and faithful performance of his duties as
such Collector.
§ 185-39.1. Repealer. [Added 1-7-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-01]
A. As of the effective date of this section, all provisions of previous
ordinances of the Borough of Greencastle or parts thereof which are
contrary or inconsistent to Ordinance No. 2008-01 are expressly
repealed.
B. The repealed ordinances enumerated in Subsection A remain effective
for documents that become subject to tax prior to the effective date of
this section.
§ 185-39 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-39.1
162:309

ARTICLE IV
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted 6-7-1999 by Ord. No. 1999-347]
§ 185-40. Rules and regulations.
The rules and regulations attached hereto as Exhibit A48 and incorporated
herein are hereby approved and adopted.
§ 185-41. Disclosure statement.
The disclosure statement, substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit B49
attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby approved and adopted.
§ 185-42. Petition for appeal and refund.
The form of petition for appeal and refund, substantially in the form set
forth in Exhibit C50 attached hereto and incorporated herein, is hereby
approved and adopted.
§ 185-43. Appeals before Borough Council.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle hereby determines that
administrative appeal procedures relating to petitions for appeal and refund
submitted by taxpayers in connection with the assessment, determination
or refund of an eligible tax under the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (LTBR)
shall be undertaken by the Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle,
Franklin County, Pennsylvania, sitting in executive session.
§ 185-44. Administrative appeals procedures.
The Administrative Appeals Procedures set forth in the Rules and
Regulations substantially in the form set forth in Exhibit D,51 attached
hereto and incorporated herein, are hereby approved and adopted.
47.Editor's Note: For informational purposes, the prefatory clauses of this ordinance
provided as follows: “WHEREAS, the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania enacted the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights (the 'LTBR') within the provisions
of Act 50 of 1998; and” “WHEREAS, the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights requires political
subdivisions levying certain local taxes ('eligible taxes'), as that term is defined in the
LTBR, to adopt rules and regulations for practice, procedure and administration in the
audit, assessment, appeal, determination and collection of eligible taxes; and”
“WHEREAS, the Borough of Greencastle levies certain taxes which qualify as eligible taxes
under the LTBR; and” “WHEREAS, in order to comply with the requirements of the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights, the Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle desires to
adopt rules and regulations for practice and procedure implementing the LTBR, a notice
to taxpayers, a disclosure statement and administrative appeal procedures relating to
taxpayer petitions.”
48.Editor's Note: Exhibit A is on file in the Borough offices.
49.Editor's Note: Exhibit B is on file in the Borough offices.
50.Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Borough offices.
51.Editor's Note: Exhibit D is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 185-40 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-45
162:311
§ 185-45. When effective; applicability.
This article shall become effective in accordance with the provisions of law
and shall be applicable to eligible taxes as of January 1, 1999.
§ 185-45 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-45
162:312
ARTICLE V
Local Service Tax
[Adopted 12-16-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-1152]
§ 185-46. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation as this term is defined in Section 13
(relating to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of
Dec. 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.53
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession; or other activity, as this term is defined in Section 13 (relating
to earned income taxes) of the Local Tax Enabling Act, the Act of Dec. 31,
1965, P.L. 1251, § 13, as amended, 53 P.S. § 6913, as amended.54
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 185-47 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for an effective date of 1-1-2013.
53.Editor's Note: Repealed by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective June 30, 2012; see
now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
54.Editor's Note: Repealed by 2008, July 2, P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective June 30, 2012; see
now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 185-46 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-47
162:313
§ 185-47. Levy of tax.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2013, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough of
Greencastle during the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such
privilege for any length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that
year in the amount of $52, assessed on a pro rata basis, in accordance with
the provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes as the same may be allocated by the Borough from time to
time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical services,
police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or maintenance;
reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through implementation
of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A.
Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to homestead property exclusion). The political
subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from the tax
for emergency services. This tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind
or nature heretofore levied by the political subdivision. The tax shall be no
more than $52 on each person for each calendar year, irrespective of the
number of political subdivisions within which a person may be employed.
§ 185-47.1. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
§ 185-47 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-47.1
162:314
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy
of all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the
tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
§ 185-47.1 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-47.1
162:315
§ 185-48. Duty of employers to collect.
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough, in consultation with the Collector and DCED,
shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims for any
tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which procedures
shall be in accord with provisions of the General Municipal Law relating
to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments. Refunds
made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day
the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of the
calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough or the Collector shall determine eligibility
for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
§ 185-47.1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-48
162:316
§ 185-49. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 185-50. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 185-51. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 185-52. Employment in more than one occupation or political
subdivision.
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of Subsection B
of § 185-47.1 of this article and this section and remits the amount so
withheld in accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 185-48 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-52
162:317
§ 185-53. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and, in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 185-54. Administration of tax.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
§ 185-52 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-54
162:318
§ 185-55. Suits for collection.
§ 185-56. Violations and penalties.
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
consistent with the Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights under Act 50 of 1998.
(Municipalities may detail their appeal processes.)
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required
by this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or
accounts in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of
employees subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or
whoever fails or refuses to file any return required by this article shall
be in violation of this article.
(1) Any violation of this article may result in a civil enforcement
proceeding being brought before a Magisterial District Judge by
complaint or such other means as may be provided by the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure. The fine for such violation
shall not be less than $100 nor more than $600 for each violation. A
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion of a day in
which a violation is found to exist, or for each section of this article
which is found to have been violated.
(2) This article may be enforced through an action in equity brought in
the Court of Common Pleas in which the subject property is
located.
(3) Any person found guilty of violating this article may be assessed
court cost and reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough in
§ 185-54 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-56
162:319
§ 185-57. Interpretation.
the enforcement proceedings brought in accordance with this
article.
B. The action to enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted
against any person in charge of the business of any employer who shall
have failed or who refuses to file a return required by this article.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 185-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-57
162:320
ARTICLE VI
Tax Exemption for Deteriorated Properties (LERTA)
[Adopted 11-5-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-10]
§ 185-58. Definitions.
The following words and phrases when used in this article shall have the
following meaning:
DETERIORATED PROPERTY — Any industrial, commercial or other
business property located in an eligible deteriorating area as defined
hereinafter in § 185-59, or any such property which has been the subject of
an order of a governmental agency requiring the property to be vacated,
condemned, or demolished by reason of noncompliance with laws,
ordinances, or regulations. In the event that a property is used for both
residential and industrial, commercial or business purposes, also known
as a mixed use, deteriorated property shall consist only of that portion of
the property (based on percentage of square footage) which is used for
industrial, commercial or other business purposes, as determined by the
Borough in its sole discretion. In no event shall any portion of property
(based on percentage of square footage) used for residential purposes be
considered and/or defined as deteriorated property.
IMPROVEMENTS — Repair, new construction or reconstruction, building
alterations or additions, having the effect of rehabilitating deteriorated
property so that it becomes habitable or attains higher standards of safety,
health, economic use or amenity or is brought into compliance with laws,
ordinances or regulations governing such standards. Ordinary upkeep or
maintenance shall not be deemed an improvement.
§ 185-59. Eligible areas.
The Borough Council determines that the areas shown on the map attached
hereto as Exhibit "A"55 and incorporated by reference shall be the
deteriorated area(s) within the Borough which contain deteriorated
properties which are eligible for tax exemption under this article.
§ 185-60. Limited amount.
A. The amount to be exempted from real estate taxes shall be limited to
that portion of the additional assessment attributable to the actual cost
of new construction or improvements to deteriorated property in
accordance with the exemption schedule established by this article.
B. The exemption from real estate taxes shall be limited to the new
construction or improvement for which an exemption has been
requested in the manner set forth in the Act and restated in this article
and for which a separate assessment has been made by the Board of
Assessment Appeals.
55.Editor's Note: Said exhibit is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 185-58 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-60
162:321
§ 185-61. Exemption schedule.
§ 185-62. Procedure for obtaining exemption.
C. In any case, after the effective date of this article, where deteriorated
property is damaged, destroyed, demolished by any cause or for any
reason and the assessed valuation of the property is affected, has been
reduced as the result of said damage, destruction, or demolition, the
exemption from real property taxation authorized by this article shall
be limited to that portion of the new assessment attributable to the
actual cost of the new construction or improvements that is in excess of
the original assessment that existed prior to damage, destruction or
demolition of the property. The foregoing provision shall not be deemed
to apply to the property(ies) the title to which is (are) acquired
subsequent to the effective date of this article from Franklin County
under the provisions of the Real Estate Tax Sale Law, 72 P.S. § 5860.101
et seq.
A. The schedule of Borough real estate taxes to be exempted shall be in
accordance with the following portion (percent) of improvements to be
exempted each year.
Length
(Year)
Portion
(Percent)
First 100%
Second 80%
Third 60%
Fourth 40%
Fifth 20%
B. If an eligible property is granted a tax exemption pursuant to this
article, the actual cost of the new construction or improvement shall
not, during the exemption period, be considered as a factor in assessing
other properties.
C. The exemption from taxes granted under this article shall be upon the
property and shall not terminate upon the sale or exchange of the
property.
A. Any person desiring tax exemption under this article shall notify the
Manager and Tax Collector of the Borough of Greencastle, the Business
Manager of the Greencastle-Antrim Area School District and the County
of Franklin, within the deteriorated area identified in § 185-59 above
(each a "local taxing authority"), in writing on a form provided to the
applicant at the time a building permit, or, if no building permit, other
notification, for new construction or any improvements, has been
secured by the applicant. A copy of each exemption request shall be
forwarded to the Franklin County Assessment Office. The Franklin
§ 185-60 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-62
162:322
§ 185-63. Termination date.
An application for exemption may be made at any time within years from
the effective date of this article. All qualified applications under this article
are eligible for the entire five-year exemption schedule.
§ 185-64. Revocation.
The exemption from real estate taxes provided for herein shall be forfeited
by the taxpayer and/or any subsequent owner of the property for the failure
to pay any nonexempt real estate taxes to any local taxing authority by the
last day of the time period to pay such taxes in the penalty period, unless
the taxpayer has lawfully filed an appeal thereof. Upon receipt of the notice
of nonpayment of nonexempt real estate taxes, the Borough Tax Collector
shall discontinue the LERTA exemption as provided for under this article.
County Assessor shall, upon notice by the applicant and after
completion of the new construction or improvement, assess separately
the new construction or improvement and calculate the amount of the
assessment eligible for tax exemption in accordance with the limits
established by each local taxing authority and shall notify the taxpayer
and each local taxing authority of the reassessment and the amount
of the assessment eligible for the exemption. Appeals from the
reassessment and the amount eligible for the exemption may be taken
by the taxpayer or any local taxing authority as provided by the Act.
B. The cost of the new construction or improvements to be exempted and
the schedule of taxes exempted existing at the time of the initial request
for tax exemption shall be applicable to that exemption request, and
subsequent amendment to this article, if any, shall not apply to requests
initiated prior to their adoption.
C. Appeals from the reassessment and the amount eligible for the
exemption may be taken by the Borough or the taxpayer as provided by
law.
§ 185-62 SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING § 185-64
162:323
Chapter 187
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Shade Tree Commission — See Ch. 11, Art. III.
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 86.
Nuisances — See Ch. 132.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 185-64 GREENCASTLE CODE § 185-64
187:324
ARTICLE I
Shade Tree Rules and Regulations
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 187-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle.
COMMISSION — The Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of
Greencastle.
PERSON — All individuals, firms, partnerships, associations, corporations
and companies, or organizations of any kind.
PUBLIC AREA — The area located within the right-of-way of the public
streets in the Borough.
STREET — The entire width of every public right-of-way when any part
thereof is open to the use of the public for the purposes of vehicular and
pedestrian traffic.
TREES — Includes all large perennial plants, usually with one main trunk
and many branches, but may also have multiple trunks.
§ 187-2. Planting and control of trees.
§ 187-3. Permission to plant, treat or remove in public areas.
A. The Commission shall have charge and control of all trees growing now
or hereafter in any public area in the Borough, and shall have the power
to plant and maintain such trees in accordance with this article.
B. The Commission shall have authority to determine all questions of a
physiological, entomological or pathological nature relating to the
disposition of any tree or group of trees in any public area in the
Borough.
A. No person shall hereafter plant, move, spray, fertilize, trim, do surgery
work, climb with spikes, remove or damage any guard or device placed
to protect any tree, cut above or below ground, disturb or alter any tree
on any public area of the Borough, nor cause such acts to be done by
others, without first obtaining permission form the Commission, which
shall issue a permit for such work if, in its judgment, the work is
necessary and the proposed methods of workmanship are of a
satisfactory nature. A permit shall not be required to cultivate and
water. The person receiving the permit shall abide by the arboricultural
specifications and standards or practice adopted by the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough.
§ 187-1 TREES § 187-3
187:325
§ 187-4. Contents of permit.
Every written permit issued by the Commission shall describe the work
to be done, specify the species or variety, size, nursery grade, location,
briefly specify the method of planting, method of support and trimming of
all trees concerned, and contain a definite expiration date. Any permit may
be declared void if its terms are violated.
§ 187-5. Fastening materials to trees.
No person shall fasten any sign, wire, rope or other material to or around
or drive any nail or spike through any tree in a public area in the Borough
except by permission of the Commission, except in emergencies such as
storms or accidents.
§ 187-6. Placing materials in public areas.
No person shall deposit, place, store or maintain upon any public area of the
Borough any stone, earth fill, brick, sand, concrete or other materials which
may impede the free passage of water, air and fertilizer to the roots of any
tree growing therein.
§ 187-7. Protection of trees.
B. As a condition to the issuance of a permit to remove any tree in a public
area, the Commission may require that the permittee plant one or more
trees in place of the one removed. Whenever any such tree has been
removed or destroyed pursuant to any such conditional permit, it shall
be unlawful for the permittee to fail, refuse or neglect to plant another
tree or other trees of the type, size and at the location specified in the
permit, within the time specified by the Commission, unless the
Commission determines that such replacement is unnecessary or
undesirable.
C. After removal of any tree located in a public area, the stump must be
leveled to ground level or below and filled in.
D. Upon failure of any permittee to comply with the terms of the permit, or
the conditions imposed by the Commission, the Commission shall
request the Borough to undertake the work to be done and collect the
cost thereof from the person who owns the property.
A. No person shall break, injure, mutilate, kill or destroy any tree, or
permit any fire to burn where such fire will injure any portion of any
tree, in any public area of the Borough of Greencastle.
B. No person shall knowingly permit any leak to exist in any gas pipe
within the root zone of any tree in a public area.
C. No person shall knowingly permit electric wires to come in contact with
trees in any public area unless such wires are insulated or protected by
an approved method.
§ 187-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 187-7
187:326
§ 187-8. Spraying of trees.
All spraying of trees shall be done only with materials approved by the
Shade Tree Commission in accordance with all applicable state and federal
regulations.
§ 187-9. Work to be performed by approved professionals.
All pruning, cutting, removal, spraying, fertilizing and tree surgery shall
be done only by a qualified tree surgeon or tree maintenance contractor
approved by the Commission. All such surgeons or contractors shall possess
general liability insurance coverage with a policy limit of not less than
D. No person shall attach any electrical insulation to any tree in a public
area or excavate any ditches, tunnels or trenches, or lay a driveway
within a radius of 10 feet from any tree in a public area without first
obtaining permission from the Commission.
E. During construction of buildings or other improvements to real estate,
the property owner or builder shall erect suitable protective barriers,
with a radius of 10 feet, around trees in public areas which, in the
judgment of the property owner, builder or Commission, will be
endangered by such construction work.
F. Whenever, in the judgment of the Commission, it becomes necessary to
move, protect or temporarily cut off electric current from electric
service lines so that any work on behalf of or at the direction of the
Commission pursuant to these regulations can be safely and properly
performed, written notice shall be given to the owners of such electric
lines and such owners shall comply with such notice within 24 hours
after receipt thereof.
G. No person shall place salt, brine, oil, or other substances injurious to
plant growth in any place in such a manner as to injure any tree in a
public area.
H. No person shall build any fire or station any tar kettle, road roller or
other engine in such a manner that the heat vapors or fumes therefrom
may injure any tree growing in any public area.
I. No person shall lay any sidewalk along or open, construct, curb or pave
any street or do any like act so as to interfere with or do injury to any
tree in a public area without permission of the Commission.
J. Shovels and all other implements, machines and tools shall not be used
or operated in such a manner as to damage or destroy any tree in any
public area.
K. Where in authorized excavations it becomes necessary to expose or cut
roots more than one inch in diameter, it shall be the duty of the
contractor to protect such roots in the manner required by the
Commission.
§ 187-7 TREES § 187-9
187:327
$500,000 for each occurrence, and proof of said coverage shall be
submitted to the Commission prior to commencing any work within the
Borough.
§ 187-10. Property owner's privileges.
Minor work on trees planted in public areas may be performed by the
abutting property owners of the said public areas, provided that permission
has first been obtained from the Commission. The Commission shall have
the authority to determine whether or not the proposed work on such trees
is minor.
§ 187-11. Declaration of nuisance; notice; abatement.
Any tree, or parts thereof, growing in any public area or upon private
property but overhanging or interfering with the use of any street, park or
public area of the Borough and which, in the judgment of the Commission,
endangers the life, health, safety or property of the public, is hereby
declared to be a public nuisance and shall be corrected or removed. The
owner shall be notified in writing of the existence of the nuisance and given
30 days to correct or remove it. If not corrected or removed within such
time, the Commission shall request the nuisance be corrected or removed
by the Borough and the cost thereof shall be assessed to the person who
owns the property.
§ 187-12. Permits to public utilities.
§ 187-13. Cooperation with other Borough departments.
The Commission and other Borough departments, authorities and agencies,
including the Planning and Zoning Commission, Police Department, Water
Department, Sewer Department and Street Department, shall cooperate
with and consult with the Commission when their work or functions affect
trees in public areas.
A. All permits issued for the installation of public utilities that affect trees
in public areas shall be approved by the Commission in accordance with
accepted standards.
B. When a permit is issued to a public utility to trim trees or perform other
operations affecting trees in public areas, such work shall be done in a
neat and workmanlike manner according to specifications of the Shade
Tree Commission.
C. The Commission may, if necessary, assign an inspector to supervise the
provisions of the permit, and the cost of such service shall be charged
to the public utility at cost.
§ 187-9 GREENCASTLE CODE § 187-14
187:328
§ 187-14. Interference prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the
Commission or any agent or employee of the Commission or the Borough
in the execution or enforcement of these regulations or any amendments
hereto.
§ 187-15. Collection of costs.
Payment of costs for work done by the Borough shall be due and payable
30 days after proper invoice by the Borough to the person who owns the
property. If such person does not make payment within 30 days, these
costs shall be considered a lien against the property. Any such lien may be
collected by an action at law or by the filing of a lien in the manner provided
by law for the filing and maintenance of municipal claims.
§ 187-16. Enforcement.
The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Commission and the
Greencastle Police Department.
§ 187-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of this article shall be fined not less than
$250 nor more than $1,000 for each offense, and a separate offense shall
be deemed committed on each day during or on which a violation occurs
or continues. This section shall not limit any other remedies and criminal
sanctions provided in law or equity.
§ 187-18. Municipal immunity and nonliability for damages.
A. In addition to all other immunity existing at law or in equity, nothing
contained in this article shall create an obligation or duty upon the
Borough. No pedestrian, passenger, driver, owner of property or any
person claiming an interest otherwise affected by provisions of this
article shall have any claim against the Borough for failure to perform
any duty or for performance in a negligent manner.
B. This article shall not be construed to hold Greencastle Borough, the
Borough Council, the Mayor, the Shade Tree Commission, or any of
their respective officers, employees or their appointed agents
(collectively referred to as "municipal parties") responsible for any
damages, injuries, loss or death to person, persons or property by
reason of any activity, omission or commission, or act by municipal
parties authorized herein or otherwise arising under this article. The
approval of any tree or type of tree shall not constitute a
representation, guaranty or warranty of any kind or nature by the
municipal parties and shall create no liability upon, or a cause of action
against, the municipal parties for any damage or loss.
§ 187-14 TREES § 187-18
187:329
Chapter 190
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles — See Ch. 78.
Nuisances — See Ch. 132.
Cruising — See Ch. 138, Art. II.
Skateboards, roller skates and roller
blades — See Ch. 158.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
§ 187-18 GREENCASTLE CODE § 187-18
187:330
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 190-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 190-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter.
§ 190-3. Continuation of prior regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances in force immediately prior to the adoption of this chapter, are
intended as a continuation of such ordinances and regulations and not as
new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall not affect any act done
or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit or prosecution pending
or to be instituted to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense
under any such ordinances or regulations as aforesaid.
§ 190-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 101 to 9701 (1977), as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania, unless the context clearly indicates
a different meaning.
B. "Legal holidays" shall be New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence
Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations;
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulations, or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
§ 190-1 TREES § 190-4
187:331
§ 190-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the Borough where for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective just as they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such
regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no person shall move, remove,
destroy or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority
of this section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section
shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set forth in the law
or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature, and in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution; provided, the purpose of this section is to allow for the test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 190-6. Authority of police officers; authority of meter attendants.
[Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
§ 190-7. Authorization for use of speed timing devices.
regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature, and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The police officers of the Borough of Greencastle are hereby given
authority to direct traffic on the highways of the Borough and at
intersections thereof and to enforce the provisions of this chapter in
accordance with the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. The Borough may employ meter attendants for the purpose of enforcing
parking laws and regulations. Meter attendants employed by the
Borough of Greencastle, for the purpose of policing the use of the
parking meters, are authorized to enforce the parking regulations of
this Chapter 190.
A. The Borough of Greencastle Police Department is hereby authorized to
use all mechanical or electrical speed timing devices for the
determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are approved or will be
approved by the Department of Transportation of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including but not limited to E.S.P. and Vascar systems.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough, be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to "local authorities" under
§ 190-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-7
187:332
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§§ 101 to 9701 (1977) as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified
or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 190-7 TREES § 190-7
187:333

ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 190-8. Motor vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.
No person shall drive any vehicle except a human powered vehicle upon
a sidewalk or sidewalk area except upon a permanent or duly authorized
temporary driveway. Any person who shall violate any provision of this
section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
together with costs of prosecution.56
§ 190-9. Speed limits established. [Amended 9-8-2009 by Ord. No.
2009-02]
A. The following speed limits are hereby established:
Street Between
Speed limit
(mph)
N. Allison Street E. Baltimore Street and
Borough limits
25
S. Allison Street E. Baltimore Street and
Borough limits
25
N. Antrim Way W. Baltimore Street and
Borough limits
40*
S. Antrim Way W. Baltimore Street and
Borough limits
40*
Baumgardner Drive Jeffrey Drive and Williamson
Avenue
25
N. Carlisle Street Center Square and E. Walter
Avenue
25
S. Carlisle Street Center Square and Borough
limits
25
E. Baltimore Street Center Square and Ridge
Avenue
25
E. Baltimore Street Ridge Avenue and Borough
limits
35*
W. Baltimore Street Center Square and Borough
limits
35*
S. Jefferson Street W. Baltimore Street and
Willhelm Avenue
25
56.Editor's Note: Former § 201A, Skateboards not to be ridden on sidewalks or upon private
property, adopted 12-8-1986 by Ord. No. 86-07, which immediately followed this section,
was repealed 4-7-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-4. See now Ch. 158, Skateboards, Roller Skates
and Roller Blades.
§ 190-8 TREES § 190-9
187:335
§ 190-10. Traffic signals at certain intersections.
Street Between
Speed limit
(mph)
Jeffrey Drive Williamson Avenue and
Baumgardner Drive
25
E. Leitersburg
Street
S. Carlisle Street and S.
Washington Street
25
E. Leitersburg
Street
S. Washington Street and
Borough Limits
35*
E. Madison Street N. Carlisle Street and N.
Antrim Way
25
W. Madison Street N. Carlisle Street and Borough
limits
25
S. Ridge Avenue E. Baltimore Street and E.
Leitersburg Street
25
Walter Avenue Allison Street and Williamson
Avenue
25
S. Washington
Street [Amended
4-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-03]
E. Baltimore Street and E.
Leitersburg Street
25
S. Washington
Street [Amended
4-7-2014 by Ord.
No. 2014-03]
E. Leitersburg Street and
Borough limits
25
Williamson Avenue N. Antrim Way and Borough
limits
35*
Williamsport Pike Catharine Street and Borough
limits
40*
* Speed limits were established, posted and enforced prior to July 1,
1977.
B. This section shall be enforced by the Greencastle Borough Police
Department or any other authorized police officer in accordance with
the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania as it pertains to fines and other
penalties
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
are hereby ratified if heretofore erected), and traffic at such
intersections shall be directed by such signals:
(1) East Baltimore Street and Washington Street.
(2) West Baltimore Street and Route 11.
§ 190-9 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-10
187:336
§ 190-11. Right turn on red signal prohibited at certain
intersections.
§ 190-12. Turns restricted at certain intersections at certain times.
§ 190-13. Stop intersections. [Amended 11-4-1985; 3-3-1986 by
Ord. No. 86-02; 10-6-1986 by Ord. No. 86-06; 11-5-1990; 9-3-1991
by Ord. No. 1991-7; 4-5-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-2; 4-5-1993 by Ord.
No. 1993-3; 8-2-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-6; 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-1; 5-5-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-5; 12-8-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-7;
8-6-2001 by Ord. No. 2001-4; 10-6-2003 by Ord. No. 2003-3;
1-3-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-1; 9-2-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-06;
9-3-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-03]
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall disobey the directions of any traffic
signal shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
together with costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling on the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions hereby indicated in each case, to make a right turn when his
or her vehicle is facing a steady red traffic signal:
Street Intersecting Street Direction of Travel
E. Baltimore
Street
Washington Street East or west
Washington Street E. Baltimore Street North or south
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution.
A. At the following intersections, it shall be unlawful for the driver of any
vehicle, traveling upon the first-named highway to make a right or left
turn, as herein restricted, onto the second-named street, at any time
when such turn is prohibited:
Street
Cross
Street
Direction of
Travel
Prohibited
Turn Hours
E. Baltimore
Street
Washington
Street
East or west Left 3:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are hereby
ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street, in
§ 190-10 TREES § 190-13
187:337
the direction or directions hereby indicated. It shall be unlawful for
all vehicles approaching any such intersection upon the first-named
street, in the direction or directions hereby indicated, to not come
to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
intersection.
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Addison Avenue
(4-way)
S. Allison Street East and west
Addison Avenue
(3-way)
S. Ridge Avenue East
Addison Avenue
(1-way)
S. Washington Street West
Allison Street (4-way) Addison Avenue North and south
Allison Street (1-way) E. Baltimore Street North
Allison Street (4-way) E. Franklin Street North and south
Allison Street (2-way) Leitersburg Street North and south
Allison Street (4-way) Madison Street North and south
Apple Drive (1-way) Jopa Road South, east end
Apple Drive (1-way) Jopa Road South, west end
Baumgardner Court
(1-way)
Baumgardner Drive North
Baumgardner Drive
(2-way)
Jeffrey Drive South (except right turn)
Baumgardner Drive
(1-way)
Williamson Avenue West
Baumgardner Drive
(2-way)
W. Walter Avenue North and south
Blue Bird Trail
(1-way)
James Way East
Blue Bird Trail
(1-way)
Ronald Drive West
Brookview Drive
(1-way)
Moss Spring Avenue North
Butala Alley (2-way) S. Church Lane
Extended
East and west
Carl Avenue (1-way) W. Baltimore Street North
Carl Avenue (1-way) W. Franklin Street South
Carl Avenue (1-way) W. Madison Street North
Carlisle Street
(2-way)
Baltimore Street South
§ 190-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-13
187:338
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Carlisle Street
(4-way)
Madison Street North and south
Carlisle Street
(1-way)
Walter Avenue North
Carolle Street
(1-way)
Nova Drive North
Carolle Street
(1-way)
Ronald Drive West
Carowinds Drive
(1-way)
Williamson Avenue East
Carowinds Drive
(2-way)
W. Walter Avenue East and west
Catherine Street
(1-way)
S. Antrim Way East
Cedar Lane (2-way) E. Dahlgren Street North and south
Cedar Lane (2-way) E. Pine Lane North
Cedar Lane (2-way) Leitersburg Street North and south
Cedar Lane (2-way) Railroad Street South
Cedar Lane (1-way) Unnamed alley
between E. Franklin
Street and E.
Dahlgren Street
North
Celestial Terrace
(1-way)
Carowinds Drive North
Celestial Terrace
(2-way)
Sunburst Drive North
Century Drive
(1-way)
Osborne Avenue West
Chadwick Drive
(1-way)
Homestead Drive West
Chadwick Drive
(1-way)
W. Walter Avenue East
Chambers Lane
(1-way)
N. Carlisle Street West
Chambers Lane
(1-way)
N. Washington
Street
East
Church Lane (1-way) E. Baltimore Street East and west
Church Lane (2-way) Warren Alley South
Colonial Drive
(1-way)
Williamson Avenue East
§ 190-13 TREES § 190-13
187:339
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Dahlgren Street
(2-way)
S. Carlisle Street East and west
Dahlgren Street
(1-way)
S. Washington Street East
Disert Drive (1-way) W. Walter Avenue North
Eastern Avenue
(1-way)
Baltimore Street North
Elm Lane (3-way) Warren Alley North
Elm Lane (1-way) W. Madison Street North
Forestview Drive
(1-way)
Moss Spring Avenue South
Franklin Street
(1-way)
Apple Drive East
Franklin Street
(2-way)
Orchard Circle East
Franklin Street
(2-way)
Orchard Circle West (from Apple Drive)
Franklin Street
(4-way)
S. Allison Street East and west
Franklin Street
(2-way)
S. Antrim Way East and west
Franklin Street
(2-way)
S. Carlisle Street East and west
Franklin Street
(4-way)
S. Ridge Avenue East and west
Franklin Street
(2-way)
S. Washington Street East and west
Grant Street (2-way) N. Allison Street East and west
Grant Street (2-way) N. Linden Avenue East
Grant Street
Extended (2-way)
N. Linden Avenue West
Hamilton Lane
(1-way)
S. Carlisle Street East
Hearthside Lane
(1-way)
Baumgardner Drive South
Homestead Drive
(2-way)
W. Walter Avenue East and west
James Way (1-way) Nova Drive South
Jefferson Street
(2-way)
W. Baltimore Street North and south
§ 190-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-13
187:340
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Jefferson Street
(2-way)
W. Franklin Street North and south
Jefferson Street
(2-way)
W. Madison Street North and south
Jeffrey Drive (2-way) Baumgardner Drive North
Jeffrey Drive (1-way) Williamson Avenue West
Kay Street (1-way) Catherine Street North
Leitersburg Street
(1-way)
S. Carlisle Street West
Leitersburg Street
(2-way)
S. Washington Street East
Linden Avenue
(2-way)
E. Baltimore Street North and south
Linden Avenue
(4-way)
E. Madison Street North and south
Linden Avenue
(1-way)
Orchard Circle South
Lohman Avenue
(1-way)
Osborne Avenue East
Madison Street
(4-way)
N. Allison Street East and west
Madison Street
(1-way)
N. Antrim Way East
Madison Street
(1-way)
N. Antrim Way North (right turn only)
Madison Street
(1-way)
N. Antrim Way West (straight or left
turn only)
Madison Street
(4-way)
N. Carlisle Street East and west
Madison Street
(4-way)
N. Linden Avenue East and west
Madison Street
(4-way)
N. Washington
Street
East and west
Maple Avenue
(1-way)
S. Allison Street East
Maple Avenue
(2-way)
S. Washington Street West
Maple Avenue
Extended (2-way)
S. Washington Street East
Meadow View Circle Moss Spring Avenue East end
§ 190-13 TREES § 190-13
187:341
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Meadow View Circle Moss Spring Avenue West end
Mifflin Lane (1-way) N. Carlisle Street East
Mifflin Lane (1-way) N. Elm Lane West
Moonlight Drive
(1-way)
Celestial Terrace East
Moss Spring Avenue
(1-way)
N. Allison Street West
Nova Drive (1-way) S. Antrim Way East
Oak Lane (1-way) Lohman Avenue East
Oak Lane (2-way) S. Allison Street East and west
Oak Lane (1-way) S. Washington Street West
Orchard Circle
(1-way)
Jopa Road South
Osborne Avenue
(1-way)
Leitersburg Street North
Parkwood Drive
(1-way)
Chadwick Drive South
Pine Lane (2-way) Cedar Lane East
Pine Lane (2-way) Church Lane East and west
Pine Lane (1-way) Elm Lane East
Pine Line (2-way) N. Allison Street East and west
Pine Lane (2-way) N. Washington
Street
East and west
Railroad Street
(2-way)
S. Cedar Lane East
Ridge Avenue (3-way) Addison Avenue North and south
Ridge Avenue (4-way) E. Franklin Street North and south
Ridge Avenue (2-way) E. Grant Street North and south
Ridge Avenue (1-way) E. Madison Street South
Ridge Avenue (1-way) Leitersburg Street South
Ridge Avenue (1-way) Tyrone Street North
Ronald Drive (1-way) Nova Drive South
Rowe Avenue (1-way) Orchard Circle East
Rowe Avenue (2-way) S. Allison Street East and west
Rowe Avenue (2-way) S. Ridge Avenue East and west
Spring Grove (1-way) E. Baltimore Street South
Spring Grove (1-way) E. Madison Street North
§ 190-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-13
187:342
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Spruce Lane (1-way) S. Cedar Lane East
Spruce Lane (1-way) S. Church Lane West
Spruce Lane (2-way) S. Washington Street East and west
Starlight Drive
(1-way)
Celestrial Terrace South
Starlight Drive
(1-way)
Sunburst Drive North
Sunburst Drive
(2-way)
Celestrial Terrace West
Sunburst Drive
(1-way)
Williamson Avenue East
Teaberry Drive
(1-way)
James Way East
Town Drive (1-way) Williamsport Pike East
Tyrone Street (1-way) N. Allison Street West
Unnamed alley
located behind 346
Grant Street at
another unnamed
alley
West
Unnamed alley
located next to 239 S.
Allison Street
East
Unnamed alley
located next to 130 S.
Carlisle Street
West
Unnamed alley
located next to 131 S.
Carlisle Street
East
Unnamed alley
located next to 137 S.
Washington Street
East
Unnamed alley
located next to 265 S.
Washington Street
East
Unnamed alley
located next to 408 S.
Washington Street
West
§ 190-13 TREES § 190-13
187:343
§ 190-14. Yield intersections. [Amended 10-1-1990]
Stop Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Unnamed alley
located behind 329
Tyrone Street at
another unnamed
alley
East
Walter Avenue
(1-way)
N. Allison Street East
Walter Avenue
(2-way)
Williamson Avenue East and west
Warren Alley (2-way) N. Cedar Lane East and west
Warren Alley (2-way) N. Church Lane West
Warren Alley (3-way) N. Elm Lane East and west
Warren Alley (2-way) Unnamed alley
between N. Allison
and N. Ridge
East and west
Washington Street
(4-way)
E. Madison Street North and south
Washington Street
(1-way)
E. Walter Avenue South
Washington Street
(1-way)
Grant Street North
Wayburn Street
(1-way)
Williamsport Pike East
Wilhelm Street
(1-way)
S. Carlisle Street East
Windsor Street
(1-way)
S. Washington Street West
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section
shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa. C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended, together with costs of prosecution
for each offense and costs and penalties as collected in accordance with
any and all applicable laws.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as yield-right-of-way
intersections and official yield signs shall be erected (or are hereby
ratified if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face traffic
approaching the second-named street upon the first-named street shall
yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching
on the second-named street so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time that the driver of such vehicle is moving across
or within such intersection:
§ 190-13 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-14
187:344
§ 190-15. Through streets established.
§ 190-16. One-way streets. [Amended 4-2-1990; 3-4-1991 by Ord.
No. 1991-3]
Yield Highway Through Highway Direction of Travel
Apple Drive Jopa Road Southbound
Baumgardner Circle Walter Avenue Northbound
Baumgardner Drive
[Added 11-7-2005
by Ord. No.
2005-10]
Edward Drive Northbound
Edward Drive [Added
11-7-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-10]
Baumgardner Drive Westbound
Franklin Street Apple Drive Eastbound
Orchard Circle East and westbound
W. Franklin Street Railroad Underpass East and westbound
Linden Avenue Orchard Circle Southbound
W. Madison Street Railroad Underpass East and westbound
Orchard Circle (east
segment)
Jopa Road Southbound
Walter Avenue N. Carlisle Street Westbound
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25
together with costs of prosecution.
A. The following streets are hereby established as through streets, and the
driver of a vehicle upon approaching any such street at any intersection
thereof (except for intersections where there are now or shall hereafter
be located official traffic control signals) shall come to a full stop, within
a reasonable distance, before entering any such through street:
Street Between
Baltimore Street East Borough line and west Borough line
N. Carlisle Street North Borough line and Center Square (except for
intersection with Walter Avenue)
Washington Street E. Baltimore Street and south Borough line
B. Any driver of a vehicle who shall violate any provision of this section,
shall upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together
with costs of prosecution.
§ 190-14 TREES § 190-16
187:345
§ 190-17. Traffic to keep right of certain structures and barriers.
A. The following are hereby established as one-way streets with operation
of vehicles thereupon to be in the direction hereby indicated:
[Amended 2-2-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-01]
Streets From To
Direction of
Travel
N. Carl Avenue W. Baltimore
Street
W. Madison
Street
Northbound
N. Cedar Lane E. Baltimore
Street
Chambers Lane Northbound
S. Cedar Lane E. Baltimore
Street
E. Franklin
Street
Southbound
Church Lane Leitersburg
Street
Unnamed alley Southbound
S. Elm Lane W. Baltimore
Street
W. Franklin
Street
Southbound
N. Elm Lane W. Baltimore
Street
W. Madison
Street
Northbound
N. Findlay
Street
CVS parking lot
entrance
W. Madison
Street
Northbound
Pine Lane N. Jefferson
Street
N. Washington
Street
Eastbound
S. Ridge Avenue E. Baltimore
Street
E. Franklin
Street
Southbound
Spruce Lane Church Lane S. Washington
Street
Westbound
E. Spruce Lane S. Carlisle Street S. Cedar Lane Eastbound
W. Spruce Lane S. Carlisle Street S. Jefferson
Street
Westbound
VFW Lane S. Church Lane
Ext.
VFW Lane S.
Washington St.
Westbound
W. Walter
Avenue Island
Williamson
Avenue
Walter Avenue Eastbound
B. Any person who shall violate a provision of this section, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs of
prosecution.
A. All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure Intersection
Island at Center Square Baltimore and Carlisle Streets
§ 190-16 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-17
187:346
§ 190-18. U-turns prohibited on certain streets or portions thereof.
§ 190-19. Gross weight limits established.
§ 190-20. Trucks prohibited on certain streets; exceptions.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of a motor vehicle to make a U-turn on
any of the following streets or portions of streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution.
A. The following weight limits are hereby established, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive any motor vehicle or other vehicle,
trailer or tractor-trailer combination having a gross weight in excess of
that herein prescribed, upon any of the following streets or portions
thereof where such streets or portions thereof have been posted with
notice of such maximum weight:
Street Between
Maximum Gross
Weight
Walter Avenue N. Antrim Way and
Williamson Avenue
10 tons
B. Provided that the aforesaid weight limit shall not apply to any motor
vehicle or other vehicle, trailer or tractor-trailer combination making
deliveries or picking up goods, wares, material or merchandise at or on
premises located in any such street or portion thereof, listed above, or
any motor vehicle or other vehicle, or trailer or tractor-trailer
combination for which a special permit to operate on any such street or
portion thereof shall have been issued by the Chief of Police. Provided
further that the provisions of this section shall not apply to the driving
of vehicles hauling food or household goods, public utility vehicles, firefighting
equipment, garbage and rubbish vehicles, or school and public
transportation buses.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $75 plus $75 for each
500 pounds, or part thereof, in excess of 3,000 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight limit, together with costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any truck, which shall
mean a motor vehicle designed, used or maintained primarily for the
§ 190-17 TREES § 190-20
187:347
§ 190-21. Local traffic only on certain streets.
transportation of property, freight, or merchandise, upon any of the
following streets, or portions thereof, as herein designated:
Street Between
Apple Drive Orchard Circle and Jopa Road
Baumgardner Drive Walter Avenue and Jeffrey Drive
Catharine Street S. Antrim Way and Ronald Drive
Disert Drive Walter Avenue and Edward Drive
Edward Drive Baumgardner Drive and Disert Drive
Jeffrey Drive Williamson Avenue and Baumgardner
Drive
Jopa Road Orchard Circle and Apple Drive
Kay Street Catharine Street and Wayburn Street
Meadow View Circle Moss Spring Circle to dead end
Moss Spring Avenue N. Allison Street and Meadowview Circle
Nova Drive S. Antrim Way to dead end
Orchard Circle Linden Avenue and Jopa Road
Ronald Drive Catharine Street to dead end
Town Drive Williamsport Pike and Kay Street
Wayburn Street Williamsport Pike and Kay Street
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution; provided, nothing in this section shall make it unlawful
to operate a truck upon any street or portion thereof, listed above for
delivery and pickup of goods, wares, material or merchandise, at or on
premises located at any such street or portion thereof.
A. The following streets or portions of streets are hereby designated as
being for local traffic only:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who shall use as a through street, the streets or portions
thereof hereby designated as being for local traffic only shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution; provided, local traffic, as used herein, shall mean access
to and egress from properties and businesses or parking facilities
located along said streets.
§ 190-20 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-22
187:348
§ 190-22. Unlawful to operate motor vehicles on streets closed for
construction or repair.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle upon any street
that is under construction, resurfacing or repair, in disregard of any official
sign, barricade or notice that the same is closed to vehicular traffic. Any
person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs of prosecution.
§ 190-23. Play streets authorized.
A. The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play streets, whenever
and for whatever period of time he shall deem advisable, any portion of
any street whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such
street shall be set apart for this purpose under the direction of the
Mayor.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon any play street at any
time when such street shall be so designated, except in case of
emergency, with special permission of the police officer in charge, who
shall first clear such play street of all persons using such street for the
purpose for which it was set aside.
C. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 together with costs
of prosecution.
§ 190-22 TREES § 190-23
187:349

ARTICLE III
General Parking Regulations
§ 190-24. Loading and unloading.
The loading and unloading of goods, wares and merchandise is hereby
restricted to such length of time as is absolutely necessary for the purpose
of loading or unloading of such goods, wares and merchandise. For the
purpose of enforcement of this section, such loading or unloading of any
vehicle shall not be considered as parking; provided, without having first
obtained permission from the Chief of Police to do so, no person shall load
or unload a vehicle from any place upon any street or alley in the Borough
where parking is prohibited; or shall allow a vehicle to remain, for loading
or unloading, in any place upon any street or alley where parking is limited
as to time, for longer than the time for which parking is permitted; or shall
load or unload upon any street or alley in such a way that one lane for
vehicular traffic shall not be kept open at all times. Where such permission
is granted by the Chief of Police, he may, at his discretion, block off the
portion of the street or alley affected by such loading or unloading.
§ 190-25. Angle parking required on portions of certain streets.
§ 190-26. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces; parking
prohibited in certain marked areas; specific parking prohibitions.
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of the
streets:
Street Between
(Reserved)
B. On all streets or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
A. Wherever a particular parking space shall be lined or marked off on any
street or alley or upon the adjacent curb, every vehicle parked shall be
parked within the lines marking such parking space. All vehicles parked
on streets or alleys whether parking spaces are marked or not shall be
parked only in the direction of the permitted traffic flow.
B. Parking shall be prohibited at all times by any vehicle which in any way
will block the intersection of any street or alley or the entrance or exit
of any street or alley. Parking shall at all times be prohibited within the
painted line area adjacent to any fire hydrant or within 15 feet of any
fire hydrant, whichever is of greater distance; within the painted line
area marking the permissible distance to park from any intersection in
any area where erected signs or painted lines indicate a "No Parking"
area; in any manner so as to block any private or public driveway or
accessway to a parking lot or parking facility or other facility of the
Borough. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
§ 190-24 TREES § 190-26
187:351
§ 190-27. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
[Amended 1-6-1986; 5-5-1986 by Ord. No. 86-04; 9-8-1987 by Ord.
No. 87-03; 12-5-1988; 2-6-1989 by Ord. No. 89-01; 7-3-1989;
10-1-1990; 5-6-1991 by Ord. No. 1991-5; 9-3-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-6; 1-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-1; 10-4-1993 by Ord. No. 1993-7]
C. Parking on a sidewalk or curb at any time by any vehicle shall be
prohibited at all times. Parking shall be prohibited at all times within 20
feet of a crosswalk; within 30 feet of a stop sign, yield sign or a traffic
signal; and on private property which has been posted by the property
owner. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-09]
D. No vehicle shall be parked or standing upon a two-way roadway or
thoroughfare with the right-hand wheels in excess of 12 inches from the
right-hand curb or, in the absence of a curb, as close as practicable to
the right edge of the right-hand shoulder. [Added 9-4-2012 by Ord.
No. 2012-09]
A. Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Location
Allison Street East Between Baltimore Street and
Madison Street
Allison Street East Between Grant Street and a point
50 feet south thereof
Allison Street West Between Baltimore Street and a
point 150 feet north thereof
Allison Street West Between Baltimore Street and E.
Spruce Lane
Allison Street West Between Grant Street and north
Borough line
Allison Street West Grant Street and E. Madison Street
N. Allison Street
[Added 11-7-2005
by Ord. No.
2005-09]
East Beginning at a point on the east
side of North Allison Street which
would be the north face of the curb
at East Madison Street and
extending in a northerly direction
from said point a distance of 250
feet which would be the south face
of the curb at an unnamed alley
N. Allison Street
[Added 11-2-2015
by Ord. No.
2015-11]
East Between Grant Street and a point
82 feet south thereof
§ 190-26 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-27
187:352
Street Side Location
N. Allison Street
[Added 11-7-2005
by Ord. No.
2005-09]
West East Baltimore Street and East
Madison Street
Antrim Way (U.S.
Route 11)
East From the intersection of W.
Franklin Street south a distance of
394 feet
Antrim Way (U.S.
Route 11)
East From Pa. Rt. 16 north to the
intersection of Madison Street
Antrim Way (U.S.
Route 11)
West From Pa. Rt. 16 south a distance of
1,143 feet
Baltimore Street Both Points 50 feet east and west of the
intersection with Allison Street
Baltimore Street North Between the fire hydrant in front
of 328 E. Baltimore Street and a
point 400 feet west thereof
Baltimore Street South Between Linden Avenue and a
point 40 feet west thereof
E. Baltimore Street North From Linden Avenue easterly a
distance of 125 feet
E. Baltimore Street North From Linden Avenue westerly a
distance of 65 feet
E. Baltimore Street North From Spring Grove Avenue
extending in an easterly direction
86 feet
E. Baltimore Street
[Added 8-4-2014
by Ord. No.
2014-07]
South From the intersection of E.
Baltimore Street and the south
side of Center Square a distance of
37 feet
E. Baltimore Street South From Linden Avenue easterly a
distance of 90 feet
W. Baltimore Street Both From Antrim Way to a point 220
feet west
W. Baltimore Street Both From Antrim Way easterly to Carl
Avenue
W. Baltimore Street North From Jefferson Street easterly a
distance of 110 feet
Carlisle Street Both Between Madison Street and a
point 48 feet south thereof
Carlisle Street East Between Railroad Street and a
point 210 feet north thereof
§ 190-27 TREES § 190-27
187:353
Street Side Location
Carlisle Street West Between Franklin Street and a
point 71 feet north thereof
Carlisle Street West Boundaries of Jerome R. King
playground
N. Carlisle Street East Between Chambers Lane and
Walter Avenue
N. Carlisle Street East From 84 feet north of the
intersection of N. Carlisle Street
and Madison Street and continuing
northerly a distance of 25 feet
N. Carlisle Street West From Mifflin Lane north 20 feet
S. Carlisle Street East Franklin Street extending in a
northerly direction a distance of
136 feet
S. Carlisle Street East From Franklin Street extending in
a southerly direction a distance of
100 feet
S. Carlisle Street
[Added 8-2-1999
by Ord. No.
1999-4]
East From the intersection of S. Carlisle
Street and E. Dahlgren Street
extending in a southerly direction
from said intersection a distance of
90 feet to a point
S. Carlisle Street West From Dahlgren Street extending in
a southerly direction a distance of
40 feet
Cedar Lane Both Between Dahlgren Street and
Leitersburg Street
Dahlgren Street South Between Carlisle Street and
Jefferson Street
W. Dahlgren Street North From S. Carlisle Street extending
westwardly a distance of 60 feet
Franklin Street North Between S. Ridge Avenue and S.
Allison Street
Franklin Street North Between Washington Street and
Allison Street
Franklin Street South Between Carlisle Street and
Washington Street
E. Leitersburg Street Between S. Allison Street and a
point 100 feet east thereof
E. Leitersburg Street North Between S. Ridge Avenue and a
point 125 feet east thereof
§ 190-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-27
187:354
Street Side Location
E. Leitersburg Street Between S. Ridge Avenue and a
point 100 feet west thereof
Linden Avenue East Between Baltimore Street and the
first alley south thereof
S. Linden Avenue
[Added 4-2-2001
by Ord. No.
2001-2]
West Beginning at a point on the west
side of S. Linden Avenue which
would be face of curb at E.
Baltimore Street and extending in
a southerly direction from said
point a distance of 197 feet
Madison Street Both Between Carlisle Street and a
point 40 feet east thereof
Madison Street North Between Carlisle Street and a
point 55 feet west thereof
Madison Street South Between Carlisle Street and N.
Allison Street
Madison Street South Between Carlisle Street and N.
Jefferson Street
E. Madison Street
[Added 9-2-1997
by Ord. No.
1997-6]
North From the intersection of E.
Madison Street and N. Allison
Street and extending in a westerly
direction from said intersection a
distance of 50 feet to a point
Maple Avenue Both Between S. Washington Street and
S. Cedar Lane
Mifflin Lane Both Between N. Carlisle Street and N.
Elm Lane
Ridge Avenue East Between E. Baltimore Street and
hard surface at Leitersburg Street
Washington Street East Between E. Baltimore Street and
Leitersburg Street
Washington Street West Between Baltimore Street and
Madison Street
Washington Street West Between Franklin Street and a
point 65 feet north thereof
Washington Street West Between Franklin Street and a
point 65 feet south thereof
B. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $25 plus costs of prosecution for
each offense, to be collected as fines, costs and penalties are now by
law collected.
§ 190-27 TREES § 190-28
187:355
§ 190-28. Parking prohibited at certain times on certain streets and
alleys. [Amended 1-6-1986; 4-7-1986; 8-1-1988; 7-2-1990]
A. Parking is hereby prohibited on the following streets and alleys of the
Borough at any and all times between the hours indicated:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Addison
Avenue
South S. Allison
Street and S.
Ridge Avenue
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:00 to 4:00
p.m.
Jopa Road South Rowe Avenue
and
easternmost
terminus of
Jopa Road
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:30 to 3:30
p.m.
Leitersburg
Street
Both Washington
Street and
first alley
southeast of
VFW
Mon. to Fri.
exc. holidays
8:30 to 9:30
a.m.
2:00 to 3:00
p.m.
6:00 to 7:00
p.m.
Maple
Avenue
Both Washington
Street and
Allison Street
All 8:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:00 to 3:00
p.m.
6:00 to 7:00
p.m.
Mifflin Lane Both N. Elm Lane
west 75 feet
Mon. to Fri. 7:00 to 5:00
p.m.
Oak Lane Both Washington
Street and
Allison Street
8:30 to 9:30
a.m.
2:00 to 3:00
p.m.
6:00 to 7:00
p.m.
§ 190-28 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-28
187:356
§ 190-29. Parking time limited in certain locations.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or allow the same to remain parked
for more than the indicated length of time in any of the following locations:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Ridge
Avenue
East Leitersburg
Street and
road into
school
property
between
junior and
senior high
schools
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:00 to 4:30
p.m.
Ridge
Avenue
West Rowe Avenue
and
Leitersburg
Street
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:00 to 4:30
p.m.
Rowe Avenue South S. Ridge
Avenue and S.
Allison Street
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:30 to 3:30
p.m.
Rowe Avenue S. Ridge
Avenue and
Orchard Circle
School days 7:30 to 9:00
a.m.
2:30 to 3:30
p.m.
Washington
Street
Both Leitersburg
Street and
south Borough
line
All 7:30 to 9:30
a.m.
2:30 to 3:30
p.m.
6:00 to 7:00
p.m.
Washington
Street
West Points 75 feet
north of
Addison
Avenue
School days 7:30 to 8:30
a.m.
2:30 to 3:30
p.m.
B. For street sweeping purposes, parking will be prohibited on certain
streets at certain times according to a schedule which will be published
in a local newspaper and posted at prominent locations in the Borough.
§ 190-28 TREES § 190-29
187:357
Street Between Side Time Limit
(Reserved)
§ 190-30. Thirty-minute parking limit for certain types of vehicles.
No person shall park any truck of the weight classification of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of V-plate capacity or heavier, or any tractor
or trailer, or tractor-trailer combination, or allow the same to remain
parked, on any street or alley in the Borough of Greencastle, for a period
longer than 30 minutes.
§ 190-31. Parking for repairs.
The parking of any motor vehicle, tractor or trailer, or combination thereof,
upon streets and highways of the Borough for repairs, whether upon the
traveled or untraveled portion thereof, shall be temporary only and limited
to times for emergency repairs. This section shall not be construed to
permit parking for repairs at locations where parking is otherwise
prohibited.
§ 190-32. Trailer parking restricted.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a trailer (which shall mean a
vehicle without motive power, designed to carry property of passengers
or designed and used exclusively for living quarters wholly on its own
structure, and to be drawn by a motor vehicle or tractor and including, but
not limited to, house trailers, boat trailers, and rental handling trailers),
upon any street or highway in the Borough, without having attached to
such trailer a means of mechanical traction constructed or designed for the
purpose of drawing such trailer.
§ 190-33. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-4-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-09]
A. Parking violations. Unless otherwise provided for in this article, any
person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine
in the amount of $50 and costs of prosecution (court costs and
reasonable attorney fees) and if such violation is a violation of the
Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the penalty shall
be in accordance with the Motor Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Sections 3353(e) and 3354(f), as 75 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 3353(e)
and 3354(f), as amended from time to time. Provided, however, that any
person accused of such violation by notice placed on the vehicle by a
police officer or meter attendant may settle and compromise the claim
against him or her for such parking violation by paying to the Borough
the sums set forth below within 72 hours after the placement of such
notice on the vehicle:
(1) The sum of $15 for the following violations:
§ 190-29 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-33
187:358
§ 190-34. Handicapped parking. [Added 2-4-1991 by Ord. No.
1991-1; amended 11-2-1992 by Ord. No. 1992-4; 5-5-1997 by Ord.
No. 1997-5; 12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 2000-2; 9-3-2013 by Ord. No.
2013-03; 1-6-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-01; 8-4-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-06; 7-6-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-03]
(a) Parking a motor vehicle on a sidewalk;
(b) Parking in front of, or blocking, a public or private driveway
entrance;
(c) Parking within 20 feet of a crosswalk;
(d) Parking within 30 feet of a stop sign, yield sign or a traffic
signal;
(e) Parking any place where official signs prohibit parking; and
(f) Parking with the vehicle's right-side wheels in excess of 12
inches of the right-side curb;
(2) The sum of $25 for the following violations:
(a) Parking within 15 feet of a fire hydrant or within the painted
lines adjacent to a fire hydrant; and
(b) Parking or unattended vehicle on private property when posted
by the property owner.
B. Presumption of liability. The fact that a motor vehicle which is illegally
parked is registered in the name of a person shall be considered prima
facie proof that such person was in control of the motor vehicle at the
time of such parking.
A. Handicapped parking spaces are hereby created in the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania at the following locations:
(1) Beginning at a point on the west side of South Ridge Avenue which
is 565 feet north of the intersection of Leitersburg Street and South
Ridge Avenue and continuing in a northerly direction for a distance
of 20 feet.
(2) Beginning at a point on the north side of West Dahlgren Street
which is 167 feet east of the intersection of West Dahlgren Street
and South Jefferson Street and continuing in an easterly direction
for a distance of 20 feet.
(3) Beginning at a point on the north side of West Dahlgren Street
which is 142 feet east of the intersection of West Dahlgren Street
and South Jefferson Street and continuing in an easterly direction
for a distance of 20 feet.
(4) Beginning at a point on the east side of South Jefferson Street
which is 51 feet north of the intersection of South Jefferson Street
§ 190-33 TREES § 190-34
187:359
and West Dahlgren Street and continuing in a southerly direction
for a distance of 20 feet.
(5) Beginning at a point on the west side of North Carlisle Street which
is 58 feet south of the intersection of North Carlisle Street and
Mifflin Lane and continuing in a northerly direction for 20 feet.
(6) Beginning at a point on the west side of North Carlisle Street which
is 224 feet north of the intersection of North Carlisle Street and
West Madison Street and continuing in a northerly direction for 20
feet.
(7) Beginning at a point on the east side of South Ridge Avenue, which
is 60 feet south of the intersection of South Ridge Avenue and East
Baltimore Street, and continuing in a southerly direction a distance
of 20 feet.
(8) On Sunday only: beginning at a point on the north side of Tyrone
Street which is 335 feet east of the intersection of Tyrone Street
and North Allison Street and continuing in an easterly direction 20
feet.
(9) Beginning at a point on the east side of North Washington Street,
which is 50 feet north of the intersection of North Washington
Street and East Baltimore Street, and continuing in a northerly
direction a distance of 20 feet.
(10) Saturday and Sunday only: beginning at a point on the west side of
North Washington Street, which is 42 feet north of the intersection
of North Washington Street and East Madison Street, and
continuing in a northerly direction a distance of 20 feet.
(11) Saturday and Sunday only: beginning at a point on the west side of
North Washington Street, which is 60 feet north of the intersection
of North Washington Street and East Madison Street, and
continuing in a northerly direction a distance of 20 feet.
(12) Beginning at a point on the north side of East Baltimore Street,
which is five feet west of the intersection of East Baltimore Street
and Cedar Lane (an alley), and continuing in a westerly direction a
distance of 20 feet.
(13) Handicapped loading and unloading zone: beginning at a point on
the north side of East Baltimore Street, which is 60 feet east of the
intersection of East Baltimore Street and Washington Street, and
continuing in an easterly direction a distance of 20 feet.
(14) Sunday only: beginning at a point on the east side of South
Jefferson Street, said point being located 54 feet south from the
intersection of South Jefferson Street and W. Baltimore Street, and
continuing in a southerly direction for a distance of 20 feet.
§ 190-34 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-34
187:360
§ 190-35. Parking restricted to police vehicles. [Added 12-4-2000 by
Ord. No. 2000-2]
(15) Beginning at a point on the western side of Church Lane, said point
being located 160 feet north from the intersection of Church Lane
and East Baltimore Street and continuing in a northerly direction
for a distance of 20 feet.
(16) Beginning at a point on the western side of Church Lane, said point
being located 196.5 feet north from the intersection of Church
Lane and East Baltimore Street and continuing in a northerly
direction for a distance of 20 feet.
(17) Beginning at a point on the east side of South Carlisle Street, which
is 73 feet north of the intersection with Franklin Street, and
continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of 20 feet.
(18) Beginning at a point on the west side of North Carlisle Street,
which is 120 feet north of the center of the traffic island on Center
Square at Baltimore and Carlisle Streets, and continuing in a
northerly direction for a distance of 20 feet.
(19) Beginning at a point on the east side of South Carlisle Street, which
is 186 feet south of the intersection of Dahlgren Street and South
Carlisle Street, and continuing in a southerly direction for a
distance of 20 feet.
B. It shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to park
in the spaces created in Subsection A, supra, unless the vehicle parked
therein bears or displays either a "handicapped registration plate," a
"handicapped parking placard," a "disabled veteran registration plate,"
or a "disabled veteran placard."
C. Official signs giving notice of the provisions of this section shall be
erected in accordance with the Vehicle Code, and applicable rules and
regulations relating thereto.
D. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be subject to prosecution in accordance with the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq., as amended, together with
costs of prosecution for each offense and costs and penalties as
collected in accordance with any and all applicable laws.
A. A police-car-only parking space is hereby created in the Borough of
Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania, as follows: Beginning at a
point on the west side of N. Carlisle Street, which is 142 feet north of
the center of the traffic island on Center Square at Baltimore and
Carlisle Streets, and continuing in a northerly direction for a distance of
20 feet.
B. Official signs giving notice of the provisions of this section shall be
erected in accordance with the "Vehicle Code."
§ 190-34 TREES § 190-35
187:361
C. Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating the provisions of
this section shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to a fine of $25 plus costs of prosecution for
each offense, to be collected as fines, costs and penalties are now by
law collected.
§ 190-35 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-35
187:362
ARTICLE IV
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 190-36. Parking meter zones established.
Parking meter zones are hereby established upon and along the following
streets and/or off-street lots:
Street Side Between
E. Baltimore Street Both Center Square and Church Lane
W. Baltimore Street Both Jefferson Street and Center Square
N. Carlisle Street Both Madison Street and Center Square
S. Carlisle Street Both Center Square and Franklin Street
N. Washington Street East The first alleys north of E. Baltimore
Street
S. Washington Street West Baltimore Street and the first alley south
thereof
§ 190-37. Parking time limit in parking meter zones. [Amended
7-1-2013 by Ord. No. 2013-02]
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or allow the same
to remain parked for longer than the time limit(s) prescribed from time
to time by the Borough Council and indicated on the legend of parking
meters, provided that the requirements of this article as to parking time
limits and as to deposit of coins in meters shall not apply on Sundays and
those holidays prescribed annually by the Borough Council.
§ 190-38. Placement and characteristics of meters.
Parking meters shall be installed in the parking meter zones established as
provided in § 190-36, and where installed shall be placed upon the sidewalk,
immediately adjacent to the individual parking spaces as described in
§ 190-39. Each meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show that
the parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking time
established by the Borough and, when occupied, shall indicate by its dial
and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and, on expiration of
such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
§ 190-39. Parked vehicles to be wholly within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
and/or street adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of designating
the parking space for which such meter is to be used. Each vehicle parked
adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within the lines or
markings so placed and applicable to such meter. It shall be unlawful to
park any vehicle across any such line or marking, or to park any vehicle
§ 190-36 TREES § 190-39
187:363
in such a position that such vehicle shall not be wholly within the area so
designated by such lines or markings.
§ 190-40. Manner of parking at meter.
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall
be parked so that the front of such vehicle shall be nearest to the parking
meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal to the
curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be parked
with the front of such vehicle nearest to such meter.
§ 190-41. Coin deposit in meters.
Any person or persons causing a vehicle to be parked in a parking space
shall deposit in the parking meter adjacent to such space coin or coins of the
United States of America or a token or tokens as approved by the Borough
Council, according to the time limits and rates indicated on the legend of
such meter.
§ 190-42. Rates for parking.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Greencastle may, by resolution, from
time to time revise and change parking rates and determine the length of
time that parking is permissible in any individual parking space which is
regulated by the meter immediately adjacent thereto; and notice thereof
shall be given to the public, stating the length of time during which parking
is permitted and the conditions regulating the same, by either placing said
notice on the parking meter or in the immediate vicinity of said parking
facility.
§ 190-43. Unlawful to park after time on meter has elapsed;
evidence of violation.
Any person or persons who cause a vehicle to remain in a parking space
after the prescribed time, for which coins or tokens have been deposited,
has elapsed is hereby determined to be illegally parked; and each additional
hour that such person or persons permit such vehicle to remain in an
individual parking space after the prescribed time for parking has elapsed
is hereby declared to be an additional violation. The fact that a vehicle is
in an individual parking space when the time signal on the parking meter
regulating said parking space shows that no parking is permitted, or that
the time has expired, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of the unlawful
parking of said vehicle by its operator and/or owner. The elapse of one hour
from the time reported on the notice to the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle, shall be deemed prima facie evidence of additional violations of the
parking of said motor vehicle by the operator or owner.
§ 190-39 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-44
187:364
§ 190-44. Unlawful to deposit coin in meter to extend parking time
beyond legal limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit
or to cause to be deposited in any parking meter any coin for the purpose
of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the total
legal parking time in a parking meter zone.
§ 190-45. Tampering with meters unlawful.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter, or parking meter stand or coin depository installed under
the provisions of this article; provided, nothing herein shall apply to the
servicing or opening of parking meters by officers, employees and/or police
officers of the Borough under the direction of the Mayor and/or the Borough
Council.
§ 190-46. Report of violations.
§ 190-47. Suspension of regulations.
The Borough Council may suspend in whole or in part the parking meter
regulations set forth in this article during such days and hours as may be
designated by them.
§ 190-48. Fines. [Amended 3-3-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2; 9-4-2012
by Ord. No. 2012-09]
A. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough, in accordance
with the instructions of the Chief of Police, to report all violations of any
provision of this article, indicating, in each case:
(1) The section thereof violated;
(2) The location where such violation took place; including the parking
meter at which the vehicle was illegally parked;
(3) The state and license number of such vehicle;
(4) The date and time of violation;
(5) The date and time of the notice of the violation;
(6) Other facts deemed necessary for a clear understanding of the
circumstances attending the violation.
B. Every such police officer or meter person shall place upon such vehicle
a notice to the owner or driver thereof that such vehicle was parked in
violation of a provision of this article, and shall indicate on the notice
the date and time the notice was placed on the vehicle. [Amended
3-3-1997 by Ord. No. 1997-2]
§ 190-44 TREES § 190-48
187:365
A. Any person, firm, corporation, or owner of any vehicle parked in
violation of any provision of this article or aiding, abetting, or assisting
in the violation thereof, shall be guilty of a summary offense and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine in the amount of $50 and
cost of prosecution (court costs and reasonable attorney fees).
Provided, however, that any person accused of such violation may settle
and compromise the claim against him or her for such violation by
paying the Borough the sums set forth below within 72 hours after the
placement of such notice on the vehicle:
(1) The sum of $10 for violations of §§ 190-37, 190-39, 190-40, 190-41,
190-42, 190-43, and 190-44.
B. Violations of § 190-45, Tampering with meters unlawful, is a criminal
act punishable as a felony, misdemeanor, or summary offense
depending upon the extent of damage inflicted. (See 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3304, as amended from time to time.)
§ 190-48 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-48
187:366
ARTICLE V
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 190-49. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code, 57 and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound those
vehicles which have been abandoned or are not legally entitled to operate
or park on the streets and highways of the Commonwealth under authority
of the Vehicle Code.
§ 190-50. "Abandoned vehicle" defined.
§ 190-51. Removal of vehicle by or at direction of police.
A. A vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) shall be presumed to be abandoned
under any of the following circumstances, but the presumption is
rebuttable by a preponderance of the evidence:
(1) The vehicle is physically inoperable and is left unattended on a
highway or other public property for more than 48 hours;
(2) The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property for a period of more than 48 hours;
(3) The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the
following:
(a) A valid registration plate.
(b) A certificate of inspection.
(c) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
(4) The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent
of the owner or person in control of the property for more than 48
hours.
B. Vehicles and equipment used or to be used in construction or in the
operation or maintenance of highways or public utility facilities, which
are left in a manner which does not interfere with the normal movement
of traffic, shall not be considered to be abandoned.
A. Outside business and residence districts. Whenever any police officer
finds a vehicle in violation of any of the provisions of Section 3351 of the
Vehicle Code (relating to stopping, standing and parking outside
business and residence districts),58 the officer may move the vehicle, or
cause the vehicle to be moved, or require the driver or other person in
charge of the vehicle to move the vehicle, to a position off the roadway
57.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22).
58.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3351.
§ 190-49 TREES § 190-51
187:367
where the vehicle will not interfere unduly with the normal movement
of traffic or constitute a safety hazard.
B. Unattended vehicle obstructing traffic. Any police officer may remove
or cause to be removed to a place of safety any unattended vehicle
illegally left standing upon any highway, bridge, causeway or in any
tunnel, in such position or under such circumstances as to interfere
unduly with the normal movement of traffic or constitute a safety
hazard.
C. Removal to garage or place of safety. Any police officer may remove or
cause to be removed to the place of business of the operator of a
wrecker or to a nearby garage or other place of safety any vehicle found
upon a highway under any of the following circumstances:
(1) Report has been made that the vehicle has been stolen or taken
without the consent of its owner.
(2) The person or persons in charge of the vehicle are physically
unable to provide for the custody or removal of the vehicle.
(3) The person driving or in control of the vehicle is arrested for an
alleged offense for which the officer is required by law to take the
person arrested before an issuing authority without unnecessary
delay.
(4) The vehicle is in violation of Section 3353 of the Vehicle Code
(relating to prohibitions in specified places)59 except for overtime
parking.
(5) The vehicle has been abandoned as defined herein. The officer shall
comply with the provisions of Subsection D and Chapter 75
(relating to abandoned vehicles and cargos) of the Vehicle Code.
D. Notice to owner prior to removal.
(1) Prior to removal of an abandoned vehicle bearing a registration
plate, certificate of inspection or vehicle identification number
plate by which the last registered owner of the vehicle can be
determined, the police department shall send a notice by certified
mail to the last registered owner of the vehicle informing the owner
that unless the vehicle is moved to a suitable location within seven
days of the date notice is mailed, the vehicle will be removed under
this section and held at a suitable facility where it may be
reclaimed by the owner in accordance with the provisions of
Section 7306 (relating to payment of costs upon reclaiming
vehicle).60 If the abandoned motor vehicle does not bear an
identifiable registration plate, certificate of inspection or vehicle
59.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3353.
60.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7306.
§ 190-51 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-51
187:368
§ 190-52. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Any police officer may remove or removal and impounding of vehicles
under this chapter shall be done only by "approved storage garages" that
shall be designated from time to time by Borough Council. Every such
garage shall submit evidence to Borough Council that it is bonded or has
acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory to Borough Council
as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles against loss or
damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage keeper for the
purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage shall submit to
Borough Council its schedule of charges for towing and storage of vehicles
under this chapter, and, when the schedule is approved by Borough Council,
those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage garage; no
different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected from any
person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this chapter by any
approved storage garage. Borough Council shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this chapter.
identification number plate, the notice may be secured to the
vehicle.
(2) If, within the seven-day period, the owner so requests, the owner
shall be given an opportunity to explain to the police officer or
department why the owner believes the vehicle should not be
removed. If the police officer or department determines that the
vehicle shall, nonetheless, be removed, the owner shall be given an
additional 48 hours to remove the vehicle, have it removed or
demand a hearing, which shall conform to the requirements of 2 Pa.
C.S. Ch. 5, Subch. B (relating to practice and procedure of local
agencies). The police officer or department shall inform the owner
of the right to a hearing by delivering to the owner a notice warning
the owner that, unless the vehicle is removed or a hearing is
demanded, the owner shall be subject to the provisions of Section
7306. If, as a result of the hearing, it is determined that the vehicle
will be removed, the owner shall be given an additional 48 hours to
remove the vehicle or have it removed. The hearing shall be before
a civilian officer or employee of the municipality in which the
vehicle is located.
(3) The provision for notice set forth in this subsection is applicable
only if the vehicle is abandoned upon a highway and is not in
violation of Section 3351(a) or 3353(a) and (b) of the Vehicle Code.
Notice under this subsection is in addition to any other notice
requirements provided in the Vehicle Code.
§ 190-51 TREES § 190-53
187:369
§ 190-53. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this chapter
shall, unless payment is made "under protest," be final and conclusive,
and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid.
If payment of any towing or storage charges is made "under protest," the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a district justice. Payment of
towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver of any
vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the provision
of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 190-54. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs, plus a $25 fee of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 190-55. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough of Greencastle shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles
impounded under this article and shall be able at all reasonable times
to furnish the owners or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with
information as to the place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 190-56. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article or the Vehicle
Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the
time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness
and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 190-57. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 7301 et seq. (1977), as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 190-53 GREENCASTLE CODE § 190-57
187:370
Chapter 197
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 190-57 WATER § 190-57
197:371

ARTICLE I
Water Connections
[Adopted 4-4-1994 by Ord. No. 1994-2 (Ch. 26, Part 1, of the 1985
Code)]
§ 197-1. Definitions.
Unless the context specifically and clearly indicates otherwise, the meaning
of terms and phrases used in this article shall be as follows:
AUTHORITY — Greencastle Area, Franklin County, Water Authority, a
municipality authority of the Commonwealth.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania,
a municipal corporation of the Commonwealth acting by and through its
Council or, in appropriate cases, acting by and through its authorized
representatives.
BUILDING MAIN — The extension from the water system of any structure
to the lateral of a main.
COMMONWEALTH — The Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
IMPROVED PROPERTY — Any property within this Borough upon which
there is erected a structure intended for continuous or periodic habitation,
occupancy or use by human beings or animals.
LATERAL — That part of the water system extending from a main to the
curbline or, if no such lateral shall be provided, then "lateral" shall mean
that portion of or place in a main which is provided for connection of any
building main.
MAIN — Any pipe or conduit constituting a part of the water system used or
usable for water distribution purposes.
OWNER — Any person vested with ownership, legal or equitable, sole or
partial, of any improved property.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, company, association, society, trust,
corporation, municipality, municipality authority or other group or entity.
WATER SYSTEM — All facilities, as of any particular time, for supply,
transmission and distribution of water owned and operated by the Authority.
§ 197-2. Use of public water system required.
A. Improved property to be connected to water system.
(1) The owner of any improved property abutting upon any street in
which there is a main constituting part of the water system shall
connect such improved property with such main and shall use such
water system, in such manner as the Authority may require, within
45 days after notice to such owner from this Borough or the
Authority to make such connection; subject, however, to such
limitations and restrictions as shall be established herein or
§ 197-1 WATER § 197-2
197:373
§ 197-3. Building mains and connections.
otherwise shall be established by this Borough or the Authority,
from time to time.
(2) Any person who causes or allows any structure on an improved
property to connect with, remain connected with or otherwise use
any private well or water system other than the water system of the
Authority shall be deemed and shall be declared to be maintaining
a nuisance, which nuisance this Borough shall abate in the manner
provided by law.
B. The notice by this Borough or the Authority to make a connection to a
main, referred to in Subsection A, above, shall consist of a copy of this
article, including any amendments and/or supplements at the time in
effect, or a summary hereof, and a written or printed document
requiring the connection in accordance with the provisions of this
article and specifying that such connection shall be made within 45
days after the date such notice is given or served. Such notice may be
given or served at any time after the appropriate main or lateral is in
place that can deliver water to the particular improved property. Such
notice shall be given to or served upon the owner by personal service or
by registered mail to his last known address, or by such other means as
shall be permitted by law.
A. No person shall uncover, shall connect with, shall make any opening
into or shall use, shall alter or shall disturb, in any manner, any main,
lateral or any other part of the water system without first obtaining a
permit, in writing, from the Authority.
B. Application for a permit required under Subsection A shall be made by
the owner of the improved property served or to be served or by the
duly authorized agent of such owner.
C. No person shall make or shall cause to be made a connection of any
improved property with a main until such person has fulfilled each of
the following conditions:
(1) Such person shall have notified the Authority of the desire and
intention to connect such improved property to a main.
(2) Such person shall have applied for and shall have obtained a permit
as required by Subsection A, above.
(3) Such person shall have given the appropriate representative of the
Authority at least 48 hours' notice of the time when such
connection will be made so that the Authority may supervise and
inspect or may cause to be supervised and inspected the work of
connection and necessary testing.
(4) If applicable, such person shall have furnished satisfactory
evidence to the appropriate representative of the Authority that
§ 197-2 GREENCASTLE CODE § 197-3
197:374
§ 197-4. Rules and regulations governing mains and connections.
any tapping, connection and/or customer facility fee that may be
charged and imposed by the Authority against the owner of each
improved property who connects such improved property to a main
has been paid.
D. Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, each improved
property shall be connected separately and independently through a
building main. Grouping of more than one improved property on one
building main shall not be permitted, except under special
circumstances and for good cause shown, but then only after special
permission of the Authority, in writing, shall have been secured and
only subject to such rules, regulations and conditions as may be
prescribed by the Authority.
E. All costs and expenses of construction of a building main and all costs
and expenses of connection of a building main to a main shall be borne
by the owner of the improved property to be connected; and such owner
shall indemnify and shall save harmless this Borough and the Authority
from all loss or damage that may be occasioned, directly or indirectly,
as a result of construction of a building main or of connection of a
building main to a main.
F. A building main shall be connected to a lateral or to a main at the place
designated by the Authority. A smooth, neat joint shall be made and the
connection of a building main shall be made secure and watertight.
G. If the owner of any improved property located within the Borough and
abutting upon any street in which there is a main constituting part of
the water system, after 45 days' notice from this Borough, in
accordance with § 197-2A, shall fail to connect such improved property,
as required, this Borough may enter upon such improved property and
may construct such connection and may collect from such owner the
costs and expenses thereof in the manner permitted by law.
A. No building main shall be covered until it has been inspected and
approved by the Authority. If any part of a building main is covered
before so being inspected and approved, it shall be uncovered for
inspection at the cost and expense of the owner of the improved
property to be connected.
B. Every building main of any improved property shall be maintained in a
sanitary and safe operating condition by the owner of such improved
property.
C. Every excavation for a building main shall be guarded adequately with
barricades and lights to protect all persons from damage and injury.
Any street, sidewalk or other public property disturbed in the course of
installation of a building main shall be restored, at the cost and expense
§ 197-3 WATER § 197-4
197:375
§ 197-5. Violations and penalties.
§ 197-6. Declaration of purpose.
It is declared that enactment of this article is necessary for the protection,
benefit and preservation of the health, safety and welfare of inhabitants of
this Borough.
of the owner of such improved property being connected, in a manner
satisfactory to the Authority and this Borough.
D. If any person shall fail or shall refuse, upon receipt of a notice of this
Borough or the Authority, in writing, to remedy any unsatisfactory
conditions with respect to a building main within 60 days of receipt of
such notice, this Borough or the Authority may refuse to permit such
person to be served by the water system until such unsatisfactory
condition shall have been remedied to the satisfaction of this Borough
and of the Authority.
E. This Borough reserves the right to adopt, from time to time, additional
rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary and proper relating to
connections with the water system, which additional rules and
regulations, to the extent appropriate, shall be and shall be construed
as part of this article.
A. Any person who shall violate this article shall be liable, upon summary
conviction for a first offense and upon summary conviction for each
subsequent offense, to a fine of not more than $1,000 together with
costs of prosecution in each case. Each day that a violation shall
continue shall be deemed and shall be taken to be a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such.
B. Fines and costs imposed under provisions of this article shall be
enforceable and recoverable in the manner at the time provided by
applicable law and shall be payable to this Borough.
§ 197-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 197-6
197:376
Chapter 202
YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 205.
§ 202-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Pennsylvania.
PERMIT — The form that must be obtained, completed and submitted, along
with the required fee, to the Borough Office prior to conducting a yard sale.
YARD SALE — The sale or offering for sale of new, used, or secondhand
goods on residential property including but not limited to the lawn, yard,
garage, home, or any other accessory building located on the residential
property. "Yard sale" shall include all sales on residential property known
as "garage sale," "tag sale," "porch sale," "lawn sale," "rummage sale"
or any other similar casual sale of tangible personal goods on residential
property.[Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
§ 202-2. Permit required; removal of signs.
§ 202-3. Regulations. [Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
A. It shall be unlawful for any individual, firm, group or corporation to
conduct within the Borough a yard sale or permit a yard sale to be held
within the Borough on residential property under the individual, firm,
group or corporation's control without first obtaining a yard sale permit
from the Borough.
B. Any individual, firm, group or corporation conducting a yard sale within
the Borough or any individual, firm, group or corporation posting
advertisements within the Borough for a yard sale to be held inside or
outside the Borough shall remove all signs, flyers, posters, bulletins and
other advertisements within the Borough no later than the scheduled
last day for the yard sale.
A. No individual, firm, group, or corporation may hold more than three
yard sales in any one calendar year, nor shall a yard sale permit be
issued to the same property address more than three times in any one
calendar year.
B. The yard sale(s) shall not exceed three consecutive days nor exceed a
period of more than seven days in any one calendar year.
§ 197-6 YARD SALES § 202-3
202:377
§ 202-4. Fees. [Amended 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
There shall be no fee for obtaining a yard sale permit.
§ 202-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 and costs of
prosecution for the first offense; $100 plus prosecution costs for a second
offense; and $300 and costs of prosecution for any third or subsequent
offense.
§ 202-6. Enforcement. [Added 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
The Greencastle Police Department shall have the authority to administer
the provisions of this chapter and to investigate complaints and prosecute
violations of this chapter.
§ 202-7. Exemptions. [Added 12-4-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-10]
This chapter shall not be applicable to:
C. The approved yard sale must be held within 15 days of the issuance of
the permit for that yard sale.
D. No portion of a yard sale shall take place within a public right-of-way.
E. The individual, firm, group, or corporation to whom the yard sale permit
was issued and the person conducting the sale and the owner, tenant or
occupant of the premises where the yard sale is conducted shall be
responsible to ensure that vehicles of persons attending the yard sale
do not impede the passage of traffic on any road or streets adjacent to
where the yard sale is being conducted.
A. Persons selling goods pursuant to an order of process or a court of
competent jurisdiction.
B. Persons acting in accordance with their powers and duties as public
officials.
C. Any person selling or advertising for sale an item or items of personal
property which is specifically named or described in the advertisement.
D. Any public auction having a duration of no more than two days and
conducted by an auctioneer who is licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
E. Any publisher of a newspaper, magazine or other publication or other
communications media who publishes or broadcasts anything in good
faith without knowledge of its false, deceptive or misleading character
or without knowledge that the provisions of this chapter have not been
complied with.
§ 202-3 GREENCASTLE CODE § 202-7
202:378
Chapter 205
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 106.
Sewers — See Ch. 155.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 166.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 169.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
180.
Trees — See Ch. 187.
Water — See Ch. 197.
F. Any sale conducted by any legitimate business or commercial or
industrial establishment, properly zoned under the zoning regulations
of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, and any other sale
conducted by a business or commercial or industrial establishment
under the protection of the nonconforming use section of the zoning
laws, or by any other vendor, dealer, etc., when the sale is conducted in
a properly zoned area and not otherwise prohibited by the laws and
ordinances of the Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, and
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or this chapter.
§ 202-7 YARD SALES § 202-7
202:379

ARTICLE I
Objectives
§ 205-1. Community development objectives.
There is hereby established a new comprehensive zoning plan for the
Borough, which plan is set forth in the text and map that constitute this
chapter. Said plan is adopted in the interest of protecting and promoting
the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare, and shall be deemed
to include the following related and specific community development
objectives, among others as may be stated in the Borough of Greencastle
Comprehensive Plan:
A. To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, and
redevelopment of the Borough, in accordance with a comprehensive
plan of long-term objectives, principles, and standards deemed
beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people.
B. To protect the established character and the social and economic well
being of both private and public property.
C. To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate, and to provide maximum
protection of residential areas.
D. To secure safety from floods, water pollution, and other dangers, and to
provide adequate light, air, and convenience of access.
E. To encourage and facilitate the provision of adequate and efficient
public facilities, service and utilities.
F. To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways so as to promote efficient and safe circulation of
vehicles and pedestrians.
G. To discourage, prohibit and gradually eliminate the expansion and
undue perpetuation of nonconforming uses and structures.
H. To conserve the value of buildings and to enhance the value of land
throughout the Borough.
§ 205-1 YARD SALES § 205-1
202:381

ARTICLE II
Establishment of Zoning Districts
§ 205-2. List of districts.
The Borough is hereby divided into the classes of districts listed below:
(R-1) Low-Density Residential District
(R-2) Medium-Density Residential District
(I) Industrial District
(CC) Community Commercial District
(CC-II) Community Commercial-II District
(HC) Highway Commercial District
(R-M) Residential-Mobile Home District
§ 205-3. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of the said districts are hereby established as shown on
the "Greencastle Zoning Map," which accompanies and which, with all
explanatory matter thereof, is hereby adopted and made a part of this
chapter.61 A copy of said map, indicating the latest amendments, shall be
kept up-to-date for the use and benefit of the public.
§ 205-4. District boundaries. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
In determining the boundaries of districts shown on the Zoning Map, the
following rules shall apply:
A. Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
center lines of streets, highways, watercourses or railroad rights-of-way
or such lines extended, such center lines shall be construed to be such
boundaries.
B. Where such boundaries are indicated as approximately following the
property lines of parks or other publicly owned lands, such lines shall
be construed to be such boundaries.
C. Unless otherwise shown, all district boundaries running parallel to
streets shall be construed to be 200 feet back from the rights-of-way of
said streets.
D. In all cases where a district boundary divides a lot in one ownership, the
most restrictive district requirement, or control, shall apply. For the
purpose of this section, the most restrictive district shall be deemed
that district subject to regulations which prohibit the use intended to be
made of said lot or require higher standards with respect to coverage,
yards, screening, landscaping and similar requirements.
61.Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 205-2 YARD SALES § 205-4
202:383
§ 205-5. Effect of establishment of districts. [Amended 1-3-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
Following the effective date of this chapter and except as herein provided:
E. In all cases where a district boundary line is located not farther than 15
feet away from a lot line of record, such boundary line shall be
construed to coincide with such lot line.
F. In all cases where dimensions are not shown on the Zoning Map, the
location of boundaries shown on the map shall be determined by the use
of the scale appearing thereon.
G. In case of uncertainty as to the true location of a district boundary line
in a particular instance, the determination thereof shall be made by the
Zoning Officer. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Hearing Board, as
provided in Article VIII herein.
A. No building shall be erected, moved, altered, rebuilt or enlarged nor
shall any land or building be used, designed or arranged to be used for
any purpose or in any manner except in conformity with all regulations,
requirements, and restrictions specified in this chapter for the district
in which such building or land is located.
B. No yard or open space required in connection with any building or use
shall be considered as providing a required yard or open space for any
other building on the same or any other lot.
C. No lot shall be formed from part of a lot already occupied by a building
unless such building, all yards, and open spaces connected therewith,
and the remaining lot comply with all requirements prescribed by this
chapter for the district in which said lot is located. No building permit
shall be issued for the erection of a building on any new lot thus created
unless such building and lot comply with all the provisions of this
chapter.
D. No more than one principal use may exist on a single parcel or tract of
land.
E. Nothing contained in this chapter shall require any change in the plans,
construction, or designated use of a building complying with local laws
in force prior to this chapter, if the following is found to exist:
(1) A building permit shall have been duly issued prior to the date of
first publication of notice of the public hearing on this chapter.
(2) The entire building shall have been constructed in accordance with
such plans as have been filed with the Borough and shall have been
completed within one year from the effective date of this chapter.
F. Any use not permitted by this chapter shall be deemed to be prohibited.
Any list of prohibited uses contained in any section of this chapter shall
not be deemed to be an exhaustive list but has been included for the
§ 205-4 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-5
202:384
purpose of clarity and emphasis, and to illustrate, by example, some
of the uses frequently proposed that are deemed undesirable and
incompatible and are thus prohibited.
G. A lot shall be deemed to satisfy the frontage required as long as it has
the minimum lot width on a public street that is required for the zoning
district in which the lot is located.
§ 205-5 YARD SALES § 205-5
202:385

ARTICLE III
District Use Regulations
§ 205-6. (R-1) Residential District. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
§ 205-7. (R-2) General Residential District. [Amended 1-3-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Agricultural operations including crop farming and animal
husbandry subject to the following:
(4) No stable or storage of manure or other odor producing substance
shall be located within 200 feet of any property line.
(5) No sale of products shall be permitted.
(6) No keeping, breeding, and/or raising of cattle, sheep, goats, pigs,
fowl, or horses, including rental horses, shall be permitted on lots
of less than 20 acres.
(7) Essential services.
(8) Accessory uses.
(9) Parking, storage or use of recreational vehicles. [Added 3-7-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-02]
B. Special exceptions. Churches may be permitted as a special exception
in accordance with the procedures of Article VIII and subject to
satisfactory compliance with the following:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to adequately
demonstrate to the Zoning Hearing Board that such special
exception will be compatible with adjacent uses, neighborhood
characteristics and the objectives of this chapter.
(2) A site development plan shall be submitted with any special
exception application under this subsection.
A. Permitted uses. [Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwellings.
(3) Two-family detached dwellings.
(4) Attached dwellings.
§ 205-6 YARD SALES § 205-7
202:387
(5) Multifamily dwellings.
(6) Conversions of existing residences to a two-or-more-family
dwelling subject to the following:
(a) A minimum of two off-street parking spaces shall be provided
on the same lot for each additional dwelling unit created.
(b) Each dwelling unit shall have private bath and toilet facilities.
(7) A site development plan shall be required for all residential uses
when three or more dwelling units are proposed (Uses 4, 5 and 6
above).
(8) Churches.
(9) Essential services.
(10) Accessory uses.
(11) Parking, storage or use of recreational vehicles. [Added 3-7-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-02]
B. Special exceptions.
(1) Membership clubs and outdoor recreational facilities such as
tennis courts, swimming pools, etc., subject to the following:
(a) Any such use shall not outwardly display its commercial nature
other than by a sign in accordance with § 205-27C(3).
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board may require specific screening
measures where in its opinion the proposed parking areas may
be detrimental to other orderly use of adjacent properties.
(c) All exterior lighting shall be shielded from the view of
surrounding lots.
(d) A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet with a minimum
frontage of 80 feet and side yards of 15 feet shall be provided.
(e) The applicant shall conclusively demonstrate that all
anticipated parking needs shall be adequately provided.
(2) Eleemosynary institutions, day-care centers, nursing homes and
similar institutions subject to the following:
(a) All parking areas shall be screened from adjacent properties.
(b) All outdoor recreation areas shall be screened from adjacent
properties.
(c) A minimum lot size of 20,000 square feet with a minimum
frontage of 80 feet and side yards of 15 feet shall be provided.
§ 205-7 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-7
202:388
§ 205-8. (CC) Community Commercial District. [Amended 1-3-1995
by Ord. No. 1995-2]
(3) A site development plan shall be submitted with any special
exception application under this subsection.
(4) Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
(a) No more than four rental units shall be provided, and no more
than four persons may occupy one rental unit.
(b) At least one bathroom shall be provided for use by guests.
(c) There shall be no use of show windows or any type of display or
advertising visible from outside the premises, except for a
single nonilluminated sign no larger than two square feet in
size.
(d) A preexisting residence shall retain a residential appearance
and character.
(e) The use shall be operated only by persons who reside within
the bed-and-breakfast and by a maximum of one nonresident
employee.
(f) There shall be no separate cooking facilities in any guest room.
Food shall only be served to guests who are staying overnight.
(g) The maximum, uninterrupted length of stay at a bed-andbreakfast
shall be 14 days.
(h) The use of any amenities provided by the bed-and-breakfast,
such as swimming pool or tennis court, shall be restricted in
use to the guests and permanent residents of the
establishment.
(i) A minimum of one off-street parking space shall be provided on
the same lot for each rental unit.
(j) The bed-and-breakfast facilities may be used as the location for
weddings up to five times a calendar year.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) All permitted uses and special exceptions as listed and regulated in
the (R-2) District.
(2) Retail businesses (e.g., variety stores, groceries, apparel, etc., and
including eating and drinking establishments).
(3) Service businesses (e.g., banks, insurance, professional offices).
(4) Personal services (e.g., barber shops, beauty salons, laundry).
(5) Repair services (e.g., shoe shops, beauty salons, laundry).
§ 205-7 YARD SALES § 205-8
202:389
(6) Manufacturing and processing which is clearly incidental to a retail
or service business as listed above and provided all the goods so
manufactured or processed are sold on the premises.
(7) Newspaper, printing establishments, and broadcasting studios;
provided, however, that any antennas or towers associated with the
broadcasting studios are: [Amended 1-4-2016 by Ord. No.
2016-01]
(a) Attached to the roof of the primary structure and extend not
more than 20 feet above the highest level of the roof of the
primary structure in accordance with the definition of
"building" in § 205-56 hereof; and
(b) That electromagnetic frequency and radio frequency
interference from the antennas or towers shall be limited as
required by the Federal Communications Commission, and
certification of such compliance shall be provided to the
Borough with any application for approval of the broadcast
studio.
(8) Multiple occupancy buildings provided each such use is permitted
in the (CC) District.
(9) Hotels.
(10) Accessory uses and essential services.
(11) Parking, storage or use of recreational vehicles. [Added 3-7-2016
by Ord. No. 2016-02]
B. Special exceptions. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
(1) Boardinghouse, subject to the following conditions:
(a) Minimum lot area: 1/2 acre.
(b) Minimum setback from all lot lines: 25 feet.
(c) Minimum lot width: 150 feet.
(d) Maximum density: eight rental units per acre.
(e) Each rental unit shall be limited to a maximum of two persons
each.
(f) Interior space: a minimum of 300 square feet of interior floor
space per rental unit.
(g) The owner or the owner’s legal representative must reside at
the boardinghouse.
(h) Signs shall be limited to two signs with a maximum of two
square feet each and shall comply with all other provisions of
§ 205-27.
§ 205-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-8
202:390
§ 205-9. (CC-II) Community Commercial-II District. [Amended
5-7-1984]
§ 205-10. (HC) Highway Commercial District. [Amended 5-7-1984;
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
(i) Minimum of one bathroom for each rental floor of the
boardinghouse.
C. Frontage requirement. No lot may solely have frontage on a minor
street which provides secondary access to the rear or side of properties
otherwise abutting a street (an alley); frontage solely on an alley is not
permitted. For the purpose of this subsection, the definition of "street"
shall not include "alley." [Added 10-5-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-07]
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any permitted use as listed in the (CC) Community Commercial
District.
(2) Commercial recreation facilities.
(3) All uses in this district shall conform in all respects with the (HC)
Highway Commercial District lot area and related regulations as
set forth in Article IV of this chapter.
(4) Accessory uses and essential services.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Any permitted use as listed in the (CC-II) Community Commercial-
II District subject to the (HC) Highway Commercial lot size
requirements of Article IV.
(2) Hotels and motels.
(3) Shopping centers in accordance with the following:
(a) Access. There shall be a minimum of two separate points of
ingress and egress and no access points shall be located within
70 feet of intersecting streets, unless such points are located
directly at an intersection.
(b) Management. A shopping center shall be under unified
management which shall clearly establish centralized
responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the project,
including all common areas.
(c) Signs. There shall be only one freestanding sign per road
frontage which shall be designed and used for the purpose of
announcing the shopping center itself in compliance with the
applicable provisions of this chapter.
§ 205-8 YARD SALES § 205-10
202:391
(d) Parking. There shall be a minimum of five parking spaces for
every 1,000 square feet of merchandising or sales area
designed for tenant occupancy.
(e) Circulation. Traffic circulation within a shopping center project
shall be designed to minimize pedestrian and vehicular mixing
and congestion. Circulation shall be provided along the outer
perimeters and along store frontages.
(f) Setback requirements. Shopping centers shall comply with the
yard and setback requirements for the (HC) Highway
Commercial District.
(4) Automotive sales and services.
(5) Motor vehicle, mobile home, trailer, construction or farm
equipment sales and services.
(6) Freight, bus, and trucking terminals.
(7) Wholesaling, storing and warehousing.
(8) Essential services.
(9) Accessory uses including out-of-doors storage provided no such
storage shall occupy the required front yard area or be located
within 10 feet of the side or rear property lines.
(10) Multiple occupancy buildings.
(11) Tattoo establishment. [Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
(12) Pawnbroker. The pawnbroker use shall not be a permitted use in
any other district. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
B. Special exceptions.
(1) Light manufacturing, assembling, converting, altering, finishing, or
other processing of products or materials and research and
development establishments and related accessory uses subject to
the following:
(a) It shall be satisfactorily demonstrated that the proposed use
will be compatible with adjacent uses and neighborhood
characteristics, and that the magnitude of operation does not
necessitate locating in the (I) Industrial District.
(b) All illumination shall be arranged so that there shall be no
glare of lights upon a residential district or existing residence.
(c) No out-of-doors storage shall occupy the required front yard
area or be located within 10 feet of the side or rear property
lines.
§ 205-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-10
202:392
(d) Area, parking, and setback distance shall be in compliance
with the (HC) Highway Commercial District requirements.
(2) Adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater or cabaret, massage
parlor, health club or health spa, or model studio subject to the
following:
(a) It shall be unlawful to establish an adult bookstore, adult
motion-picture theater or cabaret, massage parlor, health club
or health spa, or model studio within 500 feet of any school,
church, residential zone, establishment licensed by the
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board to dispense alcoholic
beverages, any restaurant, eating establishment, hotel or
motel, or within 500 feet of any other adult bookstore, adult
motion-picture theater or cabaret, massage parlor, health club
or health spa, or model studio, except as a special exception in
accordance with the procedures set forth in this section.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board may authorize the establishment of
an adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater or cabaret,
massage parlor, health club or health spa, or model studio
within 500 feet of any school, church, residential zone,
establishment licensed by the Pennsylvania Liquor Control
Board to dispense alcoholic beverages, any restaurant, eating
establishment, hotel or motel, or within 500 feet of any other
adult bookstore, adult motion-picture theater or cabaret,
massage parlor, health club or health spa, or model studio, only
if the following findings are made by the Board:
[1] That the applicant has presented to the Board a petition
which indicates approval of the proposed use by 51% of
the persons owning, residing or doing business within 500
feet of the location of the proposed use.
[2] The applicant shall have attempted to contact all eligible
locations within this radius, and must supply a list of all
addresses at which no contact was made.
[3] The circulator of the petition shall have subscribed to an
affidavit or verification pursuant to 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 4904
attesting to the fact that the circulator personally
witnessed the signatures on the petition and that the same
were affixed to the petition by the persons whose names
appear thereon.
C. Any use contemplated by this section must comply with all other
applicable provisions of this chapter including the provisions of Article
V dealing with parking, screening, off-street loading, and signs.
D. In addition to any other requirements set forth in this section, or
elsewhere in this chapter, any use permitted in accordance with
Subsection A, supra, shall as a minimum be completely screened on
§ 205-10 YARD SALES § 205-10
202:393
§ 205-11. (I) Industrial District. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
§ 205-12. (R-M) Residential-Mobile Home District. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
three sides, consisting of the rear boundary line and each boundary line
perpendicular thereto, by the planting and continuous maintenance of
an evergreen material, such as arborvitae or some similar plant, for as
long as said use is in existence. These screening plants shall have an
initial minimum height of four feet after planting.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Manufacturing, assembling, converting, printing or other
processing, handling, or storage of products or materials.
(2) Wholesaling, storing, and warehousing.
(3) Freight, bus, and trucking terminals.
(4) Building material and equipment and vehicle storage, sales and
service.
(5) Research and development.
(6) Accessory uses and buildings customarily incidental to other
permitted principal uses including dwellings for only bona fide
caretakers or watchmen and their families.
B. Special exceptions.
(1) In accordance with the requirements of Article VIII, single-family
detached dwellings may be permitted as a special exception subject
to the following standards:
(a) The applicant shall satisfactorily present to the Zoning Hearing
Board the characteristics and circumstances which justify the
residential use in an (I) Industrial District.
(b) The applicant shall acknowledge his understanding that the
district is intended by the Borough to be used primarily for
industrial purposes and that the granting of a special exception
shall not receive favored status over industrial uses.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Single-family detached dwellings.
(2) Single-family semidetached dwelling.
(3) Attached dwelling residences.
(4) Multifamily dwellings.
§ 205-10 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-12
202:394
(5) Individual mobile homes.
(6) Accessory and essential services.
B. Special exceptions.
(1) Mobile home park subject to the following:
(a) Applicable requirements of Article IX of this chapter.
§ 205-12 YARD SALES § 205-12
202:395

ARTICLE IV
Lot Area and Related Regulations
§ 205-13. Single-family detached dwellings.
Lot area and related regulations for single-family detached dwellings are as
follows:
R-1 District R-2 District
Minimums:
Lot size 9,000 sq. ft. 9,000 sq. ft.
Lot width 70 ft. 70 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft. 100 ft.
Front yard 25 ft. 25 ft.
Each side yard 10 ft. 10 ft.
Rear yard 25 ft. 25 ft.
Off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit
2 2
Maximums:
Building height 35 ft. 35 ft.
Lot coverage 35% 40%
§ 205-14. Single-family semidetached dwellings. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Lot area and related regulations for single-family semidetached dwellings
are as follows:
R-1 District R-2 District
Minimums (per dwelling unit):
Lot size 5,000 sq. ft. 4,000 sq. ft.
Lot width 40 ft. 30 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft. 100 ft.
Front yard 25 ft. 15 ft.
Each side yard 10 ft. 7 ft.
Rear yard 25 ft. 20 ft.
Off-street parking spaces per
dwelling unit
2 2
Maximums (per dwelling unit):
Building height 35 ft. 35 ft.
Lot coverage 35% 40%
§ 205-13 YARD SALES § 205-15
202:397
§ 205-15. Two-family detached dwellings. [Amended 1-3-1995 by
Ord. No. 1995-2]
Lot area and related regulations for two-family detached dwellings are as
follows:
R-1 District R-2 District
Minimums:
Lot size 8,000 sq. ft.
Lot width 50 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft.
Front yard 15 ft.
Each side yard 7 ft.
Rear yard 20 ft.
Off-street parking spaces 4
Maximums:
Building height 35 ft.
Lot coverage 30%
§ 205-16. Attached dwelling residences. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
A. Lot area and related regulations for attached dwelling residences are as
follows:
R-1 District R-2 District
Minimums (per dwelling unit):
Lot area (interior units) 2,000 sq. ft.
Lot area (end units) 3,000 sq. ft.
Lot width (interior) 20 ft.
Lot depth 100 ft.
Front yard 15 ft.
Side yard for end units 10 ft.
Off-street parking spaces 2
Maximums:
Building height 35 ft.
Lot coverage 40%
B. No less than three and nor more than eight dwellings shall be permitted
in a unit or group.
§ 205-15 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-17
202:398
§ 205-17. Multiple dwelling residences. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
Lot area and related regulations for multiple dwelling residences are as
follows:
R-1 District R-2 District
Minimums:
Lot area per dwelling unit 2,000 sq. ft.
Front yard 20 ft.
Each side yard 10 ft.
Rear yard 25 ft.
Off-street parking spaces per
dwelling
2
Distance between units 20 ft.
Active play area per dwelling unit 100 sq. ft.
Maximums:
Building height 40 ft.
Lot coverage 40%
Building length 160 ft.
§ 205-18. Multiple occupancy buildings. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord.
No. 1995-2]
§ 205-19. Detached commercial and industrial uses. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2; 5-1-2006 by Ord. No 2006-06]
A. As permitted in (CC) Community Commercial and (CC-II) Community
Commercial-II Districts. Any residential use hereinafter created as part
of a multiple occupancy building shall as a minimum comply with the
requirements for conversions as provided in the (R-2) General
Residential District regulations.
B. As permitted in the (HC) Highway Commercial District. A multiple
occupancy building in a (HC) Highway Commercial District shall
contain 15,000 square feet of lot area for the first use in accordance
with § 205-19, below, and 2,500 square feet for each subsequent use.
Residential uses shall, in addition, comply with the minimum
requirements for conversions as provided in the (R-2) General
Residential District regulations.
A. Lot area and related regulations for detached commercial and
industrial uses are as follows:
§ 205-17 YARD SALES § 205-19
202:399
§ 205-20. Exceptions.
The general principles of design and the minimum area requirements
stipulated in this chapter may be varied by the Borough Council upon
recommendation of the subdivider or developer and the Planning
Commission in the case of a project large enough to constitute a more
or less self-contained neighborhood, industrial park or commercial center.
Such a project shall be developed in accordance with an overall plan safeguarded
by appropriate restrictions, which in the judgment of the Council
has made adequate provisions for all essential requirements. Provided,
however, that no modification shall be granted by the Council which would
conflict with features of any adopted long-range plan of the Borough or with
the intent and purpose of the general principles of design and minimum
requirements of this chapter.
Minimum
Required
Community
Commercial
District
Community
Commercial II
and Highway
Commercial
Districts
Industrial
District
Lot size — 15,000 sq. ft. 20,000 sq. ft.
Lot width — 80 ft. 100 ft.
Lot depth — 150 ft. 150 ft.
Front yard — 35 ft. 35 ft.
Side yard — 15 ft. 20 ft.
Rear yard — 25 ft. 30 ft.
Building height 40 ft. 40 ft. 40 ft.
Off-street parking None 1 space for
each 200 sq. ft.
of floor area1
1 space for
each employee
on maximum
shift
Notes:
1Hotels or motels which only have overnight guest rooms and
administrative offices for the operation of the hotel or motel
shall only be required to provide one off-street parking space
for each overnight guest room and one off-street parking space
for each employee.
B. Any commercial or industrial use which is adjacent to a residential
district or existing residence shall be screened along the adjacent
property line as defined in this chapter.
§ 205-19 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-20
202:400
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 205-21. Accessory buildings and structures. [Amended 5-7-1984;
9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8; 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
A. A private detached garage may be permitted as follows:
(1) Only one private detached garage may be permitted.
(2) A private detached garage shall not exceed one story or be more
than 20 feet in height.
(3) A private detached garage may be located in any required side or
rear yard.
(4) A private detached garage located in any required side or rear yard
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any side or rear lot
line.
B. A building accessory to a residential principal building, other than a
private detached garage, and not attached to the principal building
(examples include workshops, storage/utility sheds and tool/garden
sheds, playhouses and animal shelters), may be permitted as follows:
(1) Only one accessory building may be permitted.
(2) An accessory building shall not exceed one story or be more than
20 feet in height.
(3) An accessory building shall not exceed 240 square feet.
(4) An accessory building may be located in any required side or rear
yard.
(5) An accessory building located in any required side or rear yard
shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any side or rear lot
line.
(6) Playhouses and animal shelters not exceeding 30 square feet shall
not be subject to the provisions of Subsection B(1).
C. Residential buildings sharing common walls.
(1) Where residential principal buildings share common walls
(examples include single-family attached dwelling or single-family
semidetached dwelling), buildings accessory to the principal
building, other than a private detached garage, and not attached to
the principal building, may be permitted as follows:
(a) Only one accessory building may be permitted.
(b) An accessory building shall not exceed one story or be more
than 20 feet in height.
§ 205-21 YARD SALES § 205-21
202:401
(c) An accessory building shall not exceed 240 square feet.
(d) An accessory building may be located in a required side or rear
yard.
(e) A single accessory building located in a required side or rear
yard shall be set back a minimum of five feet from any side or
rear lot line.
(2) Accessory buildings, including private detached garages, may be
located in pairs or groups on contiguous lots in the required side or
rear yard along the common lot line; provided, however, they shall
be constructed at the same time and shall be set back a minimum of
five feet from the rear lot line.
D. A building accessory to a nonresidential use, or use permitted in the
Community Commercial District (CC), shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from any side or rear lot line abutting a residential district or lot
used for residential purposes.
E. A building accessory and attached to the principal building shall comply
in all respects with the requirements of this chapter applicable to the
principal building.
F. All buildings accessory to the principal building in the aggregate shall
not occupy more than 30% of the area of the required rear and/or side
yard.
G. No part of a building accessory to the principal building shall be located
closer to the street, on which the principal building fronts, than the
front of the principal building.
H. No building accessory to the principal building shall be erected on a
corner lot in either required front yard.
I. No building accessory to the principal building shall be inhabited.
J. Fences, walls and retaining walls. [Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04]
(1) Fences.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, fences are permitted uses in all
districts, subject to the following:
[1] Fences may be located in the front, side, or rear yard.
[a] In the R-1, R-2, RM, CC, and CC-II districts:
[i] Fences located in the front yard shall not exceed
four feet in height.
§ 205-21 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-21
202:402
[ii] On a corner lot located in the R-1, R-2, RM, CC,
and CC-II districts, the fence height shall be
limited to four feet on both front yards.
[b] Barbed wire fences shall not be permitted in any
district other than in the (I) Industrial and (HC)
Highway Commercial districts. Barbed wire shall not
be permitted in the front yard in any district other
than the (I) Industrial District.
[c] Chain-link fences or a pattern similar (including but
not limited to chicken wire, galvanized garden
fencing, etc.) to that of a chain-link fence shall not be
permitted in the front yard in any district other than
the (I) Industrial and (HC) Highway Commercial
districts. For any chain-link fences located in the (I)
Industrial or (HC) Highway Commercial Districts,
vegetative material of sufficient height and density on
the exterior of the fence or chain-link fence privacy
slats to conceal the chain-link fence from the view of
the adjoining lots must be provided in conjunction
with any chain-link fence which fronts upon a street or
shares a lot line with any lot located in a district other
than (I) Industrial and (HC) Highway Commercial. Any
chain-link fence privacy slats shall not be cracked or
broken.
[2] In the R-1, R-2, and RM districts, fences shall be limited to
a maximum height of eight feet in side and rear yards;
however, a fence of up to 10 feet in height may be
constructed solely in the rear yard for the sole purpose of
enclosing a court for tennis, basketball, or other similar
sport. In all other districts, fences shall have a maximum
height of 10 feet.
[3] In the CC, CC-II, HC, and I districts, businesses with
garden centers and the permitted outdoor storage of
inventory or materials which share one common wall with
the principal use may erect a fence equal in height to the
height of the common wall for the remaining three sides of
the garden center or outdoor storage area.
[4] No fence shall be constructed in a location which
interferes with the minimum sight distance required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 13M, Highway Design Manual, as amended
and supplemented from time to time.
[5] No fence shall be located within a public access or public
utility easement or right-of-way unless the applicant has
written permission of the person who has been granted the
§ 205-21 YARD SALES § 205-21
202:403
public access or public utility easement. If the Borough or
applicable utility needs access to the easement or rightof-
way, the portion of fence obstructing the easement or
right-of-way shall be removed by the property owner at
their sole cost and expense.
[6] The finished or smooth side of the fence must face the
exterior of the lot, so that any exposed posts, frames, or
supports face the interior of the lot unless the fence is
designed in a manner in which both sides are equally
finished or smooth. Simply put, the "attractive" side of the
fence must face outward.
[7] Any fence located in a front yard of a property without
existing sidewalks may have to be removed or relocated at
the property owner's sole cost and expense if sidewalks
are required at the property.
(b) A fence shall not be required to comply with accessory
structure setbacks and may be constructed on the applicant's
side of the property line, subject to Subsection J(1)(c) below.
(c) Any applicant for a zoning permit to construct a fence bears
sole responsibility for the accurate representation of any
property lines and in the event information presented by the
applicant is incorrect, the applicant shall bear all liability for
the correction of the error.
(2) Walls.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, walls are permitted uses in all
districts, subject to the following:
[1] Walls may be located in the front, side, or rear yard.
[a] In the R-1, R-2, RM, CC and CC-II districts:
[i] Walls located in the front yard shall not exceed
four feet in height and must be set back one foot
from the property line for every foot or portion
thereof of the wall's height, subject to Subsection
J(2)(b) below. For example, if the proposed wall is
3 1/2 feet in height, it must be set back four feet
from the front lot line. There shall be no required
setback for walls in a side or rear yard.
[ii] On a corner lot in the R-1, R-2, RM, CC, and CC-II
Districts, the wall height shall be limited to four
feet on both front yards.
[b] Barbed wire shall not be permitted to be combined
with walls in any district other than in the (I)
Industrial and (HC) Highway Commercial districts.
§ 205-21 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-21
202:404
Barbed wire shall not be permitted in the front yard in
any district other than the (I) Industrial District.
[2] Walls shall have a maximum height of six feet except in the
(I) Industrial and (HC) Highway Commercial districts,
where the maximum height shall be limited to eight feet.
[3] No wall shall be constructed in a location which interferes
with the minimum sight distance required by the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication
13M, Highway Design Manual, as amended and
supplemented from time to time.
[4] No wall shall be located within a public access or public
utility easement or right-of-way unless the applicant has
written permission of the person who has been granted the
public access or public utility easement. If the Borough or
applicable utility needs access to the easement or right-ofway,
the portion of wall obstructing the easement or rightof-
way shall be removed by the property owner at their
sole cost and expense.
[5] The exterior of all walls must be finished with brick, stone,
or other decorative block or decorative concrete product
and must be architecturally compatible with the primary
use structure and surrounding landscape. Concrete
masonry blocks (alone, painted, stained or treated) shall
not be considered a "finished wall."
[6] The finished side of the wall must face the exterior of the
lot, so that any exposed pillars, columns, or supports face
the interior of the lot unless the wall is designed in a
manner in which both sides are equally finished or smooth.
Simply put, the "attractive" side of the wall must face
outward.
[7] Any wall located in a front yard of a property without
existing sidewalks may have to be removed or relocated at
the property owner's sole cost and expense if sidewalks
are required at the property.
(b) Any applicant for a zoning permit to construct a wall bears sole
responsibility for the accurate representation of any property
lines and in the event information presented by the applicant is
incorrect, the applicant shall bear all liability for the correction
of the error.
(3) Retaining walls.
(a) Unless otherwise stated, retaining walls are permitted uses in
all districts, subject to the following:
§ 205-21 YARD SALES § 205-21
202:405
§ 205-22. Accessory uses.
[1] Retaining walls may be located in the front, side, or rear
yard.
[2] No retaining wall shall be constructed in a location which
interferes with the minimum sight distance required by
the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Publication 13M, Highway Design Manual, as amended
and supplemented from time to time.
[3] No retaining wall shall be located within a public access or
public utility easement or right-of-way unless the applicant
has written permission of the person who has been
granted the public access or public utility easement. If the
Borough or applicable utility needs access to the easement
or right-of-way, the portion of retaining wall obstructing
the easement or right-of-way shall be removed by the
property owner at their sole cost and expense.
[4] Retaining walls must be finished with brick, stone, or other
decorative block or concrete product and must be
architecturally compatible with the primary use structure
and surrounding landscape.
(b) Retaining walls may be placed on the applicant's side of the
property line, subject to Subsection J(3)(c) below.
(c) Any applicant for a zoning permit to construct a retaining wall
bears sole responsibility for the accurate representation of any
property lines and in the event information presented by the
applicant is incorrect, the applicant shall bear all liability for
the correction of the error. An applicant to construct a
retaining wall bears sole responsibility to ensure that the
proposed retaining wall is properly engineered and designed to
serve the purpose for which it is intended.
A. Customary home occupations including professional offices or studios
are permitted as an accessory use subject to the following provisions:
(1) Such use shall be located in a single dwelling unit or in a building
accessory to the dwelling unit and provided those persons residing
in said dwelling are involved in the home occupation and not more
than two other persons.
(2) Such use shall not display or create any exterior evidence of the
home occupation other than one unanimated, nonilluminated flat
sign having an area of not more than four square feet.
(3) Only one customary home occupation shall be permitted in
conjunction with a single-family dwelling.
§ 205-21 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-22
202:406
§ 205-23. Height regulations. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
§ 205-24. Yard and lot regulations.
(4) Prior to the establishment of each and every customary home
occupation after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be
incumbent upon the owner to adequately document to the Borough
Zoning Officer the kind, location and magnitude of such customary
home occupation and obtain a certificate of occupancy.
(5) Where off-street parking spaces are required for the principal use,
two additional parking spaces shall be provided for the customary
home occupation.
(6) The occupation is secondary and incidental to the principal
residential use.
B. Private outdoor swimming pools shall be permitted as an accessory use
subject to the following:
(1) Such pool may be erected in the required rear yard but not in the
required side or front yard.
(2) The edge of such pool shall not be located closer than 15 feet to any
lot line.
(3) Any such pool with a surface area of 150 feet or more, or a depth in
excess of two feet, shall be completely surrounded by a fence or
wall that is not less than four feet in height. All gates or doors
opening through said fence shall be erected, maintained and
provided with a self-closing, self-locking gate to prevent
unauthorized use of the pool and to prevent accidents. However, if
said pool is located more than 3 1/2 feet above the ground level,
then a fence is not required provided that all points of access to
said pool are adequately protected by a self closing, self-locking
gate.
(4) A building permit and certificate of occupancy shall be required for
swimming pools.
A. Where a lot has frontage on two or more streets or other public rightsof-
way, the limitation shall apply only as measured from the curb level
along the street or way with a higher elevation above sea level.
B. Chimneys, flues, towers, spires, cupola domes, pole masts, and
antennas shall be exempt from the height limitations of this chapter.
A. On corner lots.
(1) Front yards are required on both streets' frontages, and one yard
other than the front yard shall be deemed to be a rear yard, and
other (or others) side yards.
§ 205-22 YARD SALES § 205-24
202:407
§ 205-25. Parking regulations.
(2) No obstructions to vision in any district other than the (CC)
Community Commercial District exceeding 30 inches in height
above curb level shall be erected or maintained within a thirty-foot
clear sight triangle formed by the center line of intersecting
streets.
B. Front yard exception. No proposed principal or accessory building need
have a setback greater than the average of the existing dwellings
located within 50 feet on each side of the adjacent lot line of the
proposed dwelling, in the same side of the street, within the same
block, and the same district.
C. Projections into required yards. Open patios may be located in side and
rear yards provided, if located closer than 10 feet to any adjacent
property line, they shall be screened in accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
D. Existing small lots. A lot owned individually and separately and
separated in ownership from any adjoining tracts of land on the
effective date of this chapter, which has a total lot area or dimension(s)
less than prescribed in this chapter, may be used, provided such lot
shall be developed in conformity with all applicable district regulations
other than the minimum lot area and setback requirements. Existing
small lots meeting the above stipulations shall comply with the
following:
(1) Side yard shall be minimum of five feet.
(2) Rear yard shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
(3) Front yard shall be in accordance with Subsection B, if applicable,
and, otherwise, shall be a minimum of 10 feet.
E. Through lots. Where a lot extends through from street to street, the
applicable front yard regulation shall apply on both street frontages.
However, in the event of a complete system of through lots which are
designed for reversed frontage, the front yard need only be along the
more minor street of the subdivision.
F. Waiver of yards. No side yard or rear yard shall be required for
commercial or industrial uses when such yard abuts an operating
railroad right-of-way.
A. Parking requirements. Accessory off-street parking spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the applicable provisions of Article IV and
elsewhere in this chapter. Reasonable and appropriate off-street
parking requirements listed in Article IV shall be determined by the
Planning Commission upon consideration of all factors entering into the
parking needs of each such use.
§ 205-24 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-25
202:408
§ 205-26. Off-street loading requirements.
Off-street loading berths open or enclosed shall be permitted as an
accessory use to commercial and industrial principal uses subject to the
following minimum provisions:
B. Areas computed as parking spaces. Areas which may be computed as
open or enclosed off-street parking spaces include any private garage,
carport or other area available for parking, other than a street or
driveway. However, a driveway within a required front yard for a onefamily
or two-family residence may count as two parking spaces.
C. Size of spaces. Minimum parking stall width shall be nine feet; length
shall be 18 feet. All parking aisles shall have a minimum width of 25 feet
for ninety-degree parking, and a minimum width of 20 feet for two-way
angle parking. One-way angle parking shall have a minimum aisle width
of 15 feet.
D. Circulation. All dead-end parking lots shall be designed to provide
sufficient backup area for the end stalls. Parking areas shall be
designed so that each vehicle may proceed without requiring the
moving of any other vehicle. In no case shall commercial parking areas
be designed to require or encourage vehicles to back onto a public
street.
E. Access. Unobstructed access to and from a street or alley shall be
provided. The width of entrance or exit drives shall be a minimum of 15
feet for one-way use only and a minimum of 25 feet for two-way use. No
entrance or exit for any multiple dwelling, commercial or industrial
parking area shall be located within 50 feet of any street intersection.
F. Drainage and surfacing. All parking areas shall be surfaced with an
asphaltic or Portland cement or similar durable and dustless surface
and shall be so graded and drained to dispose of all surface water
anticipated within the area. Surface materials shall be subject to
Borough approval.
G. Screening and setbacks for multifamily, highway commercial, and
industrial uses. No parking area shall be closer than 10 feet to the
principal multiple dwelling, highway commercial or industrial building
or to the side or rear lot line. Parking areas shall be physically
separated from any public cartway by a minimum of a five foot planting
strip and in no case shall parking areas be designed to require or
encourage vehicles to back into the public street.
H. Location. Parking areas planned and designed to serve a permitted use
shall be located in the same district as the permitted use. Ingress and
egress for a parking area shall also be located in the same district as the
permitted principal use which it serves.
A. Size of spaces. Each loading berth shall be at least 12 feet wide, 33 feet
long, and 14 feet high.
§ 205-25 YARD SALES § 205-26
202:409
§ 205-27. Sign regulations. [Amended 5-7-1984; 2-1-1988 by Ord.
No. 88-01; 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2; 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-8; 4-3-2006 by Ord. No. 2006-04; 4-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
Signs may be erected and maintained only when in compliance with the
following provisions:
B. Location and access. Unobstructed access, at least 15 feet wide, to and
from a street shall be provided. Such access may be combined with
access to a parking lot. All permitted or required loading berths shall be
on the same lot and same district as the use to which they are
accessory. No entrance or exit for any off-street loading area shall be
located within 50 feet of any street intersection. No off-street loading
berth shall be located in any front yard or within 10 feet of any side or
rear yard which adjoins a residential district boundary or existing
residential use.
A. General regulations applying to all signs.
(1) Signs must be constructed of durable materials, maintained in good
condition, and not allowed to become dilapidated.
(2) Signs shall not be placed in such a position that they will cause
danger to traffic on a street by obscuring the view.
(3) No sign, except for a scoreboard permitted electronic message
center, shall be permitted which rotates and/or causes interruption
or flashing of light. Any illuminated sign shall be illuminated with a
steady, stationary, and shielded light directed solely onto the sign
without causing glare so that only the illumination of the sign,
rather than the source of lights, is visible.
(4) Abandoned or outdated signs. Signs advertising a use no longer in
existence shall be removed within 30 days of the cessation of such
use. If the owner of a property does not remove such sign within 30
days after receiving a written notice from the Zoning Officer, the
sign may be removed by the Borough at the expense of the property
owner. [Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(5) Billboards or similar outdoor advertising signs, except
scoreboards, which advertise products or businesses not connected
with the site or building shall comply with the requirements of
§ 205-27.1 of this chapter.
(6) Signs placed on the roof of a building shall be prohibited except in
the (HC) Highway Commercial and (I) Industrial districts. No sign
shall be attached to a utility pole, except by a utility or government
agency. No sign shall be attached to a tree or governmental- or
municipal-owned infrastructure to include but not be limited to:
stop signs, yield signs, etc. The police officers of the Borough of
Greencastle, the Zoning Officer, his/her designee, or the owner of
§ 205-26 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-27
202:410
the utility pole or tree shall have the authority to remove and
dispose of signs attached to a utility pole or tree in the public
right-of-way, or governmental-, or municipal-owned infrastructure
to include but not be limited to: stop signs, yield signs, etc.
[Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(7) Signs erected in violation of these provisions shall be removed
upon written notice of the Borough. Failure to remove such signs
shall constitute a violation of this chapter, and in addition to the
penalties contained herein, the Borough will charge the owner for
the cost of Borough removal of such signs.
(8) Signs or displays visible from a lot line that include any explicit
sexual materials, as defined by 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, as amended,
shall be prohibited. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(9) Signs shall be prohibited that are of such character, form, shape or
color that they imitate or resemble any official traffic sign, signal or
device or that have any characteristics which are likely to confuse
or distract the operator of a motor vehicle on a public street (such
as the prominent use of the word "danger"). [Added 8-3-2015 by
Ord. No. 2015-05]
B. Signs permitted in all districts. The following signs shall be permitted in
all districts without the necessity to obtain a permit from the Borough:
(1) Real estate signs announcing the sale or rental of the property
where located.
(2) Civic and religious signs or bulletin boards not exceeding 20 square
feet.
(3) Construction signs announcing the architect, engineer and/or
contractor(s) placed upon the property only during the duration of
construction activity and not exceeding 32 square feet.
C. Signs permitted in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(1) Customary home occupation signs, which shall be unanimated and
nonilluminated and shall not exceed an area of four square feet.
(2) Residential development signs not exceeding an area of 32 square
feet and providing only one such sign shall be permitted for each
accessway into the residential development.
(3) Signs used as accessory to a special exception not exceeding 20
square feet in area and providing only one such sign shall be
permitted for each special exception.
D. Signs permitted in (CC) Community Commercial Districts.
(1) Only one sign for each street frontage shall be permitted for each
commercial use, except that awning signs shall also be permitted,
§ 205-27 YARD SALES § 205-27
202:411
provided that the awning sign does not exceed 50% of the face of
the awning. [Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(2) Hereafter, signs may project beyond the property line abutting a
street, providing the overhanging sign is not less than eight feet
above the sidewalk and at least three feet horizontal from the
curbline. Overhanging signs shall not project over the cartway of
any street or alley.
(3) No sign shall exceed an area of 20 square feet for commercial uses
with up to 75 feet of street frontage, and no sign shall exceed an
area of 32 square feet for commercial uses with over 75 feet of
street frontage.
(4) No sign shall be placed so that its height measured from the base of
the building where located exceeds 20 feet.
(5) Sandwich board signs shall be permitted subject to the following:
(a) Sign is not in a location that would interfere with pedestrian
traffic, emergency access or parking spaces and retains a fivefoot-
wide minimum clearance path for pedestrians, and such
sign is kept as close to the building's facade as feasible.
[Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(b) A sandwich board may only be displayed during business
hours, and said sandwich board sign must be removed at the
close of business each day. A sandwich board sign must be
stored inside a building or structure during non-business
hours.
(c) Any sandwich board sign must be no greater than four feet in
height and three feet in width per side.
(d) Only one sandwich board sign is permitted per business or
entity, except any business or entity that faces two public
streets or rights-of-way is permitted to have one sandwich
board sign located on each public street or right-of-way located
immediately adjacent to the business or entity. In no event
shall a business or entity be permitted to have more than two
sandwich board signs.
(e) The owner of a sandwich board sign shall place and locate a
sandwich board sign in a manner that will not cause any
damage to any person and/or property. The owner of a
sandwich board sign assumes any and all liabilities associated
with and/or related to said sandwich board sign, indirectly and/
or directly, including but not limited to any damage to person
and/or property. By placing a sandwich board sign in the
Borough, the owner of such sandwich board sign agrees to
indemnify the Borough of Greencastle from any and all
damages, claims, costs and/or expenses associated with any
§ 205-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-27
202:412
damage to any person and/or property, caused by and/or
related to, indirectly and/or directly, a sandwich board sign.
E. Signs permitted in (HC) Highway Commercial, (I) Industrial and (CC-II)
Community Commercial-II Districts.
(1) Business identification signs shall be permitted subject to the
following:
(a) Specific district requirements. [Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord.
No. 2015-05]
[1] In the (I) Industrial, (CC-II) Community Commercial-II, and
(HC) Highway Commercial districts, not more than one
sign attached to and parallel with the premises facing each
street shall be permitted. The size of such sign shall not
exceed 96 square feet or 10% of the surface area of the
front of the building, whichever is greater.
[2] In the (HC) Highway Commercial District:
[a] For a single use housed in a single building with at
least 500 lineal feet of frontage upon a street, no more
than:
[i] Two business identification signs attached to and
parallel with the premises facing each street shall
be permitted not to exceed 96 square feet each;
and
[ii] Additional service identification signs, provided
that the total signage of the two business
identification signs and the service identifications
signs together do not exceed 5% of the surface
area of the front of the building.
[b] For any other use (single uses with less than 500 lineal
feet of frontage or any multiple use lot, not including
shopping centers), not more than one sign attached to
and parallel with the premises facing each street shall
be permitted. The size of such sign shall not exceed 96
square feet or 10% of the surface area in total of the
surface area of the front of the building.
(b) Additionally, not more than one freestanding sign shall be
permitted for each street frontage of 100 feet, and an
additional freestanding sign shall be permitted for each
additional 100 feet of frontage or faction thereof. The size of
such sign shall not exceed 96 square feet nor exceed the height
limitation of 25 feet. If the permitted freestanding sign area is
not used, such sign area may be added to the permitted wall
sign area; provided, however, that the wall sign shall not
§ 205-27 YARD SALES § 205-27
202:413
exceed 10% of the surface area of the front of the building. An
auto service station may also include an additional 24 square
feet of sign area to display fuel prices. [Amended 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(c) No sign shall be located in the established right-of-way of any
street.
(d) Additionally, awning signs shall be permitted, provided that the
awning sign does not exceed 50% of the face of the awning and
provided that awning signs for uses subject to Subsection
E(1)(a)[2] shall be included in calculating the total signage for
the use, which shall not exceed 5% of the surface area of the
front of the building. [Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(2) Signs located in shopping centers shall be subject to the following:
(a) There shall be only one freestanding sign per road frontage
which shall be designed and used for the purpose of
announcing the shopping center. Such sign shall not exceed 96
square feet nor exceed a height limitation of 25 feet.
(b) Individual tenant business identification signs shall not exceed
96 square feet and in total (all tenant business identification
signs in the shopping center) shall not exceed 10% of the
surface area of the front of the building. [Amended 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-05]
(3) Sandwich board signs shall be permitted in the (CC-II) Community
Commercial-II and (HC) Highway Commercial Districts, and not in
the (I) Industrial District, subject to the following:
(a) A sandwich board sign must be located at either the facade of
the building where the business or entity is located or at the
curb immediately adjacent to the building where the business
or entity is located and in a manner that said sandwich board
sign is not intruding into any state right-of-way; provided,
however, that said sandwich board sign must be located in a
manner that it provides at least five feet of unobstructed
clearance for pedestrians to use any sidewalk or other walkway
in the Borough of Greencastle and must not obstruct the view
of any individual operating a motor vehicle within the Borough
of Greencastle.
(b) A sandwich board may only be displayed during business
hours, and said sandwich board sign must be removed at the
close of business each day. A sandwich board sign must be
stored inside a building or structure during non-business
hours.
(c) Any sandwich board sign must be no greater than four feet in
height and three feet in width per side.
§ 205-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-27
202:414
(d) Only one sandwich board sign is permitted per business or
entity, except any business or entity that faces two public
streets or rights-of-way is permitted to have one sandwich
board sign located on each public street or right-of-way located
immediately adjacent to the business or entity. In no event
shall a business or entity be permitted to have more than two
sandwich board signs.
(e) The owner of a sandwich board sign shall place and locate a
sandwich board sign in a manner that will not cause any
damage to any person and/or property. The owner of a
sandwich board sign assumes any and all liabilities associated
with and/or related to said sandwich board sign, indirectly and/
or directly, including but not limited to any damage to person
and/or property. By placing a sandwich board sign in the
Borough, the owner of such sandwich board sign agrees to
indemnify the Borough of Greencastle from any and all
damages, claims, costs and/or expenses associated with any
damage to any person and/or property, caused by and/or
related to, indirectly and/or directly, a sandwich board sign.
F. Information kiosk signs are permitted in the (CC) Community
Commercial, (CC-II) Community Commercial-II, and (HC) Highway
Commercial Districts.
G. Electronic message center signs are permitted in the (HC) Highway
Commercial and (CC-II) Community Commercial-II Districts.
H. Signs permitted in all districts. The following sign shall be permitted in
all districts:
(1) Scoreboard in compliance with Subsection J below.
I. Permit requirements. All signs, with the exception of those signs
specifically identified in Subsection B, and signs placed in the windows
of permitted commercial uses are subject to Borough permit
requirements prior to installation or erection.
J. Scoreboard requirements. All signs which are determined to be a
scoreboard shall meet the following regulations:
(1) Size. Such signs shall have a total maximum size area of 500 square
feet with a maximum height off the ground of eight feet.
(2) Primary purpose. The primary purpose of such signs shall be to
transmit the time and/or score and/or other relevant information
regarding such athletic information or any other event taking place
to the spectators at the event.
(3) Accessory use. Such signs shall be permitted to have an accessory
use of advertising for off-premises business and/or entities;
§ 205-27 YARD SALES § 205-27
202:415
§ 205-27.1. Outdoor advertising signs. [Added 4-3-2006 by Ord. No.
2006-04]
Outdoor advertising signs may be authorized by special exception upon a
finding that compliance with the requirements of this Chapter, as well as
the following specific criteria, have been established by the applicant:
provided, however, that such accessory use shall be limited to 25%
of the total sign area.
(4) Sign illumination. Such sign shall be permitted to externally
illuminate by electricity, gas or other artificial light, including
reflective or phosphorescent light; provided, however, that any
illumination shall include lighting devices such as any light, string
of lights, or group of lights located or arranged so as to cast
illumination on a sign.
K. Nonconforming signs. Every sign in existence at the time this article
becomes effective, which does not conform with the provisions herein,
shall be removed, altered, or replaced so as to conform with this article
after any change of use of the property upon which the sign is erected,
upon the change of the name of any business for which the sign is
erected, or upon replacement or alteration of the existing
nonconforming sign.
A. The submission by the applicant of a site development plan, which shall
contain the information, maps, plans and narrative and graphic
materials set forth in the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance62 and this chapter, for the Borough of Greencastle.
B. All lots upon which outdoor advertising signs are to be located must
conform to the area requirements of the Highway Commercial Zoning
District and be located entirely within that zoning district and, in
addition, have frontage on U.S. Route 11 within the Borough.
C. The leased portion of any lot upon which the outdoor advertising is to
be located shall contain a minimum of 5,000 square feet in area.
D. The total area of an outdoor advertising sign face shall be a maximum of
300 square feet, and all portions of any display shall fit within such area
with no extensions beyond the edge of the outdoor advertising sign's
framework. Only one sign face, not exceeding 300 square feet in face
area, may be attached or constructed on each side of a sign.
E. V-shaped billboard and advertising sign structures supported by a
single structure shall be permitted, provided that the angle formed by
the two sides of the advertising sign structure does not exceed 30°.
F. All utility lines serving the outdoor advertising sign, or those extended
to provide such service, must be installed completely underground.
62.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-27 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-27.1
202:416
Such requirement may be waived if the outdoor advertising sign is
powered by nontraditional alternative energy sources (for example,
solar power).
G. All outdoor advertising signs shall be set back from the below described
items as follows:
(1) From a roadway intersection: 500 feet.
(2) From any other outdoor advertising sign, whether such sign is
located in the Borough of Greencastle or otherwise, on the same
side of the roadway: 1,000 feet.
(3) From any other outdoor advertising sign, whether such sign is
located in the Borough of Greencastle or otherwise, on the opposite
side of the roadway: 600 feet.
(4) From the street right-of-way: 50 feet.
H. The maximum height of outdoor advertising signs shall not exceed 25
feet, as measured from the grade of the roadway from which the
advertising message is principally visible, and the bottom edge of the
outdoor advertising sign shall be no more than eight feet above the
elevation of the adjacent roadway, which height shall be sufficient to
prevent unauthorized access upon the outdoor advertising sign.
I. A buffer yard shall be required between outdoor advertising signs and
any adjacent lot(s). Such buffer yard shall be a minimum of 40 feet.
J. The land area utilized for an outdoor advertising sign shall not be
otherwise required to support another underlying use upon such lot,
including but not limited to buffer yard, parking area or setback
necessary to any preexisting use upon such lot.
K. All displays on the face of outdoor advertising signs shall be stationary.
Animated, sequential, flashing, moving, rotating, revolving, or
oscillating or otherwise nonstationary signs or displays shall be
prohibited.
L. Except as otherwise specifically provided within this subsection,
illumination of outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the
requirements of § 205-28.
M. Illumination of the display shall be designed so that it shall be focused
on the face of the display itself, so as to prevent glare upon the
surrounding area. All sources of illumination shall be external and
equipped with shields to prevent spillage of light off the display.
N. Except as otherwise may be specified herein, all development of
outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the land development
standards contained in the Borough of Greencastle Subdivision and
Land Development Ordinance63 and this Chapter
§ 205-27.1 YARD SALES § 205-27.1
202:417
§ 205-28. Lighting requirements. [Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No.
2005-8]
The following standards shall apply to the design and operation of outdoor
lighting (for example, artificial illuminating devices, installed or portable,
used for floodlighting or general illumination) for multifamily dwellings,
commercial and industrial uses:
O. Outdoor advertising signs, including any and all supporting structures
thereof, shall be dismantled and removed from the premises upon
which they are located within 180 days of the cessation of use.
P. Outdoor advertising signs shall be constructed to all applicable
structural standards for such devices, and all applications for the
special exception approval shall verify compliance with such standards
as documented and sealed by a registered engineer.
Q. Outdoor advertising signs shall be maintained by their owner in a state
of repair so that they are as safe and as functional as when originally
installed.
R. No outdoor advertising sign shall be constructed or erected until an
applicant thereof has made an application for same, which shall include
a copy of a written lease for use of the land if the applicant is not the
owner thereof, and paid the applicable fee thereof, as set by separate
ordinance or resolution of the Borough of Greencastle, and received a
permit thereof from the Borough.
S. Billboard signs shall be permitted only if the provisions of the Outdoor
Advertising Control Act of 1971, Act 160, 36 P.S. § 2718.101 et seq.,
have been met.
T. Before any outdoor advertising signs are erected, the appropriate state
and/or federal permits that are required for the erection of a billboard
shall be obtained and copies of the same shall be filed at the Borough
Office prior to issuance of a signed permit by the Borough.
A. Light fixtures or lamps shall be shielded in such manner as to direct all
light toward the earth's surface and away from reflective surfaces.
B. Light fixtures or lamps shall be shielded in such manner as to direct
incident rays away from all adjacent property.
C. Light fixtures or lamps on poles shall not exceed the height of the
building whose area they illuminate, or 15 feet, whichever is less.
D. Light fixtures or lamps shall not shine toward any street, adjacent
residential district, residential use or into the night sky.
63.Editor's Note: See Ch. 180, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 205-27.1 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-28
202:418
E. Light-emitting surfaces of light fixtures or lamps shall not be visible
when viewed from the ground, from any street, residential district or
residential use.
§ 205-28 YARD SALES § 205-28
202:419

ARTICLE VI
Nonconforming Uses and Buildings
§ 205-29. Definitions and use provisions.
§ 205-30. Expansion and change of nonconforming uses.
A. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or building or part
thereof manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use
provisions contained in this chapter or its subsequent amendment
where such structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this
chapter or amendment. Such nonconforming structures include, but
are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, or
both, which does not comply with the applicable use provisions of this
chapter or its subsequent amendments, where such use was lawfully in
existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment.
B. Use provisions. Any nonconforming use of land or structure or
combination thereof may be continued subject to the following:
(1) Shall not be moved to another location where such use would be
nonconforming.
(2) Shall not be changed to another nonconforming use without special
exception approval by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with § 205-30 herein.
(3) Shall not be reestablished unless in accordance with § 205-31, if
such use has been discontinued for a period of one year or more.
A. Procedure. Any nonconforming use of structure or land or combination
thereof may be expanded or changed only upon approval of the Zoning
Hearing Board after a special use hearing as defined elsewhere in this
chapter.
B. Standards. Each application for an expansion or change of a
nonconforming use shall be subject to the following standards:
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the applicant to sufficiently
document to the Zoning Hearing Board that the proposed
expansion or change will not be contrary to the purposes of this
chapter and the public health, safety, and welfare of municipal
residents, in general, and of the residents of the immediate area, in
particular.
(2) That such expansion or change is not extended beyond the lot lines
existing on the date of this chapter or its subsequent amendments
were adopted.
§ 205-29 YARD SALES § 205-30
202:421
§ 205-31. Discontinuance.
Any person desiring to temporarily discontinue a nonconforming use may
do so, and may resume the same use within one year after such
discontinuance, provided such person has notified the Borough in writing
of his intention to do so within 30 days after the use is discontinued. A
discontinued use will not be deemed to be resumed unless such use is
operated on a regular basis for six months after such resumption begins.
§ 205-32. Repairs and maintenance.
Notwithstanding any of the above regulations, nothing in this article shall
be deemed to prevent normal maintenance and repair of any nonconforming
use or structure.
§ 205-33. Registration of nonconforming uses.
The Borough Zoning Officer shall identify and register all lawful uses
existing at the effective date of this chapter which do not conform to the
requirements set forth in this chapter, or any amendments thereto. Such
registration shall be carried out within 90 days of the effective date of this
chapter, or any amendments thereto.
(3) That such expansion or change shall comply with the applicable
yard and setback requirements of the district where located.
(4) Any person seeking permission to change a nonconforming use to
any other nonconforming use, shall sufficiently document to the
Zoning Hearing Board that such new nonconforming use is more in
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter than the
present nonconforming use.
(5) The Zoning Hearing Board may attach additional provisions to the
granting of a special use permit or expand or change a
nonconforming use for the purpose of promoting the objectives and
intent of this chapter.
§ 205-30 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-33
202:422
ARTICLE VII
Enforcement
§ 205-34. Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 205-35. Building permits. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
No building in any district shall be erected, reconstructed or restored, or
structurally altered, without a building permit duly issued upon application
to the Borough. No building permit shall be issued unless the proposed
A. For the administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer, who shall not
hold any elective office in the Borough, shall be appointed.
B. The Zoning Officer shall meet the qualifications established by the
Borough and shall be able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Borough a working knowledge of municipal zoning.
C. The Zoning Officer shall administer this chapter in accordance with its
literal terms, and shall not have the power to permit any construction or
any use or change of use which does not conform to this chapter.
D. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
E. The Zoning Officer or his duly authorized assistant(s) shall have the
right to enter any building or enter upon any land at any reasonable
hour as necessary in the execution of their duties, provided that:
(1) The Zoning Officer shall notify the owner and tenant before
conducting any inspection.
(2) The Zoning Officer or his duly authorized assistant(s) shall display
identification signed by the Borough Council upon commencing an
inspection.
(3) Inspections shall be commenced in the presence of the owner or his
representative or tenant.
F. The Zoning Officer shall maintain files, open to the public, of all
applications for certificates of occupancy and building permits along
with plans submitted therewith as well as final certificates and permits.
G. The Zoning Officer shall also maintain records, open to the public, of
every complaint of a violation of the provisions of this chapter as well as
action taken as a result of such complaints.
H. The Zoning Officer shall submit to the Borough Council, for insertion in
the Council's minutes, a written report summarizing for the month all
building permits and certificates of occupancy issued by him as well as
complaints of violations and action taken as a result of such complaints.
§ 205-34 YARD SALES § 205-35
202:423
construction or use is in full conformity with all the provisions of this
chapter. Any building permit issued in violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall be null and void and of no effect, without the necessity
for any proceedings or revocations or nullification thereof; and any work
undertaken or use established pursuant to any such permit shall be
unlawful.
§ 205-36. Certificate of occupancy.
A. No building permit shall be issued for the construction or alteration of
any building upon a lot without the required minimum lot width on an
ordained public street or highway.
B. No building permit shall be issued for a building to be used for any
variance or for any special exception in any district where such use is
allowed only by approval of the applicable Borough agency unless and
until such approval has been duly granted.
C. The Borough shall, within 10 days after the filing of a complete and
properly prepared application, either issue or deny a building permit. If
a building permit is denied, the Borough shall state in writing to the
applicant the reasons for such denial.
D. Every building permit shall expire if the work authorized has not
commenced within three months after the date of issuance, or has not
been completed within 18 months from such date for construction
costing less than $1,000,000 and has not been completed within 36
months from such date for construction costing in excess of such
amount. If no zoning amendments or other codes or regulations
affecting subject property have been enacted in the interim, the
Borough may authorize in writing the extension of either above periods
of an additional six months, following which no further work is to be
undertaken without a new building permit.
E. As soon as the foundation of a building or of any addition to an existing
building is laid off, and before first story framing or wall construction is
begun, there shall be filed with the Borough an accurate survey signed
by the person responsible for said survey, showing the exact location of
such foundation with respect to the street and property lines of the lot.
A. The following shall be unlawful until a certificate of occupancy shall
have been applied for and issued by the Borough:
(1) Occupancy and use of a building erected, reconstructed, restored,
structurally altered, moved, or any change in use of an existing
building.
(2) Occupancy, use or any change in the use of any land.
(3) Any change in the use of nonconforming uses.
§ 205-35 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-36
202:424
§ 205-37. Fees. [Amended 5-7-1984; 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
B. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any special exception of
a building or of land requiring special exception approval by the Zoning
Hearing Board or for any land or use requiring site development plan
approval by the Commission unless and until such special exception or
site development plan approval has been duly granted. Every certificate
of occupancy for which special exception or site development plan
approval has been granted or in connection with which a variance has
been granted by the Zoning Hearing Board shall contain a detailed
statement of any condition to which the same is subject.
C. On a form furnished by the Borough, application for a certificate of
occupancy for a new building, or for an existing building which has
been altered, shall be made after the erection of such building or part
thereof has been completed in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter and in the case of a new building shall be accompanied by an
accurate plot plan or, if not available, by a survey prepared by a
licensed land surveyor or, engineer showing the location of all buildings
as built.
D. If the proposed use is in conformity with the provisions of this chapter
and of all other applicable codes and ordinances, a certificate of
occupancy for the use of vacant land or for a change of use by a
nonconforming use, shall be issued by the Borough within 15 days after
receipt of a properly completed application. If a certificate of occupancy
is denied, the Borough shall state the reasons in writing to the
applicant.
E. A certificate of occupancy shall be deemed to authorize, and is required
for both initial occupancy and the continuance of occupancy and use of
the building or land to which it applies.
F. Upon written request by the owner, and upon fee payment, the Borough
shall, after inspection, issue a certificate of occupancy for any building
or use thereof or of land existing at the time of the adoption of this
chapter, certifying such use and whether or not the same and the
building conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
G. A record of all certificates of occupancy shall be kept by the Borough
and copies shall be furnished, on request, to any agency of the Borough
or to any persons having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the
building or land affected.
A. The Borough Council shall establish by resolution a schedule of fees,
charges and expenses and collection procedures for zoning permits,
occupancy permits, special exceptions, variances and appeals, and
other matters pertaining to this chapter. The schedule of fees shall be
posted in the office of the Zoning Officer and may be altered or
amended only by the Borough Council.
§ 205-36 YARD SALES § 205-37
202:425
§ 205-38. Causes of action. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval
of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner
or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent,
in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting
a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant,
notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior
to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has
been given.
§ 205-39. Enforcement notice. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
B. No action shall be taken on any application or appeal until all
application fees, charges and expenses have been paid in full.
A. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
§ 205-37 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-39
202:426
§ 205-40. Violations and penalties. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No.
1995-2]
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus
all court costs, including reasonable attorney fees incurred by the
Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the District Justice. If the defendant neither pays nor timely
appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant
to the applicable rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless the District
Justice determining that there has been a violation further determines
that there was a good-faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was no
such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have been only
one such violation until the fifth day following the date of the
determination of a violation by the District Justice and thereafter each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. District Justices shall have initial jurisdiction over proceedings brought
under this section.
§ 205-39 YARD SALES § 205-40
202:427

ARTICLE VIII
Zoning Hearing Board.
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 205-41. Creation; membership; powers and duties.
A. There is hereby created for the Borough a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
B. The membership of the Board shall consist of three residents of the
Borough appointed by resolution by the Borough Council. The terms of
office shall be for three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office
of one member shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify
the Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term. Members
of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.
C. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Borough Council which appointed the member, taken after the member
has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
D. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
E. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the
Commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Borough and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the
Borough Council.
F. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Borough Council.
§ 205-41 YARD SALES § 205-42
202:429
§ 205-42. Hearings.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and made decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
A. Notice of all Zoning Hearing Board hearings shall be provided as
follows: [Amended 3-2-2009 by Ord. No. 2009-01]
(1) Public notice: Public notice, as defined herein, shall be given and
written notice shall be given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer,
Borough Council and to any person who has made timely request
for the same.
(2) Delivery of notice: Notice should be given by personal delivery or
by regular first-class mail, not less than seven days prior to the
scheduled hearing, to the last known owners of record of property
within a two-hundred-foot radius of the lot lines of the subject
property.
(3) Posting: In addition to the written notice provided herein, written
notice of said hearing shall be posted on the affected tract of land in
a conspicuous place, as determined by the Zoning Enforcement
Officer, at least seven days prior to the hearing.
B. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no decision is
called for, the findings shall be made by the Board, however, the
appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
§ 205-42 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-42
202:430
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
I. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from their solicitor,
unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of
the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said decision within
§ 205-42 YARD SALES § 205-42
202:431
§ 205-43. Jurisdiction.
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
K. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other person who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
L. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to
§§ 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and
10916.1.
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the Borough and a Zoning Hearing Board has not been
previously established, the appeal raising procedural questions
shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease-and-desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(4) Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to § 910.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
§ 205-42 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-43
202:432
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 912.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under § 916.2 of
the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq.
B. The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the MPC pursuant to the provisions of § 702 of
the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10702.
(2) All applications pursuant to § 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10508, for
approval of subdivisions or land developments under Article V of
the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter.
(4) Applications for curative amendment to this chapter or pursuant to
§§ 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and
10916.1(a).
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq. Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the
Zoning Officer or the Borough Engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable land
use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection
§ 205-43 YARD SALES § 205-43
202:433
§ 205-44. Variances.
shall be to the Planning Commission and all appeals from the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be to court.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may by rule prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
C. Variance procedures and requirements. Requests for variances within
an identified floodplain area shall be considered by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the following: [Added 1-3-2012 by Ord. No.
2012-0364]
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-18-2012.
§ 205-43 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-44
202:434
§ 205-45. Special exceptions.
(1) No variance shall be granted for any construction, development,
use or activity within any floodway area that would cause any
increase in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(2) Except for a possible modification of the freeboard requirements
involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development which may
endanger human life.
(3) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(4) In granting any variance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare,
and to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(5) Whenever a variance is granted, the Zoning Hearing Board shall
notify the applicant in writing that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(6) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Zoning Hearing Board
shall consider, but not be limited to the following:
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood elevations,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimization of
the public or conflict with any other applicable local or state
ordinance and regulations.
(d) Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall
be designed and constructed so as to have the capability of
resisting the one-hundred-year flood.
(7) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a report of
all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
A. Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated special
exceptions to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board
§ 205-44 YARD SALES § 205-45
202:435
pursuant to express standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and
decide requests for such special exceptions in accordance with such
standards and criteria. In granting a special exception, the Board may
attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those
expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
B. Review factors for special exceptions in floodplain districts. [Added
1-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0365]
(1) In reviewing applications for special exceptions in floodplain
districts, as permitted by the Floodplain Management Ordinance66
or the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
all relevant factors and procedures specific in other sections of the
Zoning Ordinance and:
(a) The danger to life and property due to increased flood
elevations or velocities caused by encroachments.
(b) The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands or
downstream to the injury of others.
(c) The proposed water supply and sanitation systems and the
ability of these systems to prevent disease, contamination, and
unsanitary conditions.
(d) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owners.
(e) The importance of the services provided by the proposed
facility to the community.
(f) The requirements of the facility for a waterfront location.
(g) The availability of alternative locations not subject to flooding
for the proposed use.
(h) The compatibility of the proposed use with existing
development and development anticipated in the foreseeable
future.
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive
plan and floodplain management program for the area.
(j) The safety of access to the property in time of flood of ordinary
and emergency vehicles.
65.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-18-2012.
66.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Floodplain Management.
§ 205-45 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-45
202:436
§ 205-46. Time limitations.
(k) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the flood waters expected at the site.
(l) Such other factors which are relevant to the purposes of this
chapter.
(2) Supplemental technical review. The Zoning Hearing Board may
refer any application and accompanying documentation pertaining
to any request for a special exception to any engineer or other
qualified persons or agency for technical assistance in evaluating
the proposed project in relation to flood heights and velocities, and
the adequacy of the plans for protection and other related matters.
(3) Conditions for approving special exceptions.
(a) Special exceptions shall only be issued after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the granting of such will
not result in:
[1] Unacceptable or prohibited increases in flood heights;
[2] Additional threats to public safety;
[3] Extraordinary public expense;
[4] The creation of nuisances;
[5] Any fraud or victimization of the public; or
[6] Any conflict with local laws or ordinances.
(b) No special exception shall be granted for any proposed use,
development, or activity within any floodway district (FW) that
will cause any increase in flood elevations.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Borough if such
proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any
manner unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If
such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision on
a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer on a
challenge to the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto or map
or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final approval
except in the case where the final submission substantially deviates
from the approved tentative approval.
§ 205-45 YARD SALES § 205-46
202:437
§ 205-47. Stay of proceedings.
§ 205-48. Parties appellant before Board.
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code), procedural questions or alleged defects
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorney
fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 205-46 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-48
202:438
in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or from
the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor,
the issuance of any cease-and-desist order or the registration or refusal
to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a determination
by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination of any
officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of
development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter; from
the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development, may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 205-48 YARD SALES § 205-48
202:439

ARTICLE IX
Planning Commission
§ 205-49. Compliance.
Nothing in this chapter shall relieve the owner or his agent, the developer,
or the applicant for either a special exception permit or a site development
plan approval from receiving a subdivision plan approval in accordance with
the Borough Subdivision Ordinance (Chapter 180), if any.
§ 205-50. Approval of site development plans. [Amended 5-7-1984;
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
In all cases where this chapter requires approval of site development plans
by the Commission, no building permit shall be issued except upon
authorization of and in conformity with the plans approved by the
Commission.
A. Objectives. In considering and acting upon site development plans the
Commission shall take into consideration the public health, safety and
welfare, the comfort and convenience of the public in general and of the
residents of the immediate neighborhood in particular, and may
prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards as may be required in
order that the result of its action may, to the maximum extent possible,
further the express intent of this chapter and the accomplishment of the
following objectives in particular:
(1) Traffic access. That all proposed traffic access and ways are
adequate but not excessive in number; adequate in width, grade,
alignment and visibility; not located too near street corners or
other places of public assembly; and other similar safety
considerations.
(2) Circulation and parking. That adequate off-street parking and
loading spaces are provided to prevent parking in public streets of
vehicles of any person connected with or visiting the use and that
the interior circulation system is adequate to provide safe
accessibility to all required off-street parking lots.
(3) Landscaping and screening. That all playground, parking and
service areas are reasonably screened all seasons of the year from
the view of adjacent residential lots and streets and that the
general landscaping of the site is in character with that generally
prevailing in the neighborhood. Existing trees over four inches in
diameter measured 4 1/2 feet above the average ground level shall
be retained to the maximum extent possible.
(4) Illumination. The lighting from the installation of outdoor flood or
spot lighting and illuminated signs will be properly shielded so that
such lighting will not adversely affect any abutting property or
public street.
§ 205-49 YARD SALES § 205-50
202:441
B. Procedure.
(1) Presubmission conference. Prior to the submission of a site
development plan, the applicant shall meet in person with the
Commission. The purpose of such conference shall be to discuss
proposed uses or development in order to determine which of the
site development plan elements listed in Subsection D shall be
submitted to the Commission in order for said Commission to
determine conformity with the provisions and intent of this chapter.
(2) Submission to commission. Within three months following the
presubmission conference, the site development plan and any
related information shall be submitted to the Commission in four
copies at least 30 days prior to the Commission meeting at which
approval is requested. If not submitted within this three-month
period another presubmission compliance shall be required.
(3) Referral to the County Planning and Zoning Commission. Should
any site development plan constitute a subdivision or land
development plan subject to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance (Chapter 180), the procedures in said
ordinance concerning review of said plan by the County Planning
Commission shall then be applicable.
(4) Commission action. The Commission shall act to approve, modify
and approve, or disapprove any such site development plan within
60 days after the meeting at which approval is requested. Failure to
act within 60 days shall be deemed approval. Commission
disapproval shall include written findings upon any site
development plan element found contrary to the provisions or
intent of this chapter.
(5) Conditions and safeguards.
(6) Amendments to a site development plan shall be acted upon in the
same manner as the approval of the original plan.
(7) The Commission may require that site plan approval be periodically
reviewed.
C. Effect of site development plan approval.
(1) No building permit shall be issued for any structure covered by this
section until an approved site development plan or approved
amendment of any such plan has been secured by the applicant
from the Commission.
(2) No certificate of occupancy will be issued for any structure or use
of land covered by this section unless the structure is completed or
the land is developed or used in accordance with an approved site
development plan or approved amendment of any such plan.
§ 205-50 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-50
202:442
D. Site development plan elements. The applicant shall cause a site
development plan map to be prepared by a civil engineer, surveyor, land
planner, architect, or other competent person. Site development plan
elements shall include those listed below which are appropriate to the
proposed development or use as indicated by the Commission in the
presubmission conference:
(1) Legal data.
(a) Lot, block and section number of the property taken from the
latest tax records.
(b) Name and address of the owner of record.
(c) Name and address of person, firm, or organization preparing
map.
(d) Date, North point, and written and graphic scale.
(e) Sufficient description of information to define precisely the
boundaries of the property. All distances shall be in feet and
hundredths of a foot. All angles shall be given to the nearest 10
seconds or closer. The error of closure shall not exceed one in
5,000.
(f) The locations, names, and existing widths of adjacent streets
and curblines.
(g) The locations and owners of all adjoining lands as shown on the
latest tax records.
(h) Location, width, and purpose of all existing and proposed
easements, setbacks, reservations, and areas dedicated to
public use within or adjoining the property.
(i) A complete outline of existing deed restrictions or covenants
applying to the property.
(j) Existing zoning.
(2) Natural features.
(a) Existing contours with intervals of five feet or less, referred to
a datum satisfactory to the Commission.
(b) Approximate boundaries of any area subject to flooding or
stormwater overflows.
(c) Location of existing watercourses, marshes, wooded areas,
rock outcrops, isolated trees with a diameter of four inches or
more, measured 4 1/2 feet above the average ground level, and
other significant existing features.
(d) Soil percolation test results as required by the Commission.
§ 205-50 YARD SALES § 205-50
202:443
(e) Detailed soil survey map as required by the Commission.
(3) Existing structures and utilities on and within 200 feet of the site.
(a) Location of uses and outlines of structures drawn to scale.
(b) Paved areas, sidewalks, and vehicular access.
(c) Locations, dimensions, grades, and flow direction of existing
sewers, culverts, water lines as well as other underground and
aboveground utilities within and adjacent to the property.
(d) Other existing development, including fences, landscaping,
and screening.
(4) Proposed development.
(a) The location of proposed buildings or structural improvements.
(b) The location and design of all uses not requiring structures
such as off-street parking and loading areas.
(c) The location, direction, power and time of use for any proposed
outdoor lighting or public address systems.
(d) The location and plans for any outdoor signs.
(e) The location and arrangement of proposed means of access
and egress, including sidewalks, driveways, or other paved
areas. Profiles indicating grading and cross sections showing
width of roadway, location and width of sidewalks and location
and size of water and sewer lines.
(f) Any proposed grading, screening, and other landscaping
including types and locations of proposed street trees.
(g) The location of all proposed water lines, valves and hydrants,
and of all sewer lines and manholes or alternate means of
water supply and distribution and sewage disposal and
treatment.
(h) An outline of any proposed deed restrictions or covenants.
(i) Any contemplated public improvements on or adjoining the
property.
(j) If the site development plan only indicates a first stage, a
supplementary plan shall indicate ultimate development.
(5) Any other information deemed by the Commission necessary to
determine conformity of the site plan with the intent and
regulations of this chapter.
§ 205-50 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-50
202:444
ARTICLE X
Amendments
[Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
§ 205-51. General procedure.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit the
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit
the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section, and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered, a reference to a place within the Borough where copies of
the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough Council
shall publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven
days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council shall,
at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 205-51 YARD SALES § 205-52
202:445
§ 205-52. Enactment of zoning ordinance amendments.
§ 205-53. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The
procedure for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set
forth in § 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10607, is hereby declared optional.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
such proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Borough Council, the Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to
the county planning agency for recommendations.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the county planning agency.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map, or any provision thereof,
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in § 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10916.1. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and the county planning agency as provided
in § 609 and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as provided in
§§ 610 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609, 10610, and 10916.1.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 908 of the MPC, 53
P.S. § 10908, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing Board
§ 205-52 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-53
202:446
§ 205-54. Procedure for Borough curative amendments.
shall, for purposes of this section, be references to the Borough
Council. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this subsection and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision
shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this entire chapter and
Zoning Map, but only for those provisions which specifically relate to
the landowner's curative amendment and challenge.
C. The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
A. If the Borough determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Borough shall declare by formal action, this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of
such declaration and proposal the Borough Council shall:
(a) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter which may include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
§ 205-53 YARD SALES § 205-54
202:447
[2] Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision;
or
[3] Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the
validity of, this chapter pursuant to the provisions of § 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10609, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A, the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under § 609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a
report requested under §§ 909.1 or 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1
and 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon
the grounds identical or substantially similar to those specified by the
resolution required by Subsection A(1). Upon completion of the
procedures set forth in Subsections A and B, no rights to a cure
pursuant to the provisions of §§ 609.1 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration and
proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Borough, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section,
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if after the date of
declaration and proposal there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
§ 205-54 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-54
202:448
ARTICLE XI
Definitions
§ 205-55. Word usage and interpretation.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning indicated:
§ 205-56. Definitions. [Amended 1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
Other terms or words used herein shall be interpreted or defined as follows:
ACCESSORY — A building or use clearly incidental or subordinate to, and
customary in connection with, and located on the same lot with the principal
building or use.
ADULT BOOKSTORE — Any commercial establishment having as a
substantial or significant portion of its stock-in-trade, including but not
limited to, books, magazines, periodicals, visual representations or writings,
distinguished or characterized by emphasis on matter depicting, describing
or related to specified anatomical areas or to specified sexual activities, or
an establishment with a segment or section devoted to the sale or display of
such materials.
ADULT CABARET — Any commercial establishment substantially engaged
in the presentation of sexual conduct or specified sexual activities as
A. Words in the singular include the plural and those in the plural include
the singular.
B. Words used in the present tense include the future tense.
C. The words "person" and "owner" include a corporation, unincorporated
association and a partnership, or other legal entity, as well as an
individual.
D. The term "occupied" or "used" as applied to any building shall be
construed as though followed by the words "or intended, arranged, or
designed to be occupied or used."
E. The word "building" includes "structure" and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof."
F. The word "lot" includes the word "plot."
G. The word "watercourse" includes channel, creek, ditch, dry run, spring,
stream and river.
H. The words "should" and "may" are permissive; the words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory and directive.
I. The word "erect" shall mean to build, construct, alter, repair, display,
relocate, attach, hang, place, suspend, affix or maintain any structure
or building and shall also include the painting of exterior wall signs.
§ 205-55 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:449
defined in this chapter, or any establishment which has a segment or section
devoted to these presentations.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any commercial establishment
substantially engaged in showing obscene films or films commonly denoted
as "adult films," or an establishment with a segment or section devoted to
the showing of obscene or "adult films."
ADVERTISEMENT — The outdoor display of any writing, printing, picture,
painting, emblem, drawing, sign or similar device intended to invite or draw
the attention to the public to any goods, merchandise, property, business,
service, entertainment, amusement or industrial activity or establishment.
ADVERTISING STRUCTURE — Any rigid or semirigid material with or
without advertisement displayed thereon situated upon or attached to or
which is part of real property for the purpose of furnishing a background,
base surface or support upon which an advertisement may be posted or
displayed outdoors.
ALLEY — See "street."
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock and poultry,
with the intent of producing capital gain, or profit or with the intent of
selling any livestock or poultry products. The keeping of livestock or poultry
as farm pets, or for domestic purpose pursuant to the regulations of this
chapter, shall not be construed as animal husbandry.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
BASEMENT — A story in a building, the structural ceiling level of which is
four feet or more above average level of finished grade where such grade
abuts that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street, and the
floor level of which is below finished grade at any point on the periphery of
the building.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — The use and occupancy of a single-family
detached or semidetached dwelling for accommodating transient guests for
rent within the other requirements of this chapter.[Added 12-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-08]
BLOCK — An area bounded by three or more streets.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.
BOARDINGHOUSE — A residential use in which individual room(s) that do
not meet the definition of a dwelling unit are rented for habitation routinely
for periods of seven consecutive days or longer and that does not meet the
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:450
definition of a hotel, motel, bed-and-breakfast use, group home or nursing
home. A boardinghouse may either involve or not involve the providing of
meals only to residents.[Amended 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Greencastle, Franklin County, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
BUFFER STRIP — A strip of land at least 10 feet in width which may be part
of the minimum setback distance, free of any principal or accessory building
or required improvement other than screening.
BUILDING — Any combination of materials forming any construction,
except where entirely underground, so as to permit the use of the ground
above same as if no building was present; the term "building" shall include
the term "structure" as well as the following:[Amended 12-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-08]
BUILDING AREA — The horizontal area measured around the outside of the
foundation walls plus the floors of roofed porches and roofed terraces, and
including the area of accessory buildings if any. In the case of split-level
dwellings, the first-floor area shall be deemed to include floor areas on two
nonoverlapping levels, separated by a half-story, or less, of height.
BUILDING, FACE OF OR FRONT OF — The outer surface of a building,
which is visible from any private or public street or highway.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance measured from the average
elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest
point of the roof for flat and mansard roofs, and to the mean height between
eave and ridge for other types of roofs.
BUILDING, PRINCIPAL — A building in which is conducted the main or
principal use of the lot on which said building is located.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — The line within a property defining the
minimum required distance between the principal building to be erected,
and an adjacent street right-of-way.
BUSINESS — Any enterprise, occupation, trade or profession engaged in,
either continuously or temporarily, for profit. The term "business" shall
include the occupancy or use of a building or premises or any portion
thereof for the transaction of business or the rendering or receiving of
professional or personal service.
CARTWAY (ROADWAY) — The paved portion of a street right-of-way
intended for vehicular use.
A. Signs.
Radio and television receiving and transmitting towers, except for such
antennas installed on the roof of a building and extending not more
than 20 feet above the highest level of the roof of such building.
B.
C. Porches, outdoor bins and other similar structures.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:451
CELLAR — Any space in a building the structural ceiling level of which is
less than four feet above the average finished grade where such grade abuts
that exterior wall of such building which fronts on any street. A cellar shall
not be considered in determining the permissible number of stories.
CLEAR SIGHT TRIANGLE — An area of unobstructed vision at street
intersections defined by lines of sight between points at a given distance
from the intersection of the street center line.
CLUSTER DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land and/or buildings planned as
a whole for development of single-family dwelling units. Said development
shall permit a reduction of the lot size while at the same time maintaining
the overall density requirements applicable to the district in which said land
is situated and conforming to all other applicable requirements.
COMMERCIAL RESORTS — A business combining lodging, eating and
recreational facilities as a single enterprise and offered to the public.
COMMISSION — The Borough Planning Commission.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — A Comprehensive Plan prepared by the
Borough Planning Commission pursuant to Article III of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code and adopted by the Council, which indicates
the general locations recommended for the various functional classes of
public works, places and structures and for the general physical
development of the Borough, and includes any unit or part of such plan
separately adopted and any amendment to such plan or part thereof.
COUNCIL — The Greencastle Borough Council.
COUNTY — The County of Franklin, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COURT, INNER — An open space enclosed on all sides by exterior walls of
a building.
COURT, OUTER — An open space enclosed on three sides by exterior walls
of a building.
COURT, OUTER, DEPTH OF — The linear average dimension measured
from the unenclosed side of the court to the farthest wall thereof.
COURT, OUTER, WIDTH OF — The linear dimension of the unenclosed side
of the court.
CROP FARMING — The raising and keeping of field, truck and tree crops.
For the purposes of this chapter the term "crop farming" does not include
animal husbandry.
CROSSWALK (INTERIOR WALK) — A publicly or privately owned right-ofway
for pedestrian use extending from a street into a block or across a block
to another street or to a public recreation area.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:452
CURB LEVEL — The officially established grade of the curb in front of the
midpoint of the lot.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Borough lies.
DEDICATION — The deliberate appropriation of land by its owner for any
general and public or limited public use, reserving to himself no other rights
than such as are compatible with the full exercise and enjoyment of the
public uses to which the property has been devoted.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan" when used in this chapter shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
DWELLING — A building or structure designed for living quarters for one or
more families, including homes which are supported either by a foundation
or by blocks or jacks or are otherwise permanently attached to the land. A
travel trailer, a boarding or rooming house, convalescent home, fraternity
or sorority house, hotel, motel, inn, nursing or other similar home, or other
similar structure shall not be deemed to constitute a dwelling.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building used by three or more families
living independently of each other and doing their own cooking including,
for example, apartment house, rowhouse or townhouse.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED — A dwelling used by one family
and having two party walls in common with another dwelling unit, except
for end units which have one party wall. (Example: townhouse.)
A. The Borough Council;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under the subdivision and land development or planned residential
development ordinances. Determinations shall be appealable only to
the boards designated as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
C.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:453
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling used by one family,
having only one dwelling unit and having two side yards. (Example: house.)
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED — A dwelling used by one
family, having one side yard, and one party wall in common with another
dwelling unit. (Example: duplex.)
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY DETACHED — A dwelling used by two families,
with one dwelling unit arranged over the other and having two side yards.
(Example: double house.)
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms used for living and sleeping
purposes and having a kitchen with fixed cooking facilities arranged for
occupancy by one family.
EASEMENT — The authorization by a property owner or authorized agency
of a right-of-way granted, but not dedicated, for limited use of private land
for a public or quasi-public purpose; and within which the owner of the
property shall not erect any permanent structures, but shall have the right
to make any other use of the land which is not inconsistent with the rights
of the grantee.
ENDORSEMENT — The application of a public agency or body's review
stamp and the signature of the chairman or official of said public agency or
body.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration,
maintenance, by public utilities or municipal or other governmental
agencies or private corporations under contract to a municipality, of gas,
electrical, telephone, steam or water transmission or distribution systems,
and sewer and solid waste disposal systems, including buildings,
enclosures, wells, pumping stations, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers,
pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm boxes, police call boxes, traffic light
signals, hydrants, sanitary landfills, incinerator waste disposal areas, and
other similar equipment and accessories and services in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate service by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies or private
corporations under contract to a municipality including firehouses or fire
companies and agencies or emergency services under agreement with the
municipality or for the public health or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — One or more persons occupying a dwelling unit as a single
nonprofit housekeeping unit. More than five persons, exclusive of domestic
servants, not related by blood, marriage, or adoption, shall not be
considered to constitute a family.
FENCE — A man-made barrier placed or arranged as a line of demarcation
between lots or to enclose a lot, or portion thereof, that is constructed
of wood, composite, plastic/PVC, wire mesh, chain-link aluminum and/or
plastic inserts, or any other material which is designed and marketed as
a material suitable for fence construction. Man-made barriers constructed
principally of other materials, including, but not limited to, brick, concrete
or cinder block, shall be considered a wall. However, walls that are not more
than four feet in height may serve as the base or foundation for a fence, in
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:454
which case the total height of the wall and the fence shall not exceed the
maximum height of a fence. The term "wall" does not include engineering
retaining walls, which are permitted uses as needed in all districts. The
terms "fence" and "wall" do not include barriers of landscaped materials,
including hedges.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No. 2008-08; amended
8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the gross horizontal areas of the several floors
of the building or buildings on a lot measured from the exterior faces
of exterior walls or from the center line of party walls separating two
buildings, excluding cellar and basement area used only for storage and the
operation and maintenance of the building.
FLOOR AREA, LIVABLE — All spaces within the exterior walls of a dwelling
unit exclusive of garages, breezeways, unheated porches, cellars, heater
rooms, and basements having a window area of less than 10% of the
square foot area of the room. Livable floor area shall include all spaces
not otherwise excluded above such as: principal rooms, utility rooms,
bathrooms, all closets and hallways opening directly into any rooms within
the dwelling unit and all attic space having a clear height of six feet from
finished floor level to pitch of roof rafter with a clear height of seven feet six
inches from finished floor level to ceiling level over 50% of the area of such
attic space.
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The floor area in square feet of all buildings on a lot
divided by the area of such lot in square feet.67
GARAGE, PRIVATE ATTACHED — A portion of a residential principal
building, on a permanent foundation, used only by the occupant or
occupants of the principal building for the parking or storage of household
vehicles, merchandise or equipment, and from which no business, service
or commercial enterprise is offered to the public.[Added 9-6-2005 by Ord.
No. 2005-8]
GARAGE, PRIVATE DETACHED — A detached building accessory to a
residential principal building, on a permanent foundation, used only by
the occupant or occupants of the principal building for the parking or
storage of household vehicles, merchandise or equipment, and from which
no business, service or commercial enterprise is offered to the
public.[Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
GARAGE, PUBLIC — Any portion of a principal building from which service,
repair, washing or reconditioning of motor vehicles is offered to the
public.[Added 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8]
HABITABLE FLOOR AREA —
A "living room" within a dwelling unit, except that for the purpose of
determining lot area requirements, a habitable room shall not include
any of the following:
A.
67.Editor's Note: The former definition of "garage, private," which immediately followed this
definition, was deleted 9-6-2005 by Ord. No. 2005-8.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:455
HEALTH CLUB or HEALTH SPA — Any premises which offers its subscribers
or members the opportunity to engage in a program of physical exercise or
conditioning on a regular or irregular basis.
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by the Zoning
Hearing Board of the Borough of Greencastle pursuant to Article VIII.
HIGHWAY — See "street."
HOME OCCUPATION — An occupation conducted in a dwelling unit or an
accessory structure, provided that:
HOMES ASSOCIATION — An incorporated nonprofit organization operating
under recorded land agreements through which:
(1) Kitchen.
Foyers, bathrooms, toilets, public or private halls, corridors or
passageways.
(2)
Dining alcoves, dinettes or other dining spaces (without limit as to
size) when not separated by walls or doors from other habitable
rooms or cooking spaces.
(3)
As a guide, an efficiency apartment contains one habitable room; a onebedroom
apartment, two habitable rooms; a two-bedroom apartment,
three habitable rooms; and a three-bedroom apartment, four habitable
rooms.
B.
Not more than two persons other than members of the family residing
on the premises shall be engaged in such occupation.
A.
The use of the dwelling unit for the home occupation shall be clearly
incidental and subordinate to its use for residential purposes by its
occupants, and not more than 30% of the ground floor area of the
dwelling unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation.
B.
There shall be no change in the outside appearance of the building
or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such home
occupation other than one professional or announcement sign pursuant
to the provisions of § 205-27.
C.
No traffic shall be generated by such home occupation in greater
volume than would normally be expected in a residential neighborhood,
and any need for parking generated by the conduct of such home
occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a required front
yard.
D.
No equipment or process shall be used in such home occupation which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical interference
detectable to the normal senses off the premises. In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which
creates visual or audible interference in any radio or television
receivers off the premises, or causes fluctuation in line voltage off the
premises.
E.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:456
HOME, SECTIONAL — A dwelling unit manufactured in two or more
sections designed for permanent occupancy, and transported to a building
site in sections which are fastened together and mounted on a permanent
foundation ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking
and assembly operations. When fully assembled such unit shall have a
minimum body width of 20 feet and a minimum length of 45 feet exclusive
of such accessory structures as patio, carport, storage shed, etc.
HOSPITAL — A building used for the diagnosis, treatment, or other care of
human ailments. Unless otherwise specified, a hospital shall be deemed to
include a sanitarium, sanitorium, clinic, convalescent home, nursing home,
rest home, or other building with an equivalent appellation.
HOTEL — A building or part thereof which has a common entrance,
common heating system, and general dining room, and which contains six
or more living and sleeping rooms designed to be occupied by individuals or
groups of individuals for compensation. A hotel is not a motel.
HOUSE TRAILER — See "mobile home."
JUNK — Any discarded material or article including, but not limited to,
scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery,
equipment, paper, glass, containers, and structures. It shall not include,
however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the purpose of
prompt disposal.
JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk as defined above is stored, disposed
of, or accumulated.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
Each lot and/or home owner in a cluster development or other
described land area is automatically a member;
A.
Each lot is automatically subject to a charge for a proportionate share
of the expenses for the organization's activities, such as maintaining a
common property; and
B.
C. The charge, if unpaid, becomes a lien against the property.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:457
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition), a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having a
proprietary interest in land.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT AREA — The area contained within the property lines of a lot (as shown
on the plat), excluding space within all streets and within all permanent
drainage easements, but including the areas of all other easements.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and abutting on two or more
intersecting streets where the interior angle of intersection does not exceed
135°. A lot abutting a curved street shall be deemed a corner lot if the
tangents to the curve at the points of intersection of the side lot lines with
the street lines intersect at an interior angle of less than 135°.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by the
building area.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT — That boundary of a lot which is along an existing or
proposed street right-of-way. Corner lots and through lots shall have two
front lot lines.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line generally opposite to the front lot line; if
the rear lot line is less than 10 feet in length, or if the lot comes to a point
in the rear, the rear lot line shall be deemed to be a line parallel to the front
lot line not less than 10 feet long lying farthest from the front lot line.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:458
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any boundary of a lot which is not a front or a rear lot
line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot extending between and having frontage on two
generally parallel streets.
LOT WIDTH — The average horizontal distance between the side lot lines,
measured along the building setback line and parallel to the front lot line.
MAIN FLOOR — The largest area found by the projection of a horizontal
plan through the livable floor area which is enclosed by the exterior walls of
the building.
MANUFACTURING — Any process whereby the nature, size, or shape of
articles or raw materials are changed, or where articles are assembled or
packaged.
MASSAGE — Any method of treating superficial soft parts of the human
body for remedial, hygienic or other purposes, consisting of rubbing,
stroking, kneading or any similar treatment accomplished by hand or by the
use of any instrument. (Note: this definition shall not include the treatment
of any person which is based upon the signed order of a licensed physician,
osteopath, chiropractor or registered physical therapist.)
MASSAGE PARLOR — Any establishment, building or structure, or portion
thereof, located within the Borough which is open to members of the
general public, with or without the payment of a fee, at which any person,
firm, association or corporation engages in or carries on the practice of
massage.
MEMBERSHIP CLUB AND CAMP — Buildings for lodging, eating, and
sanitary facilities, and land owned, leased, or used principally by a private,
fraternal, or social organization for such activities as hunting, fishing,
scouting, etc.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MODEL STUDIO — Any premises on which there is conducted the business
of furnishing figure models who pose in the nude for the purpose of being
observed or viewed by any person or of being sketched, painted, drawn,
sculptured, photographed or otherwise similarly depicted for persons who
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:459
pay a fee, or other consideration or compensation, or a gratuity for the
right or opportunity so to depict the figure model, or for admission to, or
for permission to remain upon, or as a condition for remaining upon the
premises.
MOTEL — A building, or group of buildings, whether detached or in
connected units, used as individual sleeping or dwelling units with either
direct outside access or common entrance, designed primarily for transient
automobile travelers and provided with accessory off-street parking
facilities. The term motel includes buildings designed as tourist courts,
motor lodges, auto courts and other similar appellations, but shall not be
construed to include mobile homes or travel trailers. A motel is not a hotel.
MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY BUILDINGS — A building used for more than one
commercial use or combination commercial-residential use.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."68
MUNICIPALITY — Includes cities, boroughs, first class townships and
second class townships.
NATURAL AREA — Any area along the one side of a rural highway where
the distance between two commercial structures, establishments or uses
is one measured mile or more, or any area of historic or scenic value so
designated by an appropriate indication upon the Official Zoning Map which
is a part of this chapter.
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was lawful
prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
OBSCENE OR ADULT FILM — Any film or motion picture which:
68.Editor's Note: See now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:460
OFFICIAL MAP — The map established by the Borough Council under
Article IV of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code showing the
location and width of streets, highways, parkways, public parks, and
playgrounds.
PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking of
motor vehicles, with or without the payment of rent or charges in money or
other consideration.
PARKING SPACE — A staff or berth which is arranged and intended for
parking of one motor vehicle in a garage or parking area.
PARKING, STORAGE OR USE OF RECREATIONAL VEHICLES —
[Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find, when considered as a whole, that the subject matter appeals
to the prurient interest;
A.
The subject matter depicts, or describes in a patently offensive way,
sexual conduct, specified anatomical areas, or specified sexual
activities, of a type described in this chapter; and
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
Not more than one recreational vehicle may be parked or stored on
any lot in any residential or in the community commercial district at
any time and such recreational vehicle may Only be parked or stored
in a permitted carport or enclosed building, in the rear yard (excluding
any applicable rear yard setback lines), in a side yard, provided that
the recreational vehicle does not extend into the front yard further
than the front of the primary structure and shall not be within the
applicable side yard setback, and from May 1 through September 30,
said recreational vehicle may be parked anywhere on the lot Only for
a period not to exceed three consecutive days (72 hours) within a
calendar week.
A.
No recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on a public street or
highway for any period exceeding 24 hours.
B.
No recreational vehicle shall be used for purposes of living, sleeping,
human habitation or housekeeping purposes at any time regardless of
where parked or stored; provided, however, that a recreational vehicle
owner by visitors of the residents of the dwelling situate on the
residential lot may park and use the recreational vehicle for living and
sleeping purposes as follows:
The visitor's recreational vehicle shall be parked on the residential
lot.
(1)
Any singular period of such use shall not exceed seven consecutive
calendar days.
(2)
C.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:461
PAWNBROKER — Any person who:[Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-04]
PERMANENT OCCUPANCY — Spending one night or more per month in a
lodging or dwelling unit during more than four consecutive months.
PLANNED DEVELOPMENT — A tract of land under single ownership or
agreement, planned and developed as a permanent, year-round
development unit, utilizing a reasonable degree of flexibility in the
placement, bulk, and interrelationship of buildings and uses, while at the
same time maintaining adequate overall intensity of land use, density of
population, and amounts of light, air access, and open space.
PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office of a member of a recognized
profession. When conducted in a residential district, a professional office
shall be incidental to the residential occupation, shall be conducted by a
member of the residential family entirely within the residential building and
shall include only the office of doctors or physicians, dentists, optometrists,
ministers, architects, landscape architects, professional engineers, lawyers,
artists, authors, musicians and such other professional occupations which
may be so designated. The practice of such occupation shall in no way
adversely affect the safe and comfortable enjoyment of property rights in
any district to a greater extent than for the professional activities listed
herein. The issuance of a state or local license for regulation of any gainful
occupation need not be deemed indicative of professional standing.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
The combination of all periods of such use shall not exceed a total
of 14 calendar days per year.
(3)
Engages in the business of lending money on the deposit or pledge of
personal property, other than chosen in action, securities, or written
evidence of indebtedness; or
A.
Purchases personal property with an expressed or implied agreement
or understanding to sell it back at a subsequent time at a stipulated
price; or
B.
Lends money upon goods, wares, or merchandise pledged, stored, or
deposited as collateral security.
C.
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:462
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of July
3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the "Sunshine Act," 53 P.S. § 271 et
seq.69
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicular type portable structure without
permanent foundation, which can be towed, hauled or driven and primarily
designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and
travel use and including, but not limited to, travel trailers, truck campers,
camping trailers, house trailers, boats, boat trailers and self-propelled
motor homes.[Amended 3-7-2016 by Ord. No. 2016-02]
REFUSE SITE — A lot or land or part thereof used primarily for disposal
by abandonment, dumping, sanitary land fill, burial, burning, incineration
or any other means for whatever purpose of garbage, offal, sewage, trash,
refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste
material of any kind.
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a solicitor to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESERVE STRIP — A parcel of ground in separate ownership separating a
street from other adjacent properties, or from other streets.
RETAINING WALL — A man-made structure constructed primarily of brick,
block, or stone that is designed and constructed to resist the lateral
pressure of soil where there is a desired change in ground elevation that
exceeds the horizontal plane to which soil can be piled without slumping.
The elevation of the top of the retaining wall shall not exceed the elevation
of the soil being retained by the retaining wall by more than one foot. The
following figure depicts examples of retaining wall types:[Added 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-04]
69.Editor's Note: See now 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:463
REVIEW — Wherever in this state the Borough Planning Commission or
other Borough official body possesses such jurisdiction, the action of
"review" shall also include "review and approval," or, if necessary, "review
and disapproval."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The total width of any land reserved or dedicated as a
street, alley, crosswalk or for other public or semipublic purposes.
ROADWAY — Travelway. See "cartway."
SCREENING — A well maintained fence, wall, hedge, or vegetative material
at least five feet in height at installation and of a density sufficient to
conceal from the view of residents along the adjoining side and rear
property lines the use on the premises on which the screening is located.
SECRETARY — Unless otherwise indicated, Secretary of the Borough
Planning Commission.
SERVICE STATION — Buildings and premises where gasoline, oil, grease,
batteries, tires, and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed
at retail. Uses permissible at a service station do not include major
mechanical and body work, straightening of body parts, painting, welding,
storage of automobiles not in operating condition, or other work involving
noise, glare, fumes, smoke, or other characteristics to an extent greater
than normally found in filling stations. A service station is not a repair
garage nor a body shop.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, CENTRALIZED — A public or private utility
system designed to collect, centrally treat, and dispose of sewage from
customers, in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations or regulations of the Borough, whichever may be
more stringent.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-SITE — Any structure designed to
biochemically treat sanitary sewage within the boundaries of an individual
lot.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — Patently offensive representations or descriptions of
ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, and patently
offensive representations or descriptions of masturbation, excretory
functions and lewd exhibition of the genitals.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:464
SHOPPING CENTER — A multitenant commercial complex that
accommodates detached or attached buildings, or a combination of both,
with fully coordinated interior traffic access for the complex, coordinated
signs and shared off-street parking developed on one lot or contiguous
lots totaling at least three acres in total.[Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No.
2015-05]
SIGN — Any material, structure or device, or part thereof, composed of
lettered or pictorial matter placed, when used or located out of doors
or outside or on the exterior of any building, including window display
area, for display of an advertisement, announcement, notice, directional
matter or name, and includes sign frames, billboards, sign boards, signs on
vehicles, trailers or other mobile devices, painted wall signs, hanging signs,
illuminated signs, pennants, fluttering devices, strings of lights, projection
signs or ground signs, and shall also include an announcement, declaration,
demonstration, display, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote
the interest of any person or business when the same is placed in view of
the general public. However, the following signs shall be excluded from the
application of this chapter:[Amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
SIGN AREA — All faces of a sign measured as follows:
Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing only property
numbers, post box numbers, names of occupants of premises, or other
identification of premises not having commercial connotations.
A.
Flags and insignias of any government or governmental agency, or of
any political, educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic, professional,
religious or like campaign, drive, movement or event; except when
displayed in connection with commercial promotion.
B.
Legal notices, identification, informational, or directional signs erected
or required by governmental bodies.
C.
Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings, including
letters and trademarks except moving lights.
D.
Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on any property, but
bearing no advertising matter.
E.
Signs which are solely devoted to prohibiting trespassing, hunting, or
fishing.
F.
Signs on vehicles, trailers, or other mobile devices or storage
containers or cubes that are not being utilized primarily as signs.
The duration that a vehicle, trailer or other mobile device or storage
container or cube is stationary, its location on the property in relation
to public view, and other factors indicating that the primary use is as a
sign.
G.
When such sign is on a plate or framed or outlined, all of the area
of such place or the area enclosed by such frame or outline shall be
included.
A.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:465
SIGN, AWNING — A sign that is located on the face of an awning that
identifies the business, service or industrial enterprise or the services,
products, or activities provided by a business, service, or industrial
enterprise that is displayed upon the lot or premises occupied by such
enterprise. The face of the awning shall only include any portion of the
awning that is parallel with the face of the building to which it is attached
and shall not include any diagonal, dome, barrel, or concave portion of the
awning.[Added 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
SIGN, BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION — Any sign, symbol, trademark,
structure or similar device used to identify the product made or the activity
pursued by an individual, business, service, commercial or industrial
enterprise which is displayed upon the lot or premises occupied by such
an enterprise for the purpose of apprising the public of the location of
such enterprise and the type of activity in which it is engaged.[Amended
8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-05]
SIGN, COMMERCIAL ADVERTISING OR BILLBOARD — An advertising
sign, structure or symbol erected and maintained by an individual or
corporation engaged in the sale or rental for profit of space thereon to a
clientele of manufacturing, service or commercial enterprises, upon which
space there is displayed by means of painting, posting or other method,
advertising copy describing a wide variety of projects or services which are
not necessarily made, produced, assembled, stored or sold from the lot or
premises upon which the advertisement is displayed. This definition does
not include a scoreboard.[Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
SIGN, DIRECTIONAL — An advertising sign or device intended to direct or
point toward a place, or one that points out the way to either an unfamiliar
or a known place that obviously could not be easily located without such a
sign or device. Each such sign shall not exceed six square feet in total area.
SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER — Any sign or portion thereof that
displays electronic images, graphics, or pictures with or without textual
information, using LEDs, fiber optics, light bulbs, or other illumination
devices or combination thereof within the display area, and where a static
message change sequence is accomplished immediately or by means of
fade.[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
When such sign consists only of letters, designs or figures engraved,
painted, projected or in any manner affixed on a wall, the total area of
such signs shall be deemed the area within which all of the matter of
which such sign consists may be inscribed.
B.
Structural members and supports not bearing advertising matter shall
be excluded from the sign area.
C.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:466
SIGN, ILLUMINATED — Any sign illuminated by electricity, gas or other
artificial light, including reflective or phosphorescent light. An illuminated
sign shall include lighting devices such as any light, string of lights, or
group of lights located or arranged so as to cast illumination on a sign. This
definition does not include a scoreboard.[Amended 4-7-2014 by Ord. No.
2014-04]
SIGN, INFORMATION KIOSK — Any sign, structure or symbol erected
and maintained by the Borough of Greencastle or a nonprofit corporation
engaged in economic development upon which said sign, structure or
symbol is utilized to dispense information, pamphlets, leaflets, magazines,
guides, publications, forms and other printed material regarding the
Borough of Greencastle and the surrounding area. An information kiosk
shall not be illuminated.[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
SIGN, OFFICIAL — Any sign, symbol or device erected and maintained
by a state, county, or municipal governmental agency for the purpose of
informing or guiding the public or for the protection and promotion of
health, safety, convenience or general welfare.
SIGN, PROJECTING — Any sign which projects from the exterior of any
building.
SIGNS, NUMBER OF — For the purpose of determining number of signs,
a sign shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device
containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where
matter is displayed in a random manner without organized relation of
elements, or where there is reasonable doubt about the relationship of
elements, each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
SOIL PERCOLATION TEST — A field test conducted to determine the
suitability of the soil for on-site sanitary sewage disposal facilities by
measuring the absorptive capacity of the soil at a given location and depth.
SIGN, SANDWICH BOARD — A temporary sign that is self-supporting and
freestanding with only two visible sides that is situated immediately
adjacent to a business or entity, typically on a sidewalk, which contains
commercial speech regarding said business or entity. A sandwich board may
not be illuminated.[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
SIGN, SCOREBOARD — A scoreboard is a sign designed to provide
information to spectators at athletic events that may or may not contain
a permanent or temporary advertising message or public service
announcements located inside an enclosed athletic field located at a
property owned by a municipal entity or owned and operated by a nonprofit
corporation.[Added 4-7-2014 by Ord. No. 2014-04]
SIGN, SERVICE IDENTIFICATION — A sign that is accessory to a business
identification sign that identifies the services, products, or activities
provided by a business, service, or industrial enterprise that is displayed
upon the lot or premises occupied by such enterprise. Each service
identification sign shall be no larger than 25 square feet.[Added 8-3-2015
by Ord. No. 2015-05]
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:467
SOIL SURVEY — A scientific survey of soil conditions and characteristics,
prepared by an engineer or soil scientist and approved or certified by the
Soil Conservation Service in the county.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq. and
10901 et seq.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
STORY — That part of any building, exclusive of cellars but inclusive of
basements, comprised between the level of one finished floor and the level
of the next higher finished floor, or, if there be no higher finished floor, then
that part of the building comprised between the level of the highest finished
floor and top of the roof beams.
STORY, HALF — Any space partially within the roof framing, between the
top of the floor beams and the structural ceiling level, where the clear
height of not more than 50% of such space is seven feet six inches or more.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct or any other ways used or intended to be used
by vehicular traffic or pedestrians whether public or private.
STREET LINE — The dividing line between a lot and a street.
STRUCTURAL ALTERATION — Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as beams, columns, or girders.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
A. Human genitals, pubic region.
B. Buttocks.
C. Female breasts below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state of sexual stimulation
or arousal.
A.
B. Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or sodomy.
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or female breasts.
C.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:468
TATTOO ESTABLISHMENT — Any location where tattooing (method of
placing designs, letter, scrolls, figures, symbols or any other marks upon
or under the skin of a human with ink or any other substance, resulting
in the coloration of the skin by aid of needles or any other instrument
designed to touch or puncture the skin) is engaged in or where the business
of tattooing is conducted or any part thereof. For purposes of this chapter,
"tattoo parlor" falls within this definition.[Added 12-1-2008 by Ord. No.
2008-08]
TOURIST HOME — A dwelling in which overnight accommodations are
provided or offered for transient guests for compensation.
TRAVELWAY — See "cartway."
USE, ACCESSORY — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
main use on a lot, whether such accessory use be conducted in a principal
or accessory building.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
VEHICLE, DISMANTLED OR NONOPERABLE — A dismantled or
nonoperable vehicle is one that does not have a current inspection sticker
and current license.
WALL — A man-made barrier consisting primarily of brick, concrete, or
cinder block placed or arranged as a line of demarcation to separate or
enclose different areas or uses, but not including such barriers four feet or
less in height whose primary purpose is to serve as the base or foundation of
a fence. The term "wall" does not include retaining wall nor does it include
barriers of landscaped materials, including hedges.[Added 12-1-2008 by
Ord. No. 2008-08; amended 8-3-2015 by Ord. No. 2015-04]
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, CENTRALIZED — A public or private
utility system designed to transmit water from a common source to
customers, in compliance with Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection regulations or regulations of the Borough, whichever may be
more stringent.
WATER DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM, ON-SITE — A system for supplying and
distributing water to a single dwelling or other building from a source
located on the same lot.
YARD, FRONT — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
the street line or by the street line established by the official map of the
Borough, or an approved subdivision plat and a line drawn parallel thereto.
YARD, REAR — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
the rear lot line and a line drawn parallel thereto.
YARD, SIDE — An unoccupied ground area fully open to the sky between
any property line other than a street or rear lot line, and a line drawn
parallel thereto between the front and rear yards.
§ 205-56 YARD SALES § 205-56
202:469
ZONING ORDINANCE — The officially adopted Borough Zoning Ordinance
with any and all amendments thereto.
§ 205-56 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-56
202:470
ARTICLE XII
Appeals
§ 205-57. Zoning appeals.
The proceedings set forth in this article shall constitute the exclusive mode
for securing review of this chapter, or decision, determinations or orders
issued by Borough Council, its agencies or officers pursuant to this chapter.
§ 205-58. Venue.
Appeals to a court shall be taken to the Court of Common Pleas of Franklin
County.
§ 205-59. Validity of chapter; procedural questions.
Questions of an alleged defect in the process of enactment or adoption of
this chapter and map shall be raised by an appeal taken directly from the
action of the Borough Council to the court filed not later than 30 days from
the effective date of this chapter and map.
§ 205-60. Validity of ordinance; substantive questions. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
A. A landowner who, on substantive grounds, desires to challenge the
validity of an ordinance or map or any provision thereof which prohibits
or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an interest
shall submit the challenge either:
(1) To the Zoning Hearing Board under § 205-43A(1) of this chapter; or
(2) To the Borough Council under § 205-43B(4), together with a
request for a curative amendment under § 609.1 of the
Municipalities Planning Code (hereafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
B. Persons aggrieved by a use or development permitted on the land of
another by an ordinance or map, or any provision thereof, who desires
to challenge its validity on substantive grounds shall first submit their
challenge to the Zoning Hearing Board for a decision thereon under
§ 205-43A(1) of this chapter.
C. The submissions referred to in Subsections A and B shall be governed
by the following:
(1) In challenges before the Zoning Hearing Board, the challenging
party shall make a written request to the Board that it hold a
hearing on its challenge. The request shall contain the reasons for
the challenge. Where the landowner desires to challenge the
validity of such ordinance and elects to proceed by curative
amendment under § 609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.1, his
application to the Borough Council shall contain, in addition to the
requirements of the written request hereof, the plans and
§ 205-57 YARD SALES § 205-60
202:471
explanatory materials describing the use or development proposed
by the landowner in lieu of the use or development permitted by the
challenged ordinance or map. Such plans or other materials shall
not be required to meet the standards prescribed for preliminary,
tentative or final approval or for the issuance of a permit, so long as
they provide reasonable notice of the proposed use or development
and a sufficient basis for evaluating the challenged ordinance or
map in light thereof. Nothing herein contained shall preclude the
landowner from first seeking a final approval before submitting his
challenge.
(2) If the submission is made by the landowner to the Borough Council
under Subsection A(2), the request also shall be accompanied by an
amendment or amendments to the ordinance proposed by the
landowner to cure the alleged defects therein.
(3) If the submission is made to the Borough Council, the Borough
Solicitor shall represent and advise it at the hearing or hearings
referred to in § 909.1(b)(4) of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10909.1(b)(4).
(4) The Borough Council may retain an independent attorney to
present the defense of the challenged ordinance or map on its
behalf and to present their witnesses on its behalf.
(5) Based upon the testimony presented at the hearing or hearings, the
Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may be,
shall determine whether the challenged ordinance or map is
defective, as alleged by the landowner. If a challenge heard by the
Borough Council is found to have merit, the Borough Council shall
proceed as provided in § 609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.1. If a
challenge heard by the Zoning Hearing Board is found to have
merit, the decision of the Zoning Hearing Board shall include
recommended amendments to the challenged ordinance which will
cure the defects found. In reaching its decision, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(a) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(b) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the
proposal upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of
the proposal in providing housing units of a type actually
available to and affordable by classes of person otherwise
unlawfully excluded by the challenged provisions of the
ordinance or map.
(c) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by
the site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains,
aquifers, natural resources and other natural features.
§ 205-60 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-60
202:472
(d) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and
natural features, the degree to which these are protected or
destroyed, the tolerance of the resources to development and
any adverse environmental impacts.
(e) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture
and other land uses which are essential to public health and
welfare.
(6) The Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case may
be, shall render its decision within 45 days after the conclusion of
the last hearing.
(7) If the Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing Board, as the case
may be, fails to act on the landowner's request within the time
limits referred to in Subsection C(6), a denial of the request is
deemed to have occurred on the 46th day after the close of the last
hearing.
D. The Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council, as the case may be,
shall commence its hearing within 60 days after the request is filed
unless the landowner requests or consents to an extension of time.
E. Public notice of the hearing shall include notice that the validity of the
ordinance or map is in question and shall give the place where and the
times when a copy of the request, including any plans, explanatory
material or proposed amendments may be examined by the public.
F. The challenge shall be deemed denied when:
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, as the case may be,
fails to commence the hearing within the time limits set forth in
Subsection D.
(2) The Borough Council notifies the landowner that it will not adopt
the curative amendment.
(3) The Borough Council adopts another curative amendment which is
unacceptable to the landowner.
(4) The Zoning Hearing Board or the Borough Council, as the case may
be, fails to act on the request 45 days after the close of the last
hearing on the request, unless the time is extended by mutual
consent by the landowner and the Borough.
G. Where a curative amendment proposal is approved by the grant of a
curative amendment, application by the Borough Council pursuant to
§ 909.1(b)(4) of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10909.1(b)(4), or a validity challenge
is sustained by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 909.1(a)(1) of
the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10909.1(a)(1), or the court acts finally on appeal from
denial of a curative amendment proposal or a validity challenge, and
the proposal or challenge so approved requires a further application for
§ 205-60 YARD SALES § 205-60
202:473
§ 205-61. Procedure to obtain preliminary opinion. [Amended
1-3-1995 by Ord. No. 1995-2]
In order not to unreasonably delay the time when a landowner may secure
assurance that the ordinance or map under which he proposed to build is
free from challenge, and recognizing that the procedure for preliminary
approval of his development may be too cumbersome or may be unavailable,
the landowner may advance the date from which time for any challenge to
the ordinance or map will run under § 914.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10914.1,
by the following procedure:
subdivision or land development, the developer shall have two years
from the date of such approval to file an application for preliminary
or tentative approval pursuant to Article V or VII of the MPC, 53
P.S. § 10501 et seq. and 10701 et seq. Within the two-year period, no
subsequent change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other
governing ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which
adversely affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative
amendment or the sustained validity challenge. Upon the filing of the
preliminary or tentative plan, the provisions of § 508(4) of the MPC,
53 P.S. § 10508(4), shall apply. Where the proposal appended to the
curative amendment application or the validity challenge is approved
but does not require further application under any subdivision or land
development ordinance, the developer shall have one year within which
to file for a building permit. Within the one-year period, no subsequent
change or amendment in the zoning, subdivision or other governing
ordinance or plan shall be applied in any manner which adversely
affects the rights of the applicant as granted in the curative amendment
or the sustained validity challenge. During these protected periods, the
court shall retain or assume jurisdiction for the purpose of awarding
such supplemental relief as may be necessary.
A. The landowner may submit plans and other materials describing his
proposed use or development to the Zoning Officer for a preliminary
opinion as to their compliance with the applicable ordinances and
maps. Such plans and other materials shall not be required to meet the
standards prescribed for preliminary, tentative or final approval or for
the issuance of a building permit so long as they provide reasonable
notice of the proposed use or development and a sufficient basis for a
preliminary opinion as to its compliance.
B. If the Zoning Officer's preliminary opinion is that the use or
development complies with the ordinance or map, notice thereof shall
be published once each week for two successive weeks in a newspaper
of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice shall include a
general description of the proposed use or development and its
location, by some readily identifiable directive, and the place and times
where the plans and other materials may be examined by the public.
The favorable preliminary approval under § 914.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10914.1, and the time therein specified for commencing a proceeding
§ 205-60 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-61
202:474
with the Board shall run from the time the second notice thereof has
been published.
§ 205-61 YARD SALES § 205-61
202:475

ARTICLE XIII
Legal Status
§ 205-62. Interpretation.
In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this chapter shall
be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience, and general welfare. Except
where specifically provided to the contrary, it is not intended by this chapter
to repeal, abrogate, annual or in any way impair or interfere with any
rules, regulations or permits previously adopted or issued or which shall
be adopted or issued pursuant to law relating to the use of buildings,
structures, shelter or premises; nor is it intended by this chapter to
interfere with or abrogate or annual any easement, covenants or other
agreements between parties; provided, however, that where this chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon the use of a building or premises, or
requires larger open spaces than are imposed or required by any other
statute, ordinance, rule, regulation, or permit, or by any easement, or
agreement, the provisions of this chapter shall control.
§ 205-62 YARD SALES § 205-62
202:477

ARTICLE XIV
Floodplain Areas
[Added 1-3-2012 by Ord. No. 2012-0370]
§ 205-63. Conformity required.
Any proposed use occurring within a floodplain as identified in Chapter 122,
the Floodplain Management Ordinance, as amended from time to time, shall
be in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance and the
Floodplain Management Ordinance.
§ 205-64. Establishment of floodplain overlay districts.
§ 205-65. Variances within floodplain districts.
A. Overlay concept.
(1) The floodplain districts described in the Floodplain Management
Ordinance shall be overlays to the existing underlying districts as
shown on the Official Zoning Map,71 and as such, the provisions for
the floodplain districts shall serve as a supplement to the
underlying district provisions, provided they are a permitted use in
such underlying district.
(2) Where there happens to be any conflict between the provisions or
requirements of any of the floodplain provisions or requirements of
any of the floodplain districts and those of any underlying district,
the more restrictive provisions shall apply.
B. Zoning map. The boundaries of the floodplain districts are established
as incorporated into the Greencastle Borough Zoning Map.
A. General. If compliance with any of the requirements of this article or
the use requirements of the Floodplain Management Ordinance72 would
result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective builder, developer, or
landowner, the Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief
from the strict application of the requirements.
70.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided for an effective date of 1-18-2012.
71.Editor's Note: The current Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
72.Editor's Note: See Ch. 122, Floodplain Management.
§ 205-63 YARD SALES § 205-65
202:479
Appendix
Chapter A207
FEES
§ 205-65 GREENCASTLE CODE § 205-65
202:480
ARTICLE I
Sewer Services
[Adopted 1-7-1991 by Res. No. 1991-1 (Ch. 1, § 603, of the 1985
Code)]
§ A207-1. Sewer service; responsibilities.
Effective immediately, each property owner within the Borough shall be
responsible for and pay for all costs and charges incurred by the Borough
when providing sewer service to property owner's real estate, which costs
and charges are over and above the normal, usual and customary
connection fees for providing such service.
§ A207-2. Sewer service line rooter service. [Added 10-6-2003 by
Res. No. 2003-4]
Effective immediately, the Borough of Greencastle shall impose the
following charges for the services indicated:
Sewer Service Line Rooter Service
$150 for one hour
$175 for one hour during evening hours and weekends
$200 for one hour on holidays
$50 per hour for labor for each additional hour after the first hour
§ A207-1 YARD SALES § A207-2
202:481

ARTICLE II
Borough Service Charges
[Adopted 1-2-2001 by Res. No. 2001-2]
§ A207-3. Service charges established. [Amended 6-4-2012 by Res.
No. 2012-05]
Effective immediately, the Borough of Greencastle shall impose the
following charges for the services indicated:
Service Fee
Labor cost
During normal work hours $20 per hour
After work hours and
weekends
$25 per hour
On holidays $32.50 per hour
Supervisor/inspector $32 per hour
Backhoe $50 per hour (minimum charge $50)
Dump truck $50 per hour (minimum charge $50)
Air compressor $35 per hour (minimum charge $35)
Service truck $35 per hour (minimum charge $35)
Supplies and materials Actual cost paid by the Borough plus 15%
storage and handling fee
Sidewalk permit $25
Appeals to the Curb and
Sidewalk Board of Appeals
$150
Backfill for street repair $25 per square foot
§ A207-4. Payment; delinquency charges.
Invoices are due and payable in full upon receipt. A delinquency charge of 1
1/2% per month, or a minimum of $1, will be assessed on accounts not paid
within 30 days of the date of the invoice.
§ A207-3 YARD SALES § A207-4
202:483

ARTICLE III
Land Use Fees
[Adopted 11-3-2003 by Res. No. 2003-07]
§ A207-5. Building permit fees.
The following fees shall be paid at the time of submission of an application
for a building permit and shall be based upon the value of the improvements
to the property:
Value of Improvement Fee
Up to $1,000 $25
$1,001 and over $25 plus $1 for each $1,000 of improvement
over $1,001
§ A207-6. Zoning administrative fees.
Zoning administration fees shall be as follows:
§ A207-7. Subdivision administrative fees.
Subdivision administrative fees shall be as follows:
A. Rezoning application fee: $500.
B. Special exception application: $350.
C. Zoning Hearing Board application: $350.
D. Certificate of occupancy fee: $15.
E. Notice of intent to construct fee: $10 per unit.
A. Subdivision of lots:
(1) First lot: $150.
(2) Each additional lot: $10 per lot.
B. Land developments:
(1) First unit: $150.
(2) Each additional unit: $10 per unit.
C. The application fee is paid for both the preliminary and final plan
submittals.
D. Engineering review, engineering field review, engineering inspection
and legal review fees shall be paid by the developer upon being
invoiced by the Borough.
§ A207-5 YARD SALES § A207-8
202:485
§ A207-8. Document fees.
The following fees are established for the purchase and/or reproduction of
documents:
§ A207-9. When effective.
This fee schedule shall take effect immediately.
A. Zoning Ordinance: $12.
B. Subdivision Ordinance: $ 12.
C. Comprehensive Plan: $ 25.
D. Individual copies, per page: $0.25.
§ A207-8 GREENCASTLE CODE § A207-9
202:486
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2005-02 6-6-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2005-03 7-5-2005 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2005-04 7-5-2005 Franklin County
Council of
Governments
Ch. 15
2005-05 8-1-2005 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
2005-06 9-6-2005 Disturbing the peace Ch. 138, Art. III
2005-07 9-6-2005 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
2005-08 9-6-2005 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2005-09 11-7-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2005-10 11-7-2005 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2005-11 12-5-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
2006-01 1-3-2006 Susquehanna
Municipal Trust
NCM
2006-02 1-3-2006 Capital Region
Insurance Trust
NCM
2006-03 1-3-2006 Pennsylvania
Municipal Health
Insurance Cooperative
NCM
2006-04 4-3-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2006-05 3-17-2006 Street vacation NCM
2006-06 5-1-2006 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2006-07 11-6-2006 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2006-08 11-6-2006 Street opening NCM
2006-09 11-6-2006 Street opening NCM
2006-10 12-4-2006 Yard sales amendment Ch. 202
§ A207-9 YARD SALES § DL-1
202:487
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2006-11 1-2-2007 Noise Ch. 130
2006-12 12-4-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
2007-01 1-16-2007 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2007-02 4-2-2007 Nuisances amendment Ch. 132
2007-03 8-6-2007 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
2007-04 12-3-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
2008-01 1-7-2008 Realty transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 185, Art. III
2008-02 4-7-2008 Non-Uniform Pension
Plan
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-01
2008-03 4-7-2008 Police Pension Plan Superseded by Ord.
No. 2010-01
2008-04 8-4-2008 Naming of alley NCM
2008-05 8-4-2008 Meetings amendment Ch. 29
2008-06 9-2-2008 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2008-07 12-1-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
2008-08 12-1-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2009-01 3-2-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2009-02 9-8-2009 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2010-01 5-3-2010 Pensions amendment Ch. 34
2010-02 11-1-2010 Property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 132
2010-03 12-6-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
2011-01 8-1-2011 Police pension plan
amendment
See Ch. 34, Art. II
2011-02 12-5-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
2012-01 1-3-2012 Flood damage
prevention
Ch. 122
2012-02 1-3-2012 Subdivision and land
development
amendment
Ch. 180
2012-03 1-3-2012 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2012-04 2-6-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
§ DL-1 GREENCASTLE CODE § DL-1
202:488
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2012-05 2-6-2012 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2012-06 6-4-2012 Sidewalk and curb
repair and
construction
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. IV
2012-07 6-4-2012 Sidewalk and Curb
Board of Appeals
Ch. 11, Art. V
Res. No.
2012-05
6-4-2012 Borough service
charges amendment
Ch. A207, Art. II
2012-08 8-6-2012 Open burning
amendment
Ch. 95
2012-09 9-4-2012 Bicycles amendment;
skateboards, roller
skates and roller
blades amendment;
vehicles and traffic
amendment
Chs. 78; 158; 190
2012-10 11-5-2012 Tax exemption for
deteriorated
properties (LERTA)
Ch. 185, Art. VI
2012-11 12-16-2012 Local services tax Ch. 185, Art. V
2012-12 12-3-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
2012-13 12-10-2012 Per capita tax repealer Ch. 185, Art. I,
footnote only
2012-14 12-10-2012 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
2013-01 5-6-2013 Zoning Map
amendment
NCM
2013-02 7-1-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2013-03 9-3-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2013-04 11-4-2013 Alarms amendment Ch. 57
2013-05 11-4-2013 Shade Tree
Commission
amendment
Ch. 11, Art. III
12-2-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
2014-01 1-6-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2014-02 1-6-2014 Street acceptance NCM
§ DL-1 YARD SALES § DL-1
202:489
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2014-03 4-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2014-04 4-7-2014 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2014-05 7-7-2014 Sidewalk and curb
repair and
construction
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. IV
2014-06 8-4-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2014-07 8-4-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2014-08 9-2-2014 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
2014-09 12-1-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
2015-01 2-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2015-02 3-2-2015 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 141
2015-03 7-6-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2015-04 8-3-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2015-05 8-3-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2015-06 10-5-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk and curb
repair and
construction
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. IV
2015–07 10-5-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
2015-08 10-5-2015 Brush, grass and
weeds amendment
Ch. 86
2015-09 11-2-2015 Streets and sidewalks:
snow and ice removal
amendment
Ch. 169, Art. I
2015-10 11-2-2015 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
2015-11 11-2-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 190
2015-12 12-17-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
2015-13 12-17-2015 Sewers amendment Ch. 155
2016-01 1-4-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 GREENCASTLE CODE § DL-1
202:490
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
2016-02 3-7-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 205
§ DL-1 YARD SALES § DL-1
202:491