Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867]
§ 1-1. Adoption of Code.
The codification of the complete body of ordinances for the Borough of
Glenolden, County of Delaware, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, revised,
codified and consolidated into titles, chapters and sections by General Code
Publishers Corp. and consisting of Chapters 1 through 162, together with
an Appendix and Index, is hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted
as the "Code of the Borough of Glenolden," hereinafter known and referred
to as the "Code," pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code, 53 P.S.
§ 46008(b).
§ 1-2. Effective date.
All provisions of the Code shall be in full force and effect on and after
December 9, 1982.
§ 1-3. Repeal of ordinances not contained in Code.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances of a general and permanent nature
adopted by the Borough of Glenolden and in force on the date of the
adoption of this ordinance and not contained in the Code are hereby
repealed as of the effective date of this ordinance, except as hereinafter
provided.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights and
obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to April 8, 1982.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance, or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough, or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough.
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent to
the date given in § 1-4A and/or the date of adoption of this ordinance are
hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being printed, be
included therein. Attested copies of all such legislation shall be temporarily
placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes in previously adopted ordinances.
F. Any ordinance providing for the laying out, opening, altering, widening,
relocating, straightening, establishing of grade, changing of name,
improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-of-way, easement,
street, road, highway, park or other public place.
G. Any ordinance or resolution appropriating money or transferring funds,
promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the
issuance and delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments
or evidence of the Borough's indebtedness.
H. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property, or any lawful contract or obligation.
I. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
J. Any ordinance designating the boundaries of water districts.
K. The levy or imposition of taxes, special assessments or charges.
L. The dedication of property.
M. Any currently effective ordinance or resolution establishing the salaries
or compensation of officers and employees of the Borough; in
particular, Ordinance No. 682 pertaining to maintenance employees.
A. In compiling and preparing the ordinances of the Borough of Glenolden
for adoption and revision as part of the Code, certain grammatical
changes and other minor changes were made in one or more of said
ordinances. It is the intention of the Borough Council that all such
changes be adopted as part of the Code as if the ordinances so changed
had been previously formally amended to read as such.
B. Certain changes of a substantive nature have been made to various
ordinances found within the Code, and certain new materials have been
added to the Code. These changes and additions have been made to
bring the provisions of the Code into conformity with the desired
policies of the Borough Council, and it is the intent of the Borough
Council that all such changes and additions be adopted as part of the
Code as if the ordinances so changed or added had been previously
formally amended or adopted to read as such. Such changes and
additions are cited within the historical statements by the terms
§ 1-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 1-6
1:4
§ 1-7. Copy of Code on file.
A copy of the Code in a post-bound volume has been filed in the office of
the Borough Secretary and shall remain there for use and examination by
the public until final action is taken on this ordinance. If this ordinance shall
be adopted, such copy shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as
provided by law, and such certified copy shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-8. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code, as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-9. Code book to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by the Secretary to keep up-to-date the certified copy of the book
containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the Secretary for
the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all ordinances adopted
by the Borough Council subsequent to the effective date of this codification,
which the Council shall adopt specifically as part of the Code, shall, when
finally adopted, be included therein by reference until such changes or new
ordinances are printed as supplements to said Code book, at which time
such supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-10. Sale of Code book; supplements provided.
Copies of the book containing the Code may be purchased from the Borough
Secretary upon the payment of a fee to be set by resolution of the Borough
Council, which may also arrange, by resolution, for procedures for the
periodic supplementation thereof.
"amended at time of adoption of Code" or "adopted at time of adoption
of Code." These changes and additions are further detailed as follows.1
1. Editor's Note: Pursuant to § 1.6B, the following chapters and sections of the Code were
amended or added. A complete description of these amendments and additions is on file in
the office of the Borough Secretary: §§ 43-A(2), 47-12, 47-27, 51-4, 56-4, 59-2, 63-4, 66-6A,
71-2, 77-1B, 77-2, 77-5, 82-2, 86-16,90-5, 93-9L, 97-5, 101-7, 104-4, 109-3, 112-5, 114-4,
118-3, 121-5, 121-7, 124-14, 130-2, 130-3, 130-4B, 130-5, 130-6, 135-7, 135-13, 135-14,
138-8, 138-10, 138-21, 148-11, 148-19, 148-20, 151-12A, 151-13, 155-21, Ch. 157 and
§ 162-1B.
§ 1-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-11
1:5
§ 1-11. Publication; filing.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published, in the
manner required, a notice of the adoption of this ordinance adopting the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Sufficient copies
of the Code shall be maintained in the office of the Borough Secretary
for inspection by the public at all times during regular office hours. The
enactment and application of this ordinance adopting the Code, coupled
with availability of copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall
be deemed, held and considered to be due and legal publication of all
provisions of the Code for all purposes.
§ 1-12. Severability of Code provisions.
Each section of the Code and every part of each section is an independent
section or part of a section, and the holding of any section or a part thereof
to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any cause shall not be deemed
to affect the validity or constitutionality of any other section or part thereof.
§ 1-13. Severability of ordinance provisions.
Each section of this ordinance is an independent section, and the holding of
any section or part thereof to be unconstitutional, void or ineffective for any
cause shall not be deemed to affect the validity or constitutionality of any
other section or part thereof.
§ 1-14. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, any part or portion of the Code or to alter or tamper with such
Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough to
be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this ordinance
shall be subject, upon conviction, to a fine of not more than $300 and
costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 1-11 GLENOLDEN CODE § 1-14
1:6
Chapter 4
(RESERVED)
Chapter 6
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 6-1. Annual appointment authorized.
An independent auditor shall be appointed annually before the close of a
fiscal year to make an independent examination of the accounting records
of the Borough for such fiscal year in accordance with Section 1005(7) of
the Borough Code2 and to perform other duties and to exercise the powers
as conferred upon said independent auditor by the Borough Code.
§ 6-2. Office of elected Auditor abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditor is hereby abolished.
Chapter 11
(RESERVED)
Chapter 14
FIREMEN, DUTIES OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 16.
2. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46005(7).
§ 1-14 (RESERVED) § 6-2
4:7

ARTICLE I
Recognition of Fire Company
§ 14-1. Fire company recognized.
The Glenolden Fire Company Number 1, organized and existing in the
Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, is hereby designated
as the officially recognized fire company of the Borough.
§ 14-2. Authorized activities of fire company.
§ 14-3. Authorized activities of members of fire company.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company as
authorized above or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the fire company recognized by the Borough are also authorized to do the
following things:
A. The fire company recognized by the Borough is hereby authorized to
provide such services to the Borough as may be necessary for the
protection of property and persons situated therein, which include, by
way of example and not of limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and other
dangerous situations.
B. The company may also provide nonemergency and public service
functions, such as, again by way of example and not of limitation,
removing water from property after storms and assisting in the
removal, abatement and prevention of damage or injury to persons or
property, whether through natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The company may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Borough, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the company to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The company may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Borough.
E. When designated, the fire company may provide a past Fire Chief as the
5th District Fire Marshal or Assistant Fire Marshal. This Marshal or
Assistant Marshal will be authorized by the Borough of Glenolden to act
in that capacity and, as such, is covered under workmen's
compensation policy.
A. Function.
(1) Fight fires and provide emergency service in the Borough of
Glenolden and wherever asked to assist, for the humane purpose of
protection and preservation of person, place or thing.
§ 14-1 (RESERVED) § 14-3
11:9
(2) Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or
parade when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers
of the fire company.
(3) Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized
by any officer of the recognized fire company.
B. Coverage.
(1) The moment a fire alarm is sounded and/or a silent request is
received.
(2) Fire drills and all parts thereof.
(3) Schooling for the betterment of fighting and prevention.
(4) Fire prevention:
(a) School demonstrations.
(b) Public demonstrations.
(c) Public open house.
(5) Care of trucks and/or apparatus.
(6) Fire meetings (while attending).
(7) Tag Day and/or fund-raising activities.
(8) Distributing and collecting raffle books.
(9) December, Santa Claus/fire prevention for children.
C. Services rendered.
(1) Fire aid.
(2) Rescues.
(3) Salvage.
(4) Ambulance service in emergency.
(5) Fire police work.
(6) Radio communication.
(7) Assistance of accidents.
(8) Control of crowds on both fire grounds and/or occasions of public
or general assembly.
(9) Animal rescue.
(10) Abatement of conditions due to storms, flood and/or general peril.
§ 14-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 14-3
11:10
§ 14-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize Glenolden Fire Company
Number 1 as the official fire company of the Borough and to state additional
authorized activities for firefighters for workmen's compensation purposes.
(a) Pumping cellars.
(b) Helping with roofs.
(c) Helping with fallen trees.
(d) Any other duty that might be connected with the abovecaptioned.
(11) Abatement and/or removal of any hazards to safety or health as
might be requested by call or the Borough Council.
(12) Participation in official holiday functions as directed by the Fire
Chief or his designate.
§ 14-3 (RESERVED) § 14-4
11:11

ARTICLE II
Recovery of Certain Costs
§ 14-5. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Glenolden Borough Fire Company
Recovery Ordinance."
§ 14-6. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH FIRE COMPANY — The recognized and designated fire company
of the Borough of Glenolden.
EMERGENCY SERVICE — Includes firefighting, rescue, medical or other
emergency service or combination thereof, to protect a person, the
environment, critical infrastructure or property.
INSURANCE CARRIER — A company that offers and/or underwrites
insurance policies.
INSURANCE POLICY — A document detailing the terms and conditions of a
contract of insurance.
PERSON — An individual, organization, corporation, resident, and/or
property owner requiring and receiving emergency services from the
Borough Fire Company.
§ 14-7. Authorization.
The Glenolden Borough Fire Company is authorized and directed by and
through its officers and authorized representatives to ascertain what
insurance policy coverage may be applicable and available under any given
circumstance and to take all necessary and affirmative steps to apply for
and receive reimbursement from any insurance carrier where a property
owner or business owner is or may be insured to reimburse the Glenolden
Borough Fire Company for any costs and/or expenses incurred for
emergency services, supplies and/or equipment used for or provided to the
property owner or business owner by the Glenolden Borough Fire Company.
§ 14-8. Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act.
The Borough of Glenolden further authorizes the Glenolden Borough Fire
Company to recover reasonable costs from insurance carriers under
application Insurance Policies of a Person for firefighting, use of firefighting
materials and equipment and hazardous abatement materials involved in
any and all hazardous abatement material incidents as are recoverable
under the Hazardous Material Emergency Planning and Response Act.
§ 14-5 (RESERVED) § 14-8.1
11:13
§ 14-8.1. No charge for valid fire protection services.
However, and notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, under no
circumstances shall any Person receive a bill from the Glenolden Borough
Fire Company for Emergency Services provided by the Borough Fire
Company except in cases of false alarms and/or fires which are intentionally
set by the Person.
§ 14-9. Interpretation.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purposes to
compensate and/or reimburse the Borough Fire Company from insurance
proceeds for costs and/or expenses incurred while providing Emergency
Services pursuant to its duties for the Borough Fire Company.
§ 14-10. Collection of costs and fees.
The costs and fees as outlined in this article shall be recovered by the
Borough Fire Company by direct billing by an attorney, collection service
or agency contracted with the Borough Fire Company. In addition to the
costs and fees as outlined in this article, the Borough Fire Company shall
be authorized to collect any reasonable interest and administration fees for
collecting the costs and fees.
§ 14-11. Enforcement.
In the event any Insurance Carrier or Person fails to pay any bill or invoice
within 30 days of the mailing or delivery of such notice of charges, the
Borough Fire Company or any attorney or agency contracted by the
Borough Fire Company who mailed or delivered the bill or invoice may
enforce the provisions of this article by filing a civil action at law in a
court of competent jurisdiction for the collection of any amounts due to
the Borough Fire Company, together with statutory interest, court costs,
collection fees and reasonable attorneys' fees. The remedies provided
herein shall be in addition to any other relief, remedies or penalties that
may be appropriate or provided by law.
§ 14-8.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 14-11
11:14
Chapter 16
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Duties of firemen — See Ch. 14.
§ 16-1. Recognition of Association.
The Glenolden Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association of Glenolden, a
Pennsylvania corporation of the First Class, incorporated by the Court of
Common Pleas of Delaware County on November 17, 1930, under the Act of
1874, as supplemented and amended3 is recognized and declared to be the
relief fund association of the Fire Department of the Borough of Glenolden,
engaged in the service of said Borough.
§ 16-2. Appropriation of funds.
The said Glenolden Volunteer Firemen's Relief Association, through its duly
designated officers, is entitled, empowered and authorized to receive all
amounts apportioned or paid to the Borough or to the Borough Treasurer
under the Act of 1929, P.L. 709, as supplemented and amended from time
to time,4 with reference to the distribution of tax on foreign fire insurance
premiums; and all such amounts so apportioned or payable, whether now
accrued or hereafter accruing, are hereby appropriated to the said
Association; and the Borough Treasurer, immediately upon receipt thereof,
is hereby authorized and directed to pay any such amount so received by
him to the said Association, through its duly designated officers.
Chapter 16A
HISTORICAL COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 16A-1. Declaration of public policy; creation.
It is declared as a matter of public policy that the preservation and
protection of historic resources are public necessities and are in the interest
of the health, prosperity and welfare of the citizens of the Borough of
3. Editor's Note: Currently, see 53 P.S. § 8501 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.801 and 72 P.S. § 7902.
§ 14-11 FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION § 16A-1
16:15
Glenolden; that the Council of the Borough of Glenolden does, this date,
enact and create the Borough of Glenolden Historical Commission.
§ 16A-2. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is:
§ 16A-3. Establishment and membership.
There shall be a Borough of Glenolden Historical Commission which shall
consist of seven members who shall be appointed by Borough Council.
The membership of the Commission shall include individuals who have an
interest in history, archaeology or historic preservation. Each Commission
member shall serve for a term of two years. The Commission shall notify
Borough Council of any vacancies within the Commission, and Council shall
act within 90 days to fill those vacancies. Appointments to fill vacancies
for unexpired terms shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Commission members shall serve without pay.
§ 16A-4. Organization.
The Commission shall annually elect from its own membership a Chairman
who will direct the activities of the Commission and such other officers as
A. To promote the general welfare by protecting the integrity of the
historic resources of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. To mitigate the negative effects of proposed changes upon historic
resources.
C. To encourage the continuation of historical resources and facilitate
their appropriate reuse.
D. To promote among residents of the Borough a knowledge of the history
of the community and an appreciation for the accomplishment of its
citizens.
E. To collect and preserve materials of historic value related to the
Borough.
F. To encourage research into the history of the Borough with a view to
discovering previously unknown facts concerning the Borough's history.
G. To identify buildings and sites of historic interest and significance in the
Borough for the purposes of national registration.
H. To facilitate the efforts of Borough residents engaged in genealogical
research into family histories.
I. To encourage the preservation of historic settings and landscapes.
J. To discourage the unnecessary demolition or deterioration of historic
resources.
§ 16A-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 16A-4
16:16
may be required for the conduct of its business. A quorum shall be not
less than a majority of the current membership. The Commission may issue,
alter and rescind rules and forms for its procedures consistent with the
ordinances of this Borough and laws and regulations of the commonwealth.
The Commission shall conduct business at regular public meetings. The
Commission shall keep full public records of its business and shall submit a
report of its activities to Borough Council.
§ 16A-5. Functions and duties.
A. In accordance with the purposes of this chapter, the Commission shall
have the following functions and duties:
(1) To maintain a system for the survey and inventory of historic
buildings, sites, structures, objects and districts within the
Borough of Glenolden.
(2) To conduct research upon and nominate significant resources to
the National Register of Historic Places and any other appropriate
lists or programs.
(3) To conduct research upon and nominate significant historic
resources for inclusion within any lists or signage maintained or
erected by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania Historical and
Museum Commission.
(4) To promote among the citizenry of the Borough a knowledge and
awareness of the history of the Borough and appreciation for the
accomplishments and contributions of Glenolden residents and
citizens to the history of our Borough, commonwealth and nation.
(5) To collect and preserve materials of historic value related to the
Borough, especially those related to the early years of the Borough
and/or its creation, in addition to Delaware County and/or
Pennsylvania Historic Resource Survey forms, photographic
records, newspapers or magazines, deeds, title searches, recorded
interviews, transcribed interviews, videotapes, etc.
(6) To sponsor exhibits, from time to time, concerning the history of
the Borough and to publish papers, pamphlets or other documents
relating to the history of the Borough.
(7) To advise the Building Inspector, Zoning Board, Mayor or Borough
Council respecting the issuance of permits for the construction or
demolition of historic sites or resources within the Borough. When
requested, in writing, to issue such comments by any of the
aforementioned officials, the Commission shall review and
comment upon the issuance of the aforementioned permits to the
requesting authority within 30 days of said request.
(8) To advise the Planning Commission or Borough Council respecting
a subdivision or land development which may affect historic
§ 16A-4 FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION § 16A-5
16:17
Chapter 17
INVESTMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investment of pension funds — See Ch 31.
resources or sites within the Borough. Within 30 days of a written
request by the Planning Commission or Borough Council, the
Commission shall issue a written review and comment upon the
proposed subdivision or land development directed to the
requesting authority.
(9) To advise the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough Council, when
requested to comment, respecting all applications for special
exceptions, conditional uses, variances or zoning changes affecting
historic resources or historic sites. Within 30 days from such a
written request by either the Zoning Hearing Board or Borough
Council, the Commission shall issue its written review and
comment upon such request for special exceptions, conditional
uses, variances or zoning changes to the requesting authority.
(10) To maintain and update a list which clearly identifies buildings,
sites, structures, objects and districts within the Borough of
historical significance.
(11) To secure information to enable the Borough to apply for state and/
or federal funds and to incur expenses as provided for by Borough
Council.
(12) To perform any other lawful activity which shall be delegated from
time to time by Borough Council.
B. The Chairman of the Commission, or his designee, may also testify
before either Borough Council, the Planning Commission, the Zoning
Hearing Board or at any other public forum regarding any and all
matters affecting historical resources or sites within the Borough of
Glenolden.
§ 16A-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 16A-5
17:18
ARTICLE I
Local Government Investment Trust
[Adopted 1-26-1989 by Res. No. R-3-89]
§ 17-1. Joining of trust.
This governmental unit shall join with other local governmental units in
accordance with the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act by becoming a
settlor of the Pennsylvania Local Government Investment Trust (the "Trust")
and entering into the Declaration of Trust, which is adopted by reference
with the same effect as if it had been set out verbatim in this section and a
copy of which shall be filed with the minutes of the meeting at which this
Resolution No. R-3-89 was adopted.
§ 17-2. Purchase of shares.
This governmental unit is authorized to purchase shares in the Trust from
time to time with available funds and to redeem some or all of those shares
from time to time as funds are needed for other purposes. These actions are
to be taken by the officers designated for this purpose, pursuant to general
or specific instructions by the governing body of this governmental unit.
§ 17-3. Custody of funds.
The Trustees of the Trust are designated as having official custody of this
governmental unit's funds which are invested by the purchase of shares in
the Trust.
§ 17-4. Findings and determinations.
As required by the Intergovernmental Cooperation Act,5 the following
matters are specifically found and determined:
A. The conditions of the agreement are set forth in the Declaration of
Trust referred to in § 17-1.
B. This governmental unit's participation in the Trust shall be terminable
at any time by resolution.
C. The Declaration of Trust and the purchase of its shares are for the
purpose of investing this governmental unit's funds, thereby achieving
economic and other advantages of pooled investments.
D. It is not necessary to finance the agreement authorized herein from
funds of this governmental unit except through the purpose of shares in
the trust.
E. The Trust shall be managed by a Board of Trustees as set forth in the
Declaration of Trust and the bylaws provided for therein.
5. Editor's Note. See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 2301 et seq.
§ 17-1 INVESTMENTS § 17-4
17:19
F. Shares may be repurchased and redeemed from time to time as this
governmental unit may determine to be necessary or appropriate to
meet its cash investment requirements.
§ 17-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 17-4
17:20
Chapter 18
MANAGER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement benefits and pensions — See Ch
31.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 34.
Social security — See Ch. 36.
§ 18-1. Creation of office.
Pursuant to Section 1141 of the Borough Code (53 P.S. § 46141), the office
of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough Council of the
Borough of Glenolden, subject to the right of the Borough Council to abolish
said office at any time by ordinance.
§ 18-2. Qualifications.
In appointing a Borough Manager, the Borough Council shall be guided
by the executive and administrative qualifications of each person being
considered for appointment with special reference to the duties of the office
as set forth hereinafter.
§ 18-3. Appointment and removal; vacancies.
§ 18-4. Bond.
Before entering upon his or her duties, the Borough Manager shall give
a bond to the Borough of Glenolden with an approved surety company in
an amount to be determined by the Borough Council conditioned upon the
faithful performance of his or her duties. The premium for said bond shall
be paid by the Borough of Glenolden.
A. The Borough Manager shall be elected or appointed for an indefinite
term by a majority vote of all members of the Borough Council, shall
serve at the pleasure of the Borough Council and may be removed at
any time by a majority vote of all members of the Borough Council;
provided, however, that the Borough Council shall have the right, in its
discretion, to enter into a contract of employment with the Borough
Manager setting forth the terms and conditions of his or her
employment.
B. Whenever a temporary vacancy occurs in the office of Borough
Manager because of illness, disability or any other reason, the Borough
Council may appoint an Acting Borough Manager to perform the duties
set forth hereinafter for the duration of the temporary vacancy.
§ 17-4 MANAGER § 18-5
18:21
§ 18-5. Compensation.
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be
established, from time to time, by the Borough Council by ordinance or by
resolution.
§ 18-6. Powers and duties.
The Borough Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the
Borough of Glenolden and shall be responsible to the Borough Council as
a whole for the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the
Borough of Glenolden which are placed in his or her charge as set forth
hereinafter. Subject, as aforesaid, to recall at any time by ordinance or
resolution of the Borough Council and subject to the daily direction of
the President of the Borough Council or, in his or her absence, the Vice
President, the Borough Manager shall have all the powers and duties for
the proper and efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough of
Glenolden which are not expressly imposed or conferred upon other officials
of the Borough of Glenolden by statute or ordinance, and which powers and
duties shall include but not be limited to the following:
A. To execute and enforce the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and all ordinances and resolutions of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. To prepare for review by the President of the Borough Council an
agenda for each meeting, regular or special, of Borough Council.
C. To attend all meetings, regular or special, of Borough Council, and post
and/or advertise as required all appropriate notices thereof.
D. To keep the Borough Council informed as to the conduct of Borough
affairs, submit periodic reports on the condition of Borough finances
and such other reports as the Borough Council requests and make
recommendations concerning the affairs of the Borough.
E. To prepare and submit to the Borough Council by October 15 of each
year a proposed annual budget for the next fiscal year. In preparing the
proposed budget, the Borough Manager shall obtain from the Borough
Council and from the head of each department, agency or board or any
qualified officer thereof, estimates of revenues and expenditures and
such other supporting data as is required, and said data shall remain
available for review by the Borough Council.
F. To administer the annual budget after its adoption by the Borough
Council.
G. To prepare and submit annually to the Borough Council, not more than
30 days after the close of each fiscal year, a correct and detailed
statement on the finances and the administrative activities of the
Borough for the preceding year.
§ 18-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 18-6
18:22
§ 18-7. Powers and duties of Mayor.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager any of
his or her nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties.
Chapter 20
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY, JOINT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers — See Ch. 135.
§ 20-1. Declaration of intent.
The Borough of Glenolden does hereby signify its intention to organize an
Authority, together with the Townships of Ridley, Springfield and Upper
Darby and the Boroughs of Folcroft, Clifton Heights and Norwood, under
the provisions of the Acts of Assembly and the amendments and
supplements thereto.
H. To investigate and dispose of or designate an officer to investigate and
dispose of all complaints regarding Borough service and personnel and
to report to the Borough Council thereon. All complaints regarding
Borough services shall be referred to the office of the Borough
Manager.
I. To attend to all aspects of the awarding of contracts pursuant to law
and supervise the performance and faithful execution of the same,
except insofar as such duties are especially imposed upon some other
Borough officer by statute or ordinance.
J. To direct and supervise the administration of all departments and
functions of the Borough except as otherwise provided by ordinance or
law.
K. To be responsible for all accounts payable and receivable.
L. To ensure that all moneys owing the Borough are promptly paid and
that proper legal proceedings are taken for the collection of all Borough
claims.
M. To supervise and oversee all nonuniformed personnel employed by the
Borough.
N. To perform such other nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and duties
of the Borough Council as may, from time to time, be conferred upon
him or her by ordinance or by resolution.
§ 18-6 MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY, JOINT § 20-2
20:23
§ 20-2. Authorization to Borough officers.
The proper officers are hereby authorized and directed to organize the said
Authority in conjunction with the proper officers of the aforesaid townships
and boroughs and, together with the aforesaid officers, to execute the
Articles of Incorporation and to file the same with the Secretary of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as provided by law.
§ 20-3. Articles of Incorporation.
The said Articles of Incorporation shall be as follows.6
§ 20-4. Nonliability of Borough.
The said Authority shall have no power at any time or in any manner
to pledge the credits or taxing power of the Borough of Glenolden, nor
shall any of its obligations be deemed to be obligations of the Borough of
Glenolden, nor shall the said Borough be liable for the payment of principal
or of interest on any such obligations.
§ 20-5. Assumption of existing obligations.
Any and all obligations or commitments of the existing Sewer Board of the
Borough of Glenolden as provided under Ordinance No. 344 of the said
Borough, approved September 28, 1936, hereinbefore assumed or incurred
or hereinafter assumed or incurred, shall, upon incorporation of the said
Authority, be assumed in full by the said Authority, and shall become and
be the sole obligation and liability of the said Authority without liability of
whatsoever nature upon the Borough of Glenolden.7
§ 20-6. When effective.
The provisions hereof shall be operative when all other municipalities, as
above set forth and which are included in the present Sewer Board, as
aforesaid, are members of the aforesaid Authority.
Chapter 24
PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks — See Ch. 118.
6. Editor's Note: A copy of the Articles of Incorporation is on file in the office of the Borough
Secretary. The Authority was incorporated under the name of "Muckinipates Authority."
7. Editor's Note: Ord. No. 501, adopted and approved 6-12-1952, authorized the execution of
an agreement by the proper officers of the Borough of Glenolden with the other
participating municipalities and with the Muckinipates Authority providing for the
construction by the Authority of a sewage treatment plant on a tract of land owned by the
Authority in the Borough of Norwood.
§ 20-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 20-6
24:24
§ 24-1. Establishment; membership; terms of office; compensation.
There is established within the Borough of Glenolden a Recreation Board
to consist of seven persons. The members of the Board shall be appointed
by the Borough Council. Each member shall serve for a term of five years
or until his/her successor has been appointed, except that the members
of the Board first appointed (or appointed to fill newly created positions)
shall serve for staggered terms in such a manner that at least one term and
no more than two terms shall expire annually. Members of the Board shall
serve without pay.
§ 24-2. Powers.
Said Recreation Board shall have the power to equip, operate and maintain
the present playground and any other playground, playfield, gymnasium,
public bath, bathing place, swimming pool or recreation center which the
Borough may from time to time appropriate or acquire by gift, devise,
purchase, lease or otherwise, provided that said Recreation Board shall not
have the power to incur any expenses for or on behalf of the Borough or for
which the Borough shall be liable in and about the equipping, operating and
maintenance of the playground, playfield, gymnasium, public bath, bathing
place, swimming pool or recreation center which may be established in the
future, without express authorization by the Borough Council.
§ 24-3. Officers; rules and regulations.
The Recreation Board shall appoint from its membership a Chairman and
such other officers as it may deem necessary for the orderly procedure of its
business and may adopt bylaws, rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of the state laws or the Borough ordinances. The Recreation
Board shall, from time to time, make rules governing the operation and
conduct of the recreation facilities operated by the Board; however, these
rules shall be subject to the approval of the Council.
§ 24-4. Meetings and minutes.
§ 24-5. Annual budget.
Each year the Recreation Board shall submit to Council a written, typed or
printed budget for the next calendar year on or before September 1 of each
year. This date may be changed by the Council at its discretion, provided
that it is done at a meeting and notices are given to the Recreation Board of
A. The Recreation Board, at its first meeting of the new year, shall set the
date, time and place of its regular meetings and shall notify the Council
of this in writing.
B. The Recreation Board shall cause to be sent to each Councilman and
the Mayor a copy of the minutes of its last meeting.
§ 20-6 PARKS AND RECREATION BOARD § 24-5
24:25
said change. If no notice is given to the Recreation Board, it will be assumed
that the established date for the previous year will be in effect.
§ 24-6. Additional funds.
It is understood that the Recreation Board at various times does receive
funds from various other agencies. It is understood that these funds are
separate from Borough funds and that the Recreation Board is accountable
to these other agencies and to the Borough for these funds, since they must
of necessity be taken into consideration in preparation by the Recreation
Board of its budget, which is submitted to the Borough.
§ 24-7. Repealer.
All resolutions and ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed.
Chapter 26
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 26-1. Creation.
A commission to be known as the "Planning Commission of Glenolden
Borough" is hereby created and established pursuant to 53 P.S. § 10201.
A. The budget shall include all anticipated expenses for the calendar year
and shall be so itemized as to present a clear understanding of each and
every item. Towards this end, it is requested that the Recreation Board
obtain a written budget from each organization or activity to which
money is allocated by the Recreation Board, which budget shall include
all anticipated expenses for the calendar year on or before August 1 of
each year. The said budget of each organization or activity sponsored by
the Recreation Board shall include not only anticipated expenses, but
any funds which may be received by said organization or activity by way
of gift, bequest, or otherwise so that said Recreation Board may
properly prepare its budget for a proper allocation of funds.
B. Should Council require more information on the budget of the said
Recreation Board, Council shall notify the said Recreation Board.
Council may change, alter or delete any portion or portions thereof of
said Recreation Board budget as deemed inappropriate or excessive.
C. Moneys appropriated in the budget but not expended shall be returned
to the Council of the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 24-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 26-2
26:26
§ 26-2. Number of members: appointment.
The Planning Commission of the Borough of Glenolden shall consist of five
members who shall be appointed to said Commission by Borough Council.
§ 26-3. Terms of office: vacancies.
Except for the initial appointments made pursuant to this chapter, the term
of each member of the Commission shall be four years, or until his or
her successor is appointed and qualified. Any vacancy arising during an
unexpired term shall be filled by Borough Council for the balance of the
unexpired term.
§ 26-4. Initial appointments.
The initial appointments to the Planning Commission shall be made by
Borough Council as follows:
§ 26-5. Membership.
All of the members of the Planning Commission shall be residents of the
municipality.
§ 26-6. Conduct of business.
The Commission shall elect its own Chairman and Vice Chairman and create
and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve annual
terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may make and alter
bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures consistent with
the ordinances of the Municipality and the laws of the commonwealth. The
Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually make
a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to Borough Council.
Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary or as requested
by Borough Council.
§ 26-7. Powers and duties.
The powers of the duties of the Planning Commission of the Borough
of Glenolden shall be as are set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, specifically 53 P.S. § 10209.1, and by the duly adopted
ordinances of the Borough of Glenolden and by any amendments to said
ordinances.
A. Two members shall be appointed for terms of four years each.
B. Two members shall be appointed for terms of three years each.
C. One member shall be appointed for a term of two years.
§ 26-2 PLANNING COMMISSION § 26-7
26:27
Chapter 29
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police pension fund — See Ch. 31, Part 2.
§ 29-1. Establishment.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 29-2. Personnel and compensation.
Chapter 30
RECORDS
A. The following classifications are hereby established within the Police
Department of the Borough of Glenolden: Chief of Police, Sergeant,
Detective, patrolman and such other officers as designated from time to
time by the Council of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. The number of persons to serve in each of such classifications, on a fulltime
and/or a part-time basis, and the compensation of each shall be as
determined by the Borough Council from time to time.
§ 26-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 29-2
29:28
ARTICLE I
Access to Public Records
[Adopted 11--18--2008 by Ord. No. 20618]
§ 30-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FINANCIAL RECORD — Any account, voucher or contract dealing with the
receipt or disbursement of funds or acquisition, use or disposal of services,
supplies, materials, equipment or property; or the salary or other payments
or expenses paid to an officer or employee, including the individual's name
and title; and a financial audit report, excluding the audit's underlying work
papers.
PUBLIC RECORD — The public records of this Borough shall mean a record,
including a financial record, which is not exempt from being disclosed under
the Pennsylvania Right to Know Law9 or under any other federal or state
law or regulation, judicial decree or order and which is not protected by a
privilege. Public records shall not include the following:
A. Those which would cause the loss of federal or state funds if disclosed.
A record, the disclosure of which would be reasonably likely to result in
a substantial and demonstrable risk of physical harm to or the personal
security of an individual.
B.
A record, the disclosure of which would be reasonably likely to
jeopardize or threaten public safety or preparedness.
C.
A record, the disclosure of which creates a reasonable likelihood of
endangering the safety or physical security of a building, public utility,
resource, infrastructure, facility or information storage system.
D.
A record regarding computers which if disclosed would be reasonably
likely to jeopardize computer security.
E.
F. Medical information.
G. Personal identification information.
H. Certain employee information.
I. Labor relations, negotiations and arbitration.
Predecisional drafts of bills, policy, management directives, ordinances
or amendments to any of the foregoing.
J.
K. Predecisional deliberations.
8. Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Ch. A169, Records, Public Access to,
adopted 7-17-2001 by Res. No. 3-2001.
9. Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 30-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-1
29:29
RECORD — Information, regardless of physical form or characteristics,
that documents a Borough transaction or activity and is created, received
or retained pursuant to law or in connection with a Borough transaction,
business or activity, including a document; paper; letter; map; book; tape;
photograph; film or sound recording; information stored or maintained
electronically; and a data-processed or image-processed document.
RESPONSE — The Borough's notice informing a requester of a granting of
access to a record or the Borough's written notice to a requester granting,
denying, or partially granting and partially denying access to a requested
record.
§ 30-2. Authority.
The Borough Council shall make the Borough's public records available for
access and duplication to any United States resident, in accordance with
law, Borough ordinances, policy and administrative regulations.
L. Trade secrets and confidential proprietary information.
Personal notes and working papers prepared by or for a public official
or agency employee for his/her own personal use.
M.
N. Donor identity, except donations to a public official or agency.
O. Unpublished works or documents.
P. Academic records.
Q. Criminal investigations.
R. Noncriminal investigations.
Records pertaining to transmissions received by emergency dispatch
personnel, including 911 recordings.
S.
T. DNA and RNA records.
U. Records pertaining to autopsies.
Draft minutes until the next regularly scheduled meeting; executive
session records are exempt.
V.
W. Real estate appraisals and feasibility studies.
X. Certain library records.
Y. Precontract award documents; bidder information prior to bid opening.
Z. Communications with insurance company or risk management.
AA. Information regarding recipients of social services.
BB. Records regarding the identity of a minor.
§ 30-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 30-3
29:30
§ 30-3. Designation of Open Records Officer; duties and
responsibilities.
§ 30-4. Guidelines for requester and Borough.
A. The Borough Council shall designate an Open Records Officer, who
shall be responsible to:
(1) Review and respond to written requests in accordance with law,
Borough policy and administrative regulations.
(2) Direct requests to other appropriate individuals in the Borough or
in another agency.
(3) Track the Borough's progress in responding to requests.
(4) Issue interim and final responses to submitted requests.
(5) Maintain a log of all record requests and their disposition.
(6) Ensure Borough staff is trained to perform assigned job functions
relative to requests for access to records.
(7) The Open Records Officer shall ensure that the Board policy
governing access to public records and the list of applicable fees
are posted at the Borough office.
B. Upon receiving a request for access to a record, the Open Records
Officer shall:
(1) Note the date of receipt on the written request.
(2) Compute and note on the written request the day on which the fiveday
period for response will expire.
(3) Maintain an electronic or paper copy of the written request,
including all documents submitted with the request, until the
request has been fulfilled.
(4) If the written request is denied, maintain the written request for 30
days or, if an appeal is filed, until a final determination is issued or
the appeal is deemed denied.
A. A public record shall be provided to the requester in the medium
requested if it exists in that form; otherwise, it shall be provided in its
existing medium.
B. Requesters may access and procure copies of the public records of the
Borough during the regular business hours of the Borough office.
C. A requester's right of access does not include the right to remove a
record from the control or supervision of the Open Records Officer.
D. When responding to a request for access, the Borough is not required to
create a public record that does not exist nor to compile, maintain,
§ 30-3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-4
29:31
§ 30-5. Request for access.
§ 30-6. Response to request.
format or organize a record in a manner which the Borough does not
currently use.
E. Information shall be made available to individuals with disabilities in an
appropriate format, upon request and with sufficient advance notice.
F. The Borough shall not limit the number of records requested.
G. The Borough shall post at the administrative office and on the
Borough's website the following information:
(1) Contact information for the Open Records Officer.
(2) Contact information for the Commonwealth's Office of Open
Records or other applicable appeals officer.
(3) The form to be used to file a request, with a notation that the
Pennsylvania Office of Open Records form may also be used if the
Borough decides to create its own form.
(4) Board policy, administrative regulations and procedures governing
requests for access to the Borough's public records.
A. A written request for access to a public record shall be submitted on the
required form(s), and addressed to the office of the Open Records
Officer in writing and/or by mail: Open Records Office, 36 Boon Avenue,
Glenolden, PA 19036.
B. Written requests may be submitted to the Borough in person, by mail, to
a designated fax machine, and to a designated e-mail address.
C. Each request must include the following information:
(1) Identification or description of the requested record, in sufficient
detail.
(2) Name and address of the person to receive the Borough's response.
D. The Borough shall not require an explanation of the reason for the
request or the intended use of the requested record, unless otherwise
required by law.
A. Borough employees shall be directed to forward requests for access to
public records to the Open Records Officer.
B. Upon receipt of a written request for access to a record, the Open
Records Officer shall determine if the requested record is a public
record and if the Borough has possession, custody or control of that
record.
§ 30-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 30-6
29:32
§ 30-7. Grant of request.
C. The Open Records Officer or designee shall respond promptly within
five business days of receiving the request. If the Borough fails to
respond to a request within five business days, the request for access
shall be deemed denied.
D. The initial response shall grant access to the requested record, deny
access to the requested record, partially grant and partially deny
access to the requested record, or notify the requestor of the need for
an extension of time to fully respond.
E. Extension of time.
(1) If the Borough determines that more than five business days are
required to respond to the request, in accordance with the reasons
stated in the Right to Know Law,10 notice shall be sent indicating
that the request is being reviewed, the reason for the delay, the
reason for the review, a date when the response will be provided,
and an estimate of any fees.
(2) Up to a thirty-day extension for one of the listed reasons does not
require the consent of the requester. If the response is not given by
the specified date, it shall be deemed denied on the day following
that date.
(3) A requester may consent in writing to an extension that exceeds 30
days, in which case the request shall be deemed denied on the day
following the date specified in the notice if the Open Records
Officer has not provided a response by that date.
A. If the Open Records Officer determines that the request will be granted,
the response shall inform the requester that access is granted and
either include information on the regular business hours of the
administration office, provide electronic access, or state where the
requester may go to inspect the records or information electronically at
a publicly accessible site. The response shall include a copy of the fee
schedule in effect, a statement that prepayment of fees is required in a
specified amount if access to the records will cost in excess of $100, and
the medium in which the records will be provided.
B. A public record shall be provided to the requester in the medium
requested if it exists in that form; otherwise, it shall be provided in its
existing medium. However, the Borough is not required to permit use of
its computers.
C. The Open Records Officer may respond to a records request by
notifying the requester that the record is available through publicly
accessible electronic means or that the Borough shall provide access to
inspect the record electronically. If the requester, within 30 days
10.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 30-6 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-7
29:33
§ 30-8. Denial of request.
following receipt of the Borough's notice of access by electronic means,
submits a written request to have the record converted to paper, the
Borough shall provide access in printed form within five days of receipt
of the request for conversion to paper.
D. A public record that the Borough does not possess but is possessed by a
third party with whom the Borough has contracted to perform a
governmental function and which directly relates to that governmental
function shall be considered a public record of the Borough. When the
Borough contracts with such a third party, the Borough shall require
the contractor to agree in writing to comply with requests for such
records and to provide the Borough with the requested record in a
timely manner to allow the Borough to comply with the law.
E. The Open Records Officer shall notify a third party of a record request if
the requested record contains a trade secret or confidential proprietary
information, in accordance with law and administrative regulations.
F. If the Open Records Officer responds to a requester that a copy of the
requested record is available for delivery at the administration office
and the requester does not retrieve the record within 60 days of the
Borough's response, the Borough shall dispose of the copy and retain
any fees paid to date.
A. If the Open Records Officer denies a request for access to a record, a
response shall be sent within five business days of receiving the
request. The response denying the request shall include the following:
(1) Description of the record requested.
(2) Specific reasons for denial, including a citation of supporting
authority.
(3) Name, title, business address and telephone number, and signature
of the Open Records Officer on whose authority the denial was
issued.
(4) Date of the response.
(5) Procedure for the requester to appeal a denial of access.
B. The Borough shall not deny access to a public record based on the
intended use by the requester.
C. The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a record if
the requester has made repeated requests for that same record and the
repeated requests have placed an unreasonable burden on the
Borough.
D. The Open Records Officer may deny a request for access to a record
when timely access is not possible due to a disaster, or when access
§ 30-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 30-8
29:34
§ 30-9. Appeal of denial.
§ 30-10. Fees.
may cause physical damage or irreparable harm to the record. To the
extent possible, a record's contents shall be made accessible even when
the record is physically unavailable.
E. Information that is not subject to access and is redacted from a public
record shall be deemed a denial.
A. If a request for access to a public record is denied or deemed denied,
the requester may file an appeal within 15 business days of the mailing
date of the Open Records Officer's response or a deemed denial to
Pennsylvania Office of Open Records, 400 North Street Plaza Level,
Harrisburg, PA 17120-0225.
B. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Pennsylvania Office of Open Records or
designee shall make a final written determination of the request within
30 days of the date the appeal was received. If denied, a written
explanation shall be provided.
C. The final determination shall be the final order of the Office of Open
Records.
D. The requester may appeal the Office of Open Record's final order by
petitioning the Court of Common Pleas, in accordance with the
provisions of law.
A. Duplicates of public records shall be provided by the Borough upon
payment of applicable fees.
B. A list of fees that may apply shall be provided to each requester, posted
at the Borough's office, and be made available electronically.
C. The Borough shall not assess any fees for staff time or resources used to
evaluate a request for access to public records.
D. The Borough may require prepayment of estimated fees when the fees
required to fulfill the request are expected to exceed $100.
E. The Borough may charge actual fees for mailing.
§ 30-8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 30-10
29:35
Chapter 31
RETIREMENT BENEFITS AND PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 16.
Police Department — See Ch. 29.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 34.
Social Security — See Ch. 36.
§ 30-10 GLENOLDEN CODE § 30-10
29:36
Part 1
[AdopNteodnu3n-i1fo2r-1m9e9d8 FBuyllO-Tridm. eN Eo.m 1p0l5o4ye, eAsp Pperonvseiodn 3F-u1n2d-1998;
Amended In Its Entirety 9-24-2002 By Ord. No. 2001, Approved
9-24-2002]
ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 31-1. Definitions.
As used in this Part 1, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 205 — The Pennsylvania Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and
Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984).11
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — A benefit differing in amount and form of
payment from another benefit but equal in value to that other benefit based
on the following assumptions with regard to interest and life expectancy:
AVERAGE SALARY — A member's average salary at any point in time shall
be calculated as the member's average monthly compensation for the 36
consecutive, full months of employment with the Borough that produces the
highest such average.
BENEFICIARY — The person or persons designated by the member to be
the recipient of any survivor benefits payable under this plan. In the case of
a married member, the beneficiary shall be the member's spouse unless the
member, with the spouse's consent, specifically elects otherwise.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
COMPENSATION — For each month of the member’s employment with the
Borough, the total wages earned by the member during the month for such
employment, including wages for overtime served during the month, but
excluding any payment for comp time, accumulated sick time, accumulated
vacation or bonuses. Compensation shall not include any other monies paid
by the Borough to the member for any other reason, including but not
limited to unused sick leave.[Amended 9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2049,
approved 9-18-2007]
MEMBER — An individual entitled to participate in the plan by virtue of
having met the membership requirements of Article II.
PENSION COMMITTEE — The Borough of Glenolden Nonuniformed Full-
Time Employees Pension Plan Committee as described in § 31-30.3.
A. Interest: 8% per annum compounded annually.
Life expectancy: The life expectancy of members and beneficiaries shall
be determined on the basis of the 1983 Group Annuity Table using male
rates for members and female rates for beneficiaries.
B.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 31-1 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-1
29:37
PENSION FUND — The institutions or investment vehicles (bank, insurance
company, mutual funds, etc.) in which the assets of the plan are held.
PLAN — The Borough of Glenolden Nonuniformed Full-Time Employees
Pension Plan.
PLAN YEAR — The plan's fiscal year each year shall begin on January 1 of
the year and end on December 31 of the year.
YEARS OF SERVICE — The total period of full-time employment of a
member by the Borough as a nonuniformed full-time employee from date
of hire to date of termination of employment. Full-time employment shall
include time during which the member is absent from work on account of
paid vacation and paid illness and shall also include any other period of
time deemed by the Pension Committee to constitute full-time employment.
Years of service shall include any period of time during which the member
serves in the armed forces of the United States, provided that such military
service commences after the member was employed by the Borough and
that the member is employed at least six months by the Borough prior
to such military service and that the member returns to employment as a
nonuniformed full-time Borough employee within six months of termination
of such military service.
§ 31-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-1
29:38
ARTICLE II
Membership; Member Contributions
§ 31-2. Eligibility to participate; commencement.
An eligible employee of the Borough shall become a member of the plan
on the date on which he commences employment with the Borough. An
"eligible employee" shall mean a person duly appointed by the Borough as
an employee of the Borough and who is scheduled to work at least 35 hours
per week in a capacity other than that of a police officer or fire fighter.
§ 31-3. Member contributions; refund.
A. Members are required to contribute up to 5% of compensation to the
plan, except that such contribution requirement may be reduced or
eliminated by Borough resolution for any year to the extent that such
member contributions are not required to meet the plan's funding
requirements (see § 31-30.2). Each member's contributions to the plan
shall be accounted for separately and credited with interest at the rate
of 6% per annum, compounded annually.
B. A member's accumulated contributions with interest shall be refunded
to the member or the member's beneficiary, whichever is applicable, as
soon as possible following the member's termination of employment
with the Borough, provided that upon such termination of employment
no other plan benefits are payable to the member or the member's
beneficiary, whichever is applicable.
§ 31-2 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-3
29:39

ARTICLE III
Normal Retirement Benefits12
§ 31-4. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for normal retirement benefits, provided that he
retires from the Borough's employment and, upon such retirement, he has
attained at least age 65 and has completed at least five years of service.
§ 31-5. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-6 will commence on the first day of the
month coincident with or next following the member's date of retirement. If
the member retires on other than the first day of a month, he will receive
a pension payment for his initial month of retirement equal to the amount
described in § 31-6 multiplied by the ratio of the days he is retired in the
month to the full number of days in the month.
§ 31-6. Amount of benefits.
§ 31-7. Normal form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-6 will be paid in the form of a monthly annuity
for the member's lifetime only.
§ 31-8. Optional forms of payment.
In lieu of receiving benefits in the normal form (a life annuity for the
member's lifetime only), a member may, in accordance with § 31-30, elect
to receive actuarially reduced benefits under a form of payment which
provides survivor benefits.
A. For any eligible member retiring prior to October 1, 2002, such eligible
member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1% of his average
salary at time of retirement, multiplied by his years of service at
retirement (not to exceed 35 years).
B. For any member retiring on or after October 1, 2002, such eligible
member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1.2% of his
average salary at time of retirement, multiplied by his years of service
at retirement (not to exceed 35 years).
12.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Mary Jones retires prior to
October 1, 2002, at age 65 with 25 years of service. Her average salary at retirement is
$2,000 per month. Mary would be entitled to a monthly pension of $500 (i.e., 1% x 25 x
$2,000) payable for her lifetime. Mary could elect to receive reduced benefits under an
optional form that provides survivor benefits. For example, if Mary's husband was age 68,
she could elect to receive benefits under the fifty-percent surviving spouse option, in
which case she would receive $453.79 monthly for life, and, upon her death, $226.90
monthly would continue to her husband for the rest of his life.
§ 31-4 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-8
29:41

ARTICLE IV
Early Retirement Benefits13
§ 31-9. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for early retirement benefits, provided that he
retires from the Borough's employment prior to meeting the eligibility
requirements for normal retirement benefits and, upon such retirement, he
has attained at least age 55 and has completed at least 15 years of service.
§ 31-10. Benefit commencement date.
An eligible member may elect to have benefits as described in § 31-11
commence on the first day of any month coincident with or following his
date of retirement. If the member retires on other than the first day of a
month and elects to have benefits commence immediately, he will receive
a pension payment for his initial month of retirement equal to the amount
described in § 31-11 multiplied by the ratio of the days he is retired in the
month to the full number of days in the month.
§ 31-11. Amount of benefits.
§ 31-12. Normal form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-11 will be paid in the form of a monthly annuity
for the member's lifetime only.
A. For any eligible member retiring prior to October 1, 2002, such eligible
member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1% of his average
salary at time of retirement multiplied by his years of service at
retirement (not to exceed 35 years), reduced by 5/12 of 1% for each
month by which the member's benefit commencement date precedes
the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
member's 65th birthday.
B. For any eligible member retiring on or after October 1, 2002, such
eligible member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1.2% of
his average salary at time of retirement multiplied by his years of
service at retirement (not to exceed 35 years), reduced by 3/12 of 1%
for each month by which the member's benefit commencement date
precedes the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
member's 65th birthday.
13.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Tom Smith retires on his
60th birthday with 20 years of service. His average salary at retirement is $1,800 per
month. He retires prior to October 1, 2002. Tom would be entitled to a monthly pension of
$360 (i.e., 1% x 20 x $1,800) commencing at age 65 and payable for his lifetime.
Alternatively, Tom could elect to have reduced benefits commence on the first day of any
month preceding his 65th birthday. For example, if Tom elected to have benefits
commence immediately at age 60, his age-sixty-five benefit of $360 would be reduced by
25% (i.e., 5/12 of 1% x 60 months) to $270 per month payable for his lifetime. Tom would
also have the opportunity to elect to have his early retirement benefits paid under an
optional form that provides survivor benefits.
§ 31-9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-13
29:43
§ 31-13. Optional forms of payment.
In lieu of receiving benefits in the normal form (a life annuity for the
member's lifetime only), a member may, in accordance with § 31-30, elect
to receive actuarially reduced benefits under a form of payment which
provides survivor benefits.
§ 31-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-13
29:44
ARTICLE V
Disability Retirement Benefits
§ 31-14. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for disability retirement benefits if he suffers a
disability on or after October 31, 2002, as a result of the performance of
his duties as a Borough employee and such disability prevents the member
from continuing to perform his duties as a Borough employee. The
determination of whether or not the member has suffered such a disability
shall be made by the Pension Committee on the basis of a written report of
a physician or physicians designated by the Pension Committee.
§ 31-15. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-16 will commence on the first day
of the month coincident with or next following the member's date of
retirement on account of service-connected disability.
§ 31-16. Amount of benefits.
An eligible member shall, while disabled, receive an immediate monthly
benefit equal to 75% of earnings, less an amount equal to the benefits to
which such eligible member is entitled to receive under the Pennsylvania
Workers' Compensation Act (77 P.S. § 1 et seq.). If such eligible member
receives a lump sum settlement under the Pennsylvania Workers'
Compensation Act, then the monthly off-set to the benefit shall be the
actuarial equivalent of said lump sum settlement.
§ 31-17. Earnings. [Amended 9-18-2007 by Ord. No. 2049, approved
9-18-2007]
For the purposes of determining benefits under § 31-16 only, "earnings"
shall mean the average wages received by the member for the last 36
months of employment with the Borough, including wages for overtime, but
excluding any payment for comp time, accumulated sick time, accumulated
vacation or bonuses. Earnings shall not include any monies paid by the
Borough to any Member for any other reason.
§ 31-18. Form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-16 will be paid in the form of a monthly
annuity for the member's lifetime with survivor benefits described in Article
VII. Cost-of-living adjustments shall not be applied to disability retirement
benefits.
§ 31-19. Determination of continuance of disability.
At any time prior to the member reaching what would have been his normal
retirement date, the Pension Committee may require a member receiving a
disability pension to be reexamined by a physician or physicians designated
§ 31-14 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-19
29:45
by the Pension Committee. If such physician or physicians find that the
member is able to again perform his duties as a Borough employee, such
member shall be restored to active duty and his disability pension shall be
discontinued. If such member refuses or fails to accept such restoration to
active duty, his disability pension shall, nevertheless, be discontinued.
§ 31-19 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-19
29:46
ARTICLE VI
Vested Termination Benefits14
§ 31-20. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for vested termination benefits, provided that he
terminates employment with the Borough after he has completed at least
five years of service but prior to meeting the eligibility requirements for
normal retirement or early retirement benefits.
§ 31-21. Benefit commencement date.
An eligible member who has completed at least 15 years of service at
termination may elect to have monthly benefits as described in § 37-22
commence on the first day of any month coincident with or following his
55th birthday. In the case of an eligible member who has completed less
than 15 years of service at termination, benefits as described in § 31-22 will
commence on the first day of the month coincident with or next following
the member's 65th birthday.
§ 31-22. Amount of benefits.
§ 31-23. Normal form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-22 will be paid in the form of a monthly annuity
for the member's lifetime only.
A. For any eligible member who retires prior to October 1, 2002, such
eligible member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1% of his
average salary at time of termination multiplied by his years of service
at termination (not to exceed 35 years), reduced by 5/12 of 1% for each
month by which the member's benefit commencement date precedes
the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
member's 65th birthday.
B. For any eligible member who retires on or after October 1, 2002, such
eligible member's monthly pension will be equal in amount to 1.2% of
his average salary at time of termination multiplied by his years of
service at termination (not to exceed 35 years), reduced by 3/12 of 1%
for each month by which the member's benefit commencement date
precedes the first day of the month coincident with or next following the
member's 65th birthday.
14.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Kathy Smith terminates
employment at age 40 with 15 years of service. Her average salary at termination is
$1,500 per month. She retires prior to October 1, 2002. Kathy would be entitled to a
monthly benefit of $225 (i.e., 1% x15 x $1,500) commencing at age 65 and continuing for
her lifetime. Alternatively, since she has 15 years of service, she could elect to have
reduced benefits commence as early as age 55. For example, if she did elect to have
benefits commence at age 55, her age-sixty-five benefit of $225 would be reduced by 50%
(i.e., 5/12 of 1% x 120 months) to $112.50 per month payable for her lifetime. Kathy would
also have the opportunity to elect to have her benefits paid under an optional form that
provides survivor benefits.
§ 31-20 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-24
29:47
§ 31-24. Optional forms of payment.
In lieu of receiving benefits in the normal form (a life annuity for the
member's lifetime only), a member may, in accordance with § 31-30, elect
to receive actuarially reduced benefits under a form of payment which
provides survivor benefits.
§ 31-24 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-24
29:48
ARTICLE VII
Survivor Benefits
§ 31-25. Preretirement.
If a member dies prior to actual retirement but after having met the age
and service requirements for normal or early retirement benefits, 50% of
the benefit the member would have received had he been retired on his
date of death will be continued to his surviving spouse while she remains
unremarried. Benefits will commence on the first day of the month
coincident with or next following the member's date of death. In addition, if
the member died on other than the first day of the month, a partial payment
will be paid for the member's month of death equal to a full month's benefit
multiplied by the ratio of the number of days in the month, including and
following the member's date of death, to the full number of days in the
month.
§ 31-26. Termination of employment.
If a member dies after having terminated employment with the Borough
with entitlement to deferred vested benefits under Article VI but before
such benefits have commenced, 50% of the benefit the member was
scheduled to receive will be paid to his surviving spouse while she remains
unremarried, with benefits commencing on the member's scheduled benefit
commencement date. (See § 31-21.)
§ 31-27. Benefits to children.
If there is no eligible unremarried spouse to receive survivor benefits as
described in §§ 31-25, 31-26 and 31-28, each child of the member, while
such child is under age 18, shall equally share the benefits otherwise
payable to an eligible spouse with any other children of the member who
are also under age 18.
§ 31-28. Postretirement.
Survivor benefits, if any, will be payable in accordance with the form of
payment under which the deceased member had been receiving benefits.
§ 31-25 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-28
29:49

ARTICLE VIII
Administration
§ 31-29. Cost-of-living increases.
The plan does not provide for automatic cost-of-living increases in
retirement benefits being paid to members or beneficiaries.
§ 31-30. Optional forms of payment.
§ 31-30.1. Lump sum payments.
Other provisions relating to the payment of benefits under the plan
notwithstanding, if the actuarial equivalent lump sum value (i.e., the
present value) of benefits initially due a member or beneficiary is $5,000 or
less, the member or beneficiary may elect to receive such lump sum in lieu
of the payments otherwise due the member or beneficiary.
§ 31-30.2. Funding of plan.
The plan is subject to the minimum funding requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
(Act 205 of 1984).15 The plan's funding requirements will be determined on
A. A member entitled to monthly retirement benefits under the plan may
elect to have benefits paid under an optional form of payment which
differs from the normal form of payment (which is a life annuity for the
member's lifetime only with no survivor benefits). In such case, the
benefit payable under the optional form will be the actuarial equivalent
of the benefit payable under the normal form.
B. Optional forms available.
(1) Fifty-percent spouse annuity. Upon the retired member's death,
50% of the monthly benefit the member had been receiving will be
continued to the member's spouse for life.
(2) One-hundred-percent spouse annuity. Upon the member's death,
100% of the monthly benefit the member had been receiving will be
continued to the member's spouse for life.
(3) Life annuity with 10 years certain. A monthly annuity payable for
the member's lifetime. If the member dies before receiving at least
120 monthly payments, payments will continue to the member's
beneficiary until a grand total of 120 payments have been made to
the member and beneficiary combined. If the member dies after
having received at least 120 payments, no survivor benefits are
payable.
C. For purposes of Subsection B(1) and (2), "spouse" means the member's
spouse at the time when the optional form is elected.
§ 31-29 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.2
29:51
the basis of regular actuarial valuations in accordance with Act 205, and the
required funding will be met from the following sources:
§ 31-30.3. Pension Committee.
A. The portion of state aid received by the Borough from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that is allocated to the plan.
B. Member contributions of up to 5% of compensation if the amount
described in Subsection A is not sufficient to meet the plan's funding
requirements.
C. Borough contributions, if the amounts described in Subsections A and B
are not sufficient to meet the plan's funding requirements.
A. The general administration and management of the plan and pension
fund shall be vested in a Pension Committee which shall be under the
direction of the Borough Council. The members of the Pension
Committee shall be appointed from time to time to serve at the pleasure
of the Borough Council but, unless sooner removed, shall continue to
serve until their successors are duly appointed and have accepted their
appointment. Upon the expiration of the term of the member on the
Pension Committee and in the event of the resignation, death, inability
to act or removal of any member of the Pension Committee at any time,
the Borough Council by resolution shall designate and appoint a
successor or successors to such member of the Pension Committee
whose term has expired or who has resigned, died, become unable to
act or been removed.
B. The Pension Committee shall elect one of its members as Chairman and
shall appoint a Secretary who may be, but need not be, a member of the
Pension Committee. The Pension Committee shall also from time to time
appoint from its members such subcommittees or other officers as the
Pension Committee shall from time to time determine. The members of
the Pension Committee shall serve without compensation for their
services as such members.
C. The Pension Committee shall have complete control of the
administration of the plan and shall have all powers necessary to enable
it to properly carry out its duties, including but not limited to the power
to construe the provisions of the plan, to determine all questions
relating to eligibility of pension members, to authorize all
disbursements for benefits to members and (as set forth below) to
contract with life insurance companies. The decisions of the Pension
Committee on all matters within the scope of its authority shall be final.
D. The Pension Committee shall have the power to contract with any legal
reserve life insurance company licensed to transact business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose of purchasing annuity
15.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 31-30.2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-30.3
29:52
§ 31-30.4. Trustees.
§ 31-30.5. Actuary.
The Borough Council shall employ an actuary to perform the required
periodic actuarial valuations of the plan. Such actuary shall be an approved
contracts which will provide part or all of the death benefits and/
or retirement benefits described in Articles III, V, VI and VII. Such
contracts shall be owned by the plan, and any payments to any
insurance company in consideration of such contracts shall be made by
the plan. Upon the termination of a member, any cash surrender values
arising from such contracts shall be deposited in the pension fund.
E. The Pension Committee may make such rules and regulations for the
conduct of its meetings and administrative duties as it deems
appropriate and may require that a member file with the Pension
Committee a written application in form prescribed by the Pension
Committee whereby the member agrees for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators to be bound by all of the terms and
conditions of the plan.
F. No members of the Pension Committee shall incur any liability for any
action or failure to act excepting only liability for their own gross
negligence or willful misconduct. The Borough Council shall indemnify
each member of the Pension Committee against any and all claims, loss,
damages, expense and liability arising from any action or failure to act,
except when the same is judicially determined to be due to the gross
negligence or willful misconduct of such member.
G. The Pension Committee shall maintain an account showing the fiscal
transactions of the pension fund and shall keep in convenient form such
data as may be necessary for the actuarial valuations and computations
under the plan. Each year, the Pension Committee shall submit to the
Borough Council a report giving a brief account of the operations of the
plan and pension fund during the previous year.
A. The pension fund shall be held in trust by a trustee or trustees to be
designated from time to time by the Borough Council. The trustee shall
administer the pension fund in accordance with the provisions of a trust
agreement to be executed by the trustee and the Borough Council,
which trust agreement may be amended from time to time by the
Borough Council. The trustee shall not be liable to any member or to a
beneficiary of a member or any other person for the payments of any
benefits under the plan except to the extent expressly provided for in
the plan.
B. The trustee shall make payment of benefits under the plan only to the
extent, in the amounts, in the manner, at the time and to the persons as
shall from time to time be set forth or designated in written
authorizations or directions from the Pension Committee to the trustee.
§ 31-30.3 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.5
29:53
actuary as defined under the Pennsylvania Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984).16
§ 31-30.6. Miscellaneous provisions.
§ 31-30.7. Amendments; discontinuances; benefits and
compensation limits; rollovers.
A. Payments made under the provisions of this plan shall not be a charge
on any other fund in the Borough Treasury or any fund under the
control of the Borough other than the pension fund.
B. Any person participating in the pension fund or who has become a
beneficiary thereof and who is dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of
the Pension Committee in reference to the rights of such person may,
after notice and at a time fixed by the Pension Committee, personally
appear before it for the purpose of stating his or her complaints.
C. All persons claiming pensions, all members of the plan and all officials
and employees of the Borough shall furnish to the Pension Committee
such information as it may require from them from time to time in
furtherance of its duties.
D. None of the benefits provided herein shall be subject to the claims of, or
to execution, attachment, garnishment or other legal process by any
creditor of a member, nor of any beneficiary of such member, except to
the extent required under the terms of a qualified domestic relations
order as such order pertains to divorce settlements. No member, nor
beneficiary of such member, shall have any right to alienate, encumber
or assign any of the benefits provided herein, or any interest arising out
of or created by the plan, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the member from designating or changing the
designation of his beneficiary, provided that any change in designated
beneficiary occurs prior to the date a member has commenced
receiving benefits under the plan.
E. The expenses of the administration of the plan and pension fund shall
be paid from the pension fund to the extent permitted by applicable law
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any administrative expenses of
the plan and pension fund not permitted to be paid from the pension
fund shall be paid by the Borough.
F. Dividends (if any) received by the pension fund from insurance
companies and forfeitures resulting from a member's separation from
service shall be used to reduce plan costs and shall not be applied to
increase the benefits which any member would otherwise receive under
the plan.
16.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 31-30.5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-30.7
29:54
A. This plan may be amended by the Borough if, as amended, it continues
to be for the exclusive benefit of members and continues to comply with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing
nonuniformed full-time employees pension plans. Amendments may not
reduce accrued benefits under the plan except to the extent that the
pension fund is then insufficient to provide such accrued benefits in full.
B. Subject to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing
nonuniformed full-time employees pension plans, the plan may be
discontinued by the Borough, but it shall be impossible for any part of
the pension fund to be used for, or diverted to, purposes other than the
exclusive benefit of members, except such part as represents an
actuarial surplus after provision for all accrued benefits under the plan.
C. Any other provisions of the plan to the contrary notwithstanding,
benefits payable from the plan shall in no circumstances exceed the
maximum benefit limitations of Section 415 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code, nor shall compensation in excess of the
maximum permitted under Section 401(a)(17) of such code be taken
into account in calculating plan benefits.
D. A member or beneficiary may elect to have any portion of an eligible
rollover distribution transferred directly to an eligible retirement plan
as specified by the member or beneficiary. A distribution shall be
determined to be an eligible rollover distribution and a plan shall be
determined to be an eligible retirement plan in accordance with Section
401(a)(31) and other applicable sections of the United States Internal
Revenue Code.
§ 31-30.7 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.7
29:55

Part 2
Non[Audnoifpotremde9d- 2F4u-l2l-0T0i2mBe yEOmrpdl.o Nyeoe. s2 R00et1i,r eAmppernotv Meded9i-c2a4l- 2B0e0n2e]fit17
ARTICLE VIIIA
Definitions
§ 31-30.8. Definitions.
As used in this Part 2, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
MEMBER — An individual duly appointed by the Borough as an employee of
the Borough who worked at least 35 hours per week in a capacity other than
that of a police officer or fire fighter and who is entitled to participate in the
supplemental medical benefit plan by virtue of having met the membership
requirements of Article X.
SUPPLEMENTAL MEDICAL BENEFIT PLAN — The plan described in
Article XIIIC, below.
YEARS OF SERVICE — The total period of full-time employment of a
member by the Borough as a nonuniformed full-time employee from date
of hire to date of termination of employment. Full-time employment shall
include time during which the member is absent from work on account of
paid vacation and paid illness and shall also include any other period of
time deemed by the Borough to constitute full-time employment. Years of
service shall include any period of time during which the member serves in
the armed forces of the United States, provided that such military service
commences after the member was employed by the Borough and that
the member is employed at least six months by the Borough prior to
such military service and that the member returns to employment as a
nonuniformed full-time Borough employee within six months of termination
of such military service.
17.Former Part 1A, Nonuniformed Full-Time Employees Retirement Medical Benefit, Was
Renumbered As Part 2 At Time Of Republication Of Code And Subsequent Parts
Renumbered Respectively.
§ 31-30.8 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.8
29:57

ARTICLE VIIIB
Membership; Commencement
§ 31-30.9. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible to participate in the supplemental medical benefit
plan provided that he retires from the Borough's employment and, upon
such retirement, he has attained at least age 65, he has completed at least
16 years of service and he has become eligible for Medicare Parts A and B.
§ 31-30.10. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-30.11 will commence on the first
day of the month coincident with or next following the member's date of
retirement.
§ 31-30.9 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.10
29:59

ARTICLE VIIIC
Medical Retirement Benefits
§ 31-30.11. Supplemental medical benefit plan.
Each eligible member may elect to be covered under an insurance contract
selected by the Borough from time to time and supplementing Medicare
Parts A and B such as Keystone 65 or Personal Choice 65.
§ 31-30.12. Borough contribution.
The Borough shall contribute out of the Borough's general funds all or
a portion of the cost for the eligible member to participate in the
supplemental medical benefit plan based upon the following schedule:
Years of Service
Percentage of
Borough Contribution
25 or more 100%
24 90%
23 80%
22 70%
21 60%
20 50%
19 40%
18 30%
17 20%
16 10%
§ 31-30.11 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.12
29:61

ARTICLE VIIID
Termination; Amendment
§ 31-30.13. Termination of participation.
Each eligible member will cease to be a participant upon the occurrence
of the earliest of the following events: the termination of the supplemental
medical benefit plan; the death of the eligible member; or the failure of such
participant to make any contribution required.
§ 31-30.14. Amendment.
The Borough, at any time or from time to time, may amend any or all of the
provisions of the supplemental medical benefit plan without the consent of
any employee or eligible member.
§ 31-30.15. Termination.
The Borough is establishing this supplemental medical benefit plan with
the intent that it will be maintained for an indefinite period of time.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough reserves the right to terminate
the supplemental medical benefit plan, in whole or in part, at any time. In
the event the supplemental medical benefit plan is terminated, no further
contributions shall be made.
§ 31-30.13 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-30.15
29:63

Part 3
[Adopted 3-12-1998 BPoylOicred P. eNnos.i o1n0 5F3u, nAdpproved 3-12-199818]
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 31-31. Definitions.
As used in this Part 3, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACT 600 — The Police Pension Fund Act, Act of May 29, 1956 P.L. (1955)
1804, No. 600, as amended, 72 P.S. 2263.1 et seq.,19 which governs
Pennsylvania police pension plans with three or more full-time members.
ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENT — A benefit differing in amount and form of
payment from another benefit but equal in value to that other benefit, based
on the following assumptions with regard to interest and life expectancy:
ATTENDING COLLEGE — Eligible children under this Part 3 who are
registered at an accredited institution of higher learning and are carrying
a minimum course load of seven credit hours per semester.[Added
7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010]
AVERAGE SALARY — At any point in time, shall be calculated as the
member's average monthly compensation for the last 36 full months of
employment with the Borough.
BENEFICIARY — The person or persons designated by the member to be
the recipient of any survivor benefits payable under this plan. In the case of
a married member, the beneficiary shall be the member's spouse, unless the
member, with the spouse's consent, specifically elects otherwise.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
COMMITTEE — The Borough of Glenolden Police Pension Plan Committee
as described in § 31-58.
COMPENSATION — For each month of the member's employment with the
Borough, the total wages earned by the member during the month for such
employment, including wages for overtime served during the month and
wages for unused holidays which occurred during the month. Compensation
shall not include any other moneys paid by the Borough to the member
for any other reason, including but not limited to comp time, unused sick
A. Interest: 7% per annum compounded annually.
Life expectancy: The life expectancy of members and beneficiaries shall
be determined on the basis of the 1983 Group Annuity Table (male
rates) with ages set back zero years for members and six years for
beneficiaries.
B.
18.Editor's Note: This Ordinance Also Superseded Former Part 2, Police Pension Fund,
Adopted 4-8-1982 By Ord. No. 861, Approved 4-8-1982, As Amended.
19.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 771 et seq.
§ 31-31 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-31
29:65
leave, accumulated vacation or bonuses.[Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010]
DEPENDENT CHILDREN — Children of the member who are under the age
of 18 or, if attending college, are under or attaining the age of 23.[Added
7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010]
EARLY RETIREMENT DATE — The first day following the date on which
the member completes 20 years of service.[Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No.
2115, approved 2-21-2017]
MEMBER — An individual entitled to participate in the plan by virtue of
having met the membership requirements of Article X.
PENSION FUND — The institutions or investment vehicles (bank, insurance
company, mutual funds, etc.) in which the assets of the plan are held.
PLAN — The Borough of Glenolden Police Pension Plan.
PLAN YEAR — The plan's fiscal year each year shall begin on January 1 of
the year and end on December 31 of the year.
YEARS OF SERVICE — The total period of full-time employment of a
member by the Borough as a police officer from date of hire to date of
termination of employment. Full-time employment shall include time during
which the member is absent from work on account of paid vacation and
paid illness and shall also include any other period of time deemed by the
Committee to constitute full-time employment. Years of service shall not
include any period of time for which the member fails to make the required
member contributions otherwise due in accordance with § 31-33. Years of
service shall include any period of time during which the member serves in
the armed forces of the United States, provided that:
If such military service commenced before the member was employed
by the Borough, the member has purchased pension service credit for
such military service in accordance with § 31-56.
A.
If such military service commences after the member was employed
by the Borough, the member must be employed at least six months by
the Borough prior to such military service and the member must return
to full-time employment as a full-time Borough police officer within six
months of termination of such military service.
B.
§ 31-31 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-31
29:66
ARTICLE X
Membership; Member Contributions
§ 31-32. Eligibility to participate; commencement.
An eligible employee of the Borough shall become a member of the plan
on the date on which he commences employment with the Borough. An
"eligible employee" shall mean a person who holds a position as a full-time
Borough police officer and who contributes to the plan in accordance with
§ 31-33.
§ 31-33. Member contributions.
Member are required to contribute 5% of compensation to the plan, except
that such contribution requirement may be reduced or eliminated by
Borough resolution for any year to the extent that such member
contributions are not required to meet the plan's funding requirements
(see § 31-57). Each member's contributions to the plan shall be accounted
for separately and credited with interest at the rate of 6% per annum,
compounded annually.
§ 31-32 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-33
29:67

ARTICLE XI
Normal Retirement Benefits20
§ 31-34. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for normal retirement benefits, provided that he
retires from the Borough's employment and upon such retirement he has
attained at least age 50 and completed at least 25 years of service.
§ 31-35. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-36 will commence on the first day
of the month coincident with or next following the member's date of
retirement. If the member retires on other than the first day of a month,
he will receive a pension payment for his initial month of retirement equal
to the amount described in § 31-36 multiplied by the ratio of the days he is
retired in the month to the full number of days in the month.
§ 31-36. Amount of benefits.
An eligible member's initial monthly pension will be equal in amount to 50%
of his average salary at time of retirement, plus a monthly service increment
benefit equal to the lesser of $8.34 for each full year of service in excess of
25 years or $100.
§ 31-37. Form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-36 will be paid in the form of a monthly annuity
for the member's lifetime with survivor benefits and annual cost-of-living
adjustments as described in Articles XV and XVI, respectively.
20.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Officer Jones retires at age
50 with 27 years of service. His average salary at retirement is $3,000. Officer Jones would
be entitled to a monthly pension of $1,516.68 (i.e., 50% x $3,000 plus a service increment
benefit of $16.68) payable for his lifetime. This pension would increase annually in
accordance with the plan's cost-of-living feature, until it had increased by 30% to
$1,971.68 per month. Upon Officer Jones' death, 50% of the monthly benefit he had been
receiving would be continued to his surviving spouse or, if there is no such spouse, to his
children under the age of 18 or, if attending college, under or attaining the age of 23, in
equal shares. This example was amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved
7-20-2010.
§ 31-34 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-37
29:69

ARTICLE XII
Early Retirement Benefits
§ 31-38. Option available. [Amended 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2115,
approved 2-21-2017]
Each member may retire on or at any time after his early retirement
date. Upon termination, the member must file with the Secretary of the
Borough a written notice of his intention to elect an early retirement
benefit. This benefit shall become effective as of the date of the notice or the
date designated in the notice, whichever is later. The amount of the early
retirement benefit shall be the actuarial equivalent of a vested retirement
benefit as computed in Article XIV. The actuarial equivalent of the vested
retirement benefit shall be determined by actuarially reducing the vested
retirement benefit to reflect that it will commence on the effective date of
the early retirement rather than on the member's normal retirement date.
The actuarial reduction shall be calculated using the actuarial assumptions
reported in the last actuarial valuation report filed with the Public Employee
Retirement Commission.
§ 31-38 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-38
29:71

ARTICLE XIII
Disability Retirement Benefits21
§ 31-39. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for disability retirement benefits if he suffers a
disability as a result of the performance of his duties as a Borough police
officer and such disability prevents the member from continuing to perform
his duties as a Borough police officer. The determination of whether or not
the member has suffered such a disability shall be made by the Pension
Committee on the basis of a written report of a physician or physicians
designated by the Pension Committee.
§ 31-40. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-41 will commence on the first day
of the month coincident with or next following the member's date of
retirement on account of service-connected disability.
§ 31-41. Amount of benefits. [Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075,
approved 7-20-2010; 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 2115, approved
2-21-2017]
A. Officer hired before January 1, 2015. If an officer hired before January
1, 2015, is permanently disabled from performing police work for the
Borough as the result of a service-connected disability, the officer shall
receive 75% of his wages (which will include all monies received in the
twelve- month period preceding retirement). Such benefit shall be
offset by social security disability ("SSD") income received by the officer
due to the same injury or illness that resulted in the service-connected
disability pension. This pension should continue until the death of the
officer and thereafter to the officer's survivors, as defined by Act 600. In
no event should the officer's pension (exclusive of benefits) exceed
100% of his/her wages after taxes as received in the twelve-month
period preceding retirement.
B. Officer hired on or after January 1, 2015. If an officer hired on or after
January 1, 2015, is permanently disabled from performing police work
for the Borough as the result of a service-connected disability, the
officer shall receive 50% of his wages (which will include all monies
received in the twelve-month period preceding retirement). If such
officer qualifies for social security disability income due to the same
injury or illness that resulted in the service-connected disability
pension, the disability pension shall be 75% of his wages, subject to an
21.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Officer Smith retires at
age 45 with 20 years of service, on account of a service-connected disability. During his 12
months of employment, his earnings are $43,200, for an average of $3,600 per month.
Officer Smith would be entitled to a monthly pension of $2,700 (i.e., 75% of $3,600). Upon
Officer Smith's death, 50% of his monthly benefit, i.e. $1,350, would be continued to his
surviving spouse or, if there is no such spouse, to his children under the age of 18 or, if
attending college, under or attaining the age of 23, in equal shares. This example was
amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010.
§ 31-39 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-41
29:73
§ 31-42. Earnings. [Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved
7-20-2010]
For purposes of determining benefits under § 31-41 only, "earnings" shall
be all monies received in the twelve-month period preceding disability
retirement.
§ 31-43. Form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-41 will be paid in the form of a monthly
annuity for the member's lifetime with survivor benefits described in Article
XV. Cost-of-living adjustments shall not be applied to disability retirement
benefits.
§ 31-44. Determination of continuance of disability.
At any time prior to the member reaching what would have been his normal
retirement date, the Pension Committee may require a member receiving a
disability pension to be reexamined by a physician or physicians designated
by the Pension Committee. If such physician or physicians find that the
member is able to again perform his duties as a Borough police officer, such
member shall be restored to active duty and his disability pension shall be
discontinued. If such member refuses or fails to accept such restoration to
active duty, his disability pension shall, nevertheless, be discontinued.
offset for the SSD income received. This pension should continue until
the death of the officer and thereafter to the officer's survivors, defined
by Act 600. In no event should the officer's pension (exclusive of
benefits) exceed 100% of his wages after taxes as received in the
twelve-month period preceding retirement.
C. Non-service connected disability benefits.
(1) If an officer hired before January 1, 2015, is permanently and
totally disabled as a result of a non-service-connected disability, the
officer shall receive a disability pension that is 50% of his/her
annual base salary at the time of retirement until the officer returns
to work or until death. An officer shall not be eligible for this
pension if the disability:
(a) Was intentionally self-inflected;
(b) Resulted from the use of drugs or alcohol; or
(c) Resulted from employment other than as a police officer for the
Borough.
(2) The disabled officer shall be entitled to purchase, through the
Borough, medical insurance coverage (as then offered by the
Borough); provided, however, that such coverage shall be at the
cost of the individual officer and not the cost of the Borough.
§ 31-41 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-44
29:74
ARTICLE XIV
Vested Termination Benefits22
§ 31-45. Eligibility requirements.
A member will be eligible for vested termination benefits, provided that he
terminates employment with the Borough after he has completed at least 12
years of service but prior to meeting the eligibility requirements for normal
retirement or disability benefits.
§ 31-46. Benefit commencement date.
Monthly benefits as described in § 31-47 will commence on the first day of
the month coincident with or next following the date on which the member
would have met the eligibility requirements for normal retirement benefits
(§ 31-34) had he continued employment as a full-time Borough police officer.
§ 31-47. Amount of benefits.
An eligible member's initial deferred monthly pension will be equal in
amount to 50% of his average salary at time of termination multiplied
by a fraction, the numerator of which is the member's years of service
at termination and the denominator of which is the years of service that
the member would accrue based on continued employment as a full-time
Borough police officer until the date he would have met the eligibility
requirements for normal retirement benefits, plus a service increment
benefit equal to the lesser of $8.34 for each full year of service in excess of
25 years or $100.
§ 31-48. Form of payment.
Benefits as described in § 31-47 will be paid in the form of a monthly annuity
for the member's lifetime only, with survivor benefits and annual cost-ofliving
adjustments as described in Articles XV and XVI, respectively.
22.Editor's Note: This article also included the following example: Officer Brown is hired at
age 23. His projected normal retirement age is age 50, at which time he will have 27 years
of service. Officer Brown terminates his employment with the Borough at age 41 after
completing 18 years of service. His average salary at the time of termination is $3,600.
Officer Brown would be entitled to a monthly pension, commencing at age 50 equal to
$1,200 (i.e., 50% x $3,600 x 18/27). He would not be eligible for a service increment
benefit since he has only 18 years of service. After it has commenced, his pension would
increase annually in accordance with the plan's cost-of-living feature, until it had
increased 30% to $1,560 per month. Upon Officer Brown's death, 50% of the benefit he
was receiving or scheduled to receive will be paid to his surviving spouse or, if there is no
such spouse, to his children under the age of 18 or, if attending college, under or
attaining the age of 23, in equal shares. Note that survivor benefits will not commence
until Officer Brown's scheduled benefit commencement date if he dies prior to such date.
This example was amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010.
§ 31-45 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-48
29:75

ARTICLE XV
Survivor Benefits23
§ 31-49. Postretirement.
If a member dies after having commenced receiving retirement benefits
under Article XI, XIII or XIV, 50% of the benefit the member had been
receiving will be continued to his surviving spouse while she remains
unremarried. Benefits will commence on the first of the month following the
member's date of death.
§ 31-50. Preretirement; vested eligibility. [Amended 7-20-2010 by
Ord. No. 2075, approved 7-20-2010]
A. If a member dies prior to actual retirement but after having met the age
and service requirements for normal retirement, 50% of the benefit the
member would have received had he retired on his date of death will be
continued to his surviving spouse. Benefits will commence on the first
day of the month coincident with or next following the member's date of
death. In addition, if the member died on a day other than the first day
of the month, a partial payment will be paid for the member's month of
death, equal to a full month's benefit multiplied by the ratio of the
number of days in the month, including and following the member's
date of death, to the full number of days in the month.
B. Vested eligibility. In the event that a member dies after completing 12
years of service but was not yet eligible for retirement, the survivor(s)
shall be entitled to:
(1) Receive payment of all money that the member invested in the
pension fund, with interest or other increases in value of the
member’s investment in the pension fund (unless the member has
designated another beneficiary for this purpose); or
23.Editor's Note: This article also included the following examples: Example 1: Officer Adams
dies on November 1, 1998, after having commenced receiving normal retirement benefits.
His initial benefit was $1,000 per month. At the time of his death, he was receiving $1,200
per month as a result of cost-of-living increases. A full $1,200 would be paid to Officer
Adams for the month of November, since he was still alive on the first day of the month.
Commencing December 1, 1998, his surviving unremarried spouse (or dependent
children) would receive a monthly benefit of $600. The monthly benefit of $600 would
remain constant and not be eligible for cost-of-living adjustments. Example 2: Officer
Evans dies while an active officer on November 21, 1998, at age 52 with 28 years of
service. His average salary at time of death is $3,400. If he had retired on his date of
death, he would have been entitled to a monthly pension of $1,725.02 (i.e., 50% x $3,400 +
$25.02 service increment benefit). Accordingly, his surviving unremarried spouse (or
dependent children) would be entitled to a monthly benefit of $862.51 (50% x $1,725.02)
commencing December 1, 1998. In addition, a partial payment would be made for the
month of November equal to $287.50 (i.e., $862.51 x 10 days ÷30 days). The $862.51
benefit would remain constant and not be eligible for cost-of-living adjustments. Example
3: Officer Franklin terminates employment at age 45 with 20 years of service with
entitlement to a deferred vested benefit of $1,000 per month commencing at age 50.
Officer Franklin dies at age 48. His surviving unremarried spouse (or dependent children)
would be entitled to a monthly benefit of $500 (i.e., 50% x $1,000) with benefits
commencing on Officer Franklin's projected benefit commencement date, i.e, when Officer
Franklin would have attained age 50. After the survivor benefit commenced, it would
remain constant at $500 and not be eligible for cost-of-living adjustments.
§ 31-49 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-50
29:77
§ 31-50.1. Preretirement survivor benefit. [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord.
No. 2115, approved 2-21-2017]
In the event a police employee is killed in service, the police employee's
family shall receive the benefits provided for and subject to the terms of
Act 51 of 2009, which benefits are paid exclusively by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania with the exception of any pension benefit to which the police
employee was entitled prior to the police employee's death, solely by virtue
of the police employee's service with the Township (i.e., either a normal,
early, or vested pension benefit). It is understood that "family" shall refer
to the surviving spouse and dependent children. The benefit is payable to
the surviving spouse until death, then to the surviving dependent children
under the age of 18 years or, if attending college, under or attaining the age
of 23 years.
§ 31-51. Termination of employment.
If a member dies after having terminated employment with the Borough
with entitlement to deferred vested benefits under Article XIV but before
such benefits have commenced, 50% of the benefit the member was
scheduled to receive will be paid to his surviving spouse while she remains
unremarried, with benefits commencing on the member's scheduled benefit
commencement date. (See § 31-46.)
§ 31-52. Benefits to children. [Amended 7-20-2010 by Ord. No.
2075, approved 7-20-2010]
If there is no eligible spouse to receive survivor benefits as described in
§§ 31-49, 31-50 and 31-51, or if the spouse subsequently dies, then the
member's children under the age of 18 or, if attending college, under or
attaining the age of 23, shall be entitled to the benefits otherwise payable
to an eligible spouse, in equal shares.
§ 31-53. Cost-of-living adjustments.
No cost-of-living adjustments shall be applied to survivor benefits payable
under this article XV.
(2) Receive the vested benefit whereby the survivor(s) shall receive a
monthly benefit which shall be 50% of the member’s vested
monthly benefit as of the date the member would have been eligible
to receive the member's vested benefit.
§ 31-50 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-53
29:78
ARTICLE XVI
General Provisions; Administration
§ 31-54. Cost-of-living increases.24
On each January 1 following his date of retirement, a member shall have
his pension increased in proportion to the increase in the Philadelphia Area
Consumer Price Index for the twelve-month period ending on the October
31 preceding the date of increase, subject to the following conditions:
§ 31-55. Minimum benefit.
§ 31-56. Service credit for nonintervening military service.
Every member who has at least three years of service shall have the right to
purchase an additional year of service, up to a maximum of five additional
years of service, for each year or fraction thereof which the member served
in the armed forces of the United States prior to his employment by the
Borough of Glenolden. The cost of purchasing such credit for military
A. The increase due on the first January 1 following the member's
retirement shall be equal to the percentage increase described above
multiplied by that fraction of the preceding year during which the
member was retired.
B. A member's total retirement benefit after successive annual
applications of this cost-of-living provision, as described through
Subsection A, shall not exceed 130% of his initial retirement benefit.
A. If a member terminates employment prior to meeting the eligibility
requirements for retirement benefits (normal, disability or vested
termination benefits), he shall receive an immediate refund of his own
contributions to the plan with interest. If a member dies prior to
retirement and no survivor benefits are payable as described in Article
XV, the member's beneficiary shall receive an immediate refund of the
member's own contributions to the plan with interest.
B. If a member terminates employment after meeting the eligibility
requirements for retirement benefits (normal, disability or vested
termination benefits), the total benefits payable to the member and/or
his beneficiary shall not be less than the member's own contributions to
the plan with interest, as credited through the member's date of
termination.
24.Editor's Note: This section also included the following example: Officer Washington retires
on July 1, 1998, and receives a normal retirement pension of $2,000 per month. Assuming
that the Philadelphia Area Consumer Price Index increases 4% per annum, Officer
Washington's pension would increase by 2% (i.e., 50% of 4% since he was retired only six
months in 1998, effective January 1, 1999, and by 4% each successive January 1 until his
initial pension of $2,000 had increased by 30% to $2,600, as follows: Year: Monthly Benefit
1998: $2,000.00 1999: $2,040.00 2000: $2,121.60 2001: $2,206.46 2002: $2,294.72 2003:
$2,386.51 2004: $2,481.97 2005: $2,581.25 2006 and after: $2,600.00
§ 31-54 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-56
29:79
service shall be computed pursuant to the applicable formula set forth in
Section 4(b) of Act 600.
§ 31-57. Funding of the plan.
The plan is subject to the minimum funding requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act
(Act 205 of 1984).25 The plan's funding requirements will be determined on
the basis of regular actuarial valuations in accordance with Act 205, and the
required funding will be met from the following sources:
§ 31-58. Pension Committee.
A. The portion of state aid received by the Borough from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that is allocated to the plan.
B. Member contributions up to 5% of compensation if Subsection A is not
sufficient to meet the plan's funding requirements.
C. Borough contributions, if the sum of Subsections A and B is not
sufficient to meet the plan's funding requirements.
A. The general administration and management of the plan and pension
fund shall be vested in a Pension Committee which shall be under the
direction of the Borough Council. The members of the Pension
Committee shall be appointed from time to time to serve at the pleasure
of the Borough Council but, unless sooner removed, shall continue to
serve until their successors are duly appointed and have accepted their
appointment. Upon the expiration of the term of the member on the
Pension Committee and in the event of the resignation, death, inability
to act or removal of any member of the Pension Committee at any time,
the Borough Council by resolution shall designate and appoint a
successor or successors to such member of the Pension Committee
whose term has expired or who has resigned, died, become unable to
act or been removed.
B. The Pension Committee shall elect one of its members as Chairman and
shall appoint a Secretary who may be, but need not be, a member of the
Pension Committee. The Pension Committee shall also from time to time
appoint from its members such subcommittees or other officers as the
Pension Committee shall from time to time determine. The members of
the Pension Committee shall serve without compensation for their
services as such members.
C. The Pension Committee shall have complete control of the
administration of the plan and shall have all powers necessary to enable
it properly to carry out its duties, including but not limited to the power
to construe the provisions of the plan, to determine all questions
relating to eligibility of pension members, to authorize all
25.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 31-56 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-58
29:80
§ 31-59. Trustees.
disbursements for benefits to members and (as set forth below) to
contract with life insurance companies. The decisions of the Pension
Committee on all matters within the scope of its authority shall be final.
D. The Pension Committee shall have the power to contract with any legal
reserve life insurance company licensed to transact business in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, for the purpose of purchasing annuity
contracts which will provide part or all of the death benefits and/or
retirement benefits described in Articles XI, XIII, XIV and XV. Such
contracts shall be owned by the plan, and any payments to any
insurance company in consideration of such contracts shall be made by
the plan. Upon the termination of a member, any cash surrender values
arising from such contracts shall be deposited in the pension fund.
E. The Pension Committee may make such rules and regulations for the
conduct of its meetings and administrative duties as it deems
appropriate and may require that a member file with the Pension
Committee a written application in form prescribed by the Pension
Committee whereby the member agrees for himself, his heirs,
executors and administrators to be bound by all of the terms and
conditions of the plan.
F. No members of the Pension Committee shall incur any liability for any
action or failure to act, excepting only liability for their own gross
negligence or willful misconduct. The Borough Council shall indemnify
each member of the Pension Committee against any and all claims, loss,
damages, expense and liability arising from any action or failure to act,
except when the same is judicially determined to be due to the gross
negligence or willful misconduct of such member.
G. The Pension Committee shall maintain an account showing the fiscal
transactions of the pension fund and shall keep in convenient form such
data as may be necessary for the actuarial valuations and computations
under the plan. Each year the Pension Committee shall submit to the
Borough Council a report giving a brief account of the operations of the
plan and pension fund during the previous year.
A. The pension fund shall be held in trust by a trustee or trustees to be
designated from time to time by the Borough Council. The trustee shall
administer the pension fund in accordance with the provisions of a trust
agreement to be executed by the trustee and the Borough Council,
which trust agreement may be amended from time to time by the
Borough Council. The trustee shall not be liable to any member or to a
beneficiary of a member or any other person for the payments of any
benefits under the plan except to the extent expressly provided for in
the plan.
B. The trustee shall make payment of benefits under the plan only to the
extent, in the amounts, in the manner, at the time and to the persons as
§ 31-58 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-59
29:81
§ 31-60. Actuary.
The Borough Council shall employ an actuary to perform the required
periodic actuarial valuations of the plan. Such actuary shall be an approved
actuary as defined under the Pennsylvania Municipal Pension Plan Funding
Standard and Recovery Act (Act 205 of 1984).26
§ 31-61. Miscellaneous provisions.
shall from time to time be set forth or designated in written
authorizations or directions from the Pension Committee to the trustee.
A. Payments made under the provisions of this plan shall not be a charge
on any other fund in the Borough Treasury or any fund under the
control of the Borough other than the pension fund.
B. Any person participating in the Pension Fund or who has become a
beneficiary thereof and who is dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of
the Pension Committee in reference to the rights of such person may,
after notice and at a time fixed by the Pension Committee, personally
appear before it for the purpose of stating his or her complaints.
C. All persons claiming pensions, all members of the plan and all officials
and employees of the Borough shall furnish to the Pension Committee
such information as it may require from them from time to time in
furtherance of its duties.
D. None of the benefits provided herein shall be subject to the claims of, or
to execution, attachment, garnishment or other legal process by any
creditor of a member, nor of any beneficiary of such member, except to
the extent required under the terms of a qualified domestic relations
order as such order pertains to divorce settlements. No member, nor
beneficiary of such member, shall have any right to alienate, encumber
or assign any of the benefits provided herein, or any interest arising out
of or created by the plan, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed to prevent the member from designating or changing the
designation of his beneficiary, provided that any change in designated
beneficiary occurs prior to the date a member has commenced
receiving benefits under the plan.
E. The expenses of the administration of the plan and pension fund shall
be paid from the pension fund to the extent permitted by applicable law
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Any administrative expenses of
the plan and pension fund not permitted to be paid from the pension
fund shall be paid by the Borough.
F. Dividends (if any) received by the pension fund from insurance
companies and forfeitures resulting from a member's separation from
service shall be used to reduce plan costs and shall not be applied to
26.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 895.101 et seq.
§ 31-59 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-61
29:82
§ 31-62. Amendments, discontinuances, benefits and compensation
limits, rollovers.
§ 31-63. Act 44 Retirement Program. [Added 11-20-2018 by Ord.
No. 2123]
increase the benefits which any member would otherwise receive under
the plan.
A. This plan may be amended by the Borough if, as amended, it continues
to be for the exclusive benefit of members and continues to comply with
the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing police
pension plans. Amendments may not reduce accrued benefits under the
plan except to the extent that the pension fund is then insufficient to
provide such accrued benefits in full.
B. Subject to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania governing
police pension plans, the plan may be discontinued by the Borough, but
it shall be impossible for any part of the pension fund to be used for, or
diverted to, purposes other than the exclusive benefit of members,
except such part as represents an actuarial surplus after provision for
all accrued benefits under the plan.
C. Any other provisions of the plan to the contrary notwithstanding,
benefits payable from the plan shall in no circumstances exceed the
maximum benefit limitations of Section 415 of the United States
Internal Revenue Code, nor shall compensation in excess of the
maximum permitted under Section 401(a)(17) of such code be taken
into account in calculating plan benefits.
D. A member or beneficiary may elect to have any portion of an eligible
rollover distribution transferred directly to an eligible retirement plan
as specified by the member or beneficiary. A distribution shall be
determined to be an eligible rollover distribution, and a plan shall be
determined to be an eligible retirement plan in accordance with Section
401(a)(31) and other applicable sections of the United States Internal
Revenue Code.
A. Title. This section shall be known as the "Glenolden Borough Act 44
Deferred Retirement Option Program."
B. Definitions. When used in this section, the below words shall have the
meaning indicated.
ACT 44 DEFERRED RETIREMENT OPTION PROGRAM — The pension
payments plan approved by the Pennsylvania Legislature September
18, 2009, amending Title 53 as it relates to Municipal Police Pension
Plan.
ACT 44 PROGRAM ACCOUNT — Separate account created to accept
Act 44 Program participants' monthly pension check while an Act 44
Program participant, as well as any interest thereon.
§ 31-61 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-63
29:83
BOROUGH — Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
DROP PERIOD — Act 44 DROP period means the period beginning
as of the participating police officer's written election notice as
acknowledged by the employer and continuing until that police officer's
separation from employment as a police officer of the employer, but in
no event to exceed 36 months.
FUND or PLAN — The Municipal Police Pension Plan.
PARTICIPANT — A police officer who meets the eligibility for and has
executed the proper documents for participation in the Act 44 Program.
POLICE OFFICERS — Police officers of the Police Department.
C. Eligibility. Eligibility for the Act 44 Program shall be determined as
follows:
(1) Police officers who have not retired prior to the implementation of
the Act 44 Program may enter into the Act 44 Program on the first
day of any month coincident with, or following, the date when they
have completed 25 years of service and are 53 years of age.
D. Written election. Eligible officers who wish to be participants in the Act
44 Program must signify that intention in writing as follows:
(1) A police officer electing to participate in the Act 44 Program must
complete and execute an "Act 44 Program participation election
form" which shall evidence the member's election to participate in
the Act 44 Program. The form must be signed by the police officer
and be notarized and submitted to the Borough Secretary. The Act
44 Program participation election form shall include an irrevocable
notice to the Borough, by the police officer, that the police officer
shall resign from employment with the Police Department effective
on a specific date (the "resignation date") that is no later than 36
months from the effective date of the Act 44 Program election form.
A police officer shall cease to work as and may no longer be
employed as a police officer on the officer's resignation date, unless
the Borough properly terminates or honorably discharges the
officer prior to the resignation date. A participant may resign from
employment while in Act 44 Program status, which shall terminate
his/her participation in the Act 44 Program.
(2) In addition to the above information, the Act 44 Program
participation election form shall also advise the employee of the
following:
(a) An explanation of the participant's rights and obligations while
in Act 44 Program, including the participation period of 36
months;
(b) That, as a condition of Act 44 Program participation, the
participant foregos active participation in the Police Pension
Plan and foregos any recalculation of pension benefits to
§ 31-63 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-63
29:84
include salary increases occurring after Act 44 Program
participation commences; and
(c) That the Act 44 Program participant's service while in Act 44
Program will not count as pension service nor will it entitle a
participant to any service increment benefits to which the
participant was not entitled prior to commencing Act 44
Program participation. Once an Act 44 Program participant
enters the Act 44 Program, the participant may not
subsequently leave and then reenter the Act 44 Program, even
if the employee separates from employment and subsequently
begins employment with the Borough again.
E. Benefit calculation. For all pension plan purposes, continuous service of
a police officer participating in the Act 44 Program shall remain as it
existed on the effective date of commencement of participation in the
Act 44 Program. Service thereafter shall not be recognized or used for
the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the Borough
Police Pension Plan. The average monthly compensation of the police
officer for pension calculation purposes shall remain as it existed on the
effective date of commencement of participation in the Act 44 Program.
Earnings or increases in earnings thereafter shall not be recognized or
used for the calculation or determination of any benefits payable by the
Pension Program. The pension benefit payable to the members shall
increase only as a result of cost of living adjustments in effect on the
effective date of the member's participation in the Act 44 Program or by
applicable cost of living adjustments granted thereafter.
F. Accumulation of the Act 44 Program Account. The monthly retirement
benefits that would have been payable had the police officer elected to
cease employment and receive a normal retirement benefit shall, upon
the police officer commencing participation in Act 44 Program,
accumulate to the benefit of that officer and be paid into that police
officer's Act 44 Program account. Participants shall not have the option
of self-directed investment of their individual Act 44 Program account
while in the Act 44 Program. Instead, the monies shall be invested in a
fund to be identified and selected by the Borough in accordance with
applicable law so as to generate a rate of return of no less than 0% and
no more than 4.5%.
G. Accrual of nonpension benefits. After a police officer elects to
participate in the Act 44 Program, all other contractual benefits shall
continue to accrue with the exception of those provisions relating to the
Police Pension Plan.
H. Payout. Upon separation from employment, the Act 44 Program payout
options available to the Act 44 Program participant shall be as follows:
(1) The balance of the Act 44 Program participant's account, less
withholding taxes, if any, remitted to the Internal Revenue Service,
§ 31-63 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-63
29:85
shall be paid to the participant or the participant's surviving
beneficiary.
(2) The balance of the Act 44 Program participant's account shall be
paid directly to the custodian of an eligible retirement plan as
defined by Internal Revenue Code § 402(c)(8)(b), or in the case of
an eligible rollover distribution to the surviving spouse of a
deceased Act 44 Program participant, an eligible retirement
program that is an individual retirement account or an individual
retirement annuity as defined by Internal Revenue Code
§ 402(c)(9).
(3) If the Act 44 Program participant or beneficiary fails to make an
election within 60 days following the date of termination of Act 44
Program participation, then the Borough shall implement
Subsection H(1) above.
I. Service-connected disability during Act 44 Program. If an eligible DROP
participant becomes temporarily incapacitated during his participation
in the Act 44 Program, the police officer shall continue to participate in
the Act 44 Program as if fully employed. The police officer shall receive
disability pay in the same amount as disabled police officers that are not
participating in Act 44 Program. In no event shall a police officer on
temporary disability have the ability to draw from his Act 44 Program
account. However, notwithstanding any other provision in this
subsection, if a police officer is disabled and has not returned to work as
of the date of his required resignation, then such resignation shall take
precedence over all other provisions herein and said officer shall be
required to resign. Nothing contained in this program shall be
construed as conferring any legal rights upon any police officer or other
person to a continuation of employment nor shall participation in the
Act 44 Program supersede or limit in any way the right of the Borough
to lawfully discharge a police officer based upon their inability to
resume his or her full duties as a police officer. If an Act 44 Program
participant becomes eligible for a service-connected disability pension
and his/her employment is terminated due to an inability to continue in
service on grounds that render him eligible for a service-connected
disability pension, the monthly normal retirement benefit of the Act 44
Program participant shall be reclassified as being on account of a
service-connected disability. In no event shall an Act 44 participant's
monthly retirement benefit be recalculated. The Act 44 participant's
monthly retirement benefit shall remain 50% as calculated at the time
of entry into the Act 44 Program.
J. Death. If an Act 44 Program participant dies, the participant's eligibility
for the Act 44 Program shall terminate upon the date of death. In such
case, if the Act 44 Program account balances have not yet been paid
out, the participant's legal beneficiary shall have the same rights and
options as the participant to withdraw/roll over the account balance.
§ 31-63 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-63
29:86
K. Forfeiture of benefits. Notwithstanding a police officer's status as an
Act 44 Program participant, a current or former participant who is
convicted or pleads guilty to engaging in criminal misconduct which
constitutes a "crime related to public office or public employment," as
that phrase is defined in Pennsylvania's Pension Forfeiture Act, 43 P.S.
§§ 1311 through 1314, shall forfeit his right to receive a pension,
including any amounts currently deposited in the Act 44 Program
Account. In such a case, the participant shall only be entitled to receive
the contributions, if any, made by the participant to the Police Pension
Fund, without interest.
L. Cost of management for Act 44 Program. Reasonable costs or fees
associated with the implementation or their individual management of
the Act 44 Program account shall be paid directly and solely by the
participant and not by the Borough.
M. Amendment. Any amendments to the Act 44 Program section shall be
consistent with the provisions covering individual retirement option
plans set forth in any applicable collective bargaining agreement and
shall be binding upon all future Act 44 Program participants and upon
all Act 44 Program participants who have balances in their individual
retirement option accounts. The Act 44 Program may only be amended
by a written instrument, not by any oral agreement or past practice.
N. Construal of provisions. A police officer's election to participate in the
Act 44 Program shall in no way be construed as a limitation on the
Borough's right to suspend or to terminate a police officer for just cause
or to grant the police officer an honorable discharge based upon a
physical or mental inability to perform his or her duties.
O. Severability. The provisions of the Act 44 Program shall be severable:
and if any of its provisions shall be held to be unconstitutional or illegal,
the validity of any of the remaining provisions of the Act 44 Program
shall not be affected thereby. It is hereby expressly declared as the
intent of the Borough that the Act 44 Program would have been adopted
had such unconstitutional or illegal provision or provisions not been
included herein.
P. Effective date. The effective date of the Act 44 Program will be January
1, 2018.
§ 31-63 POLICE DEPARTMENT § 31-63
29:87
Chapter 34
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 31-63 GLENOLDEN CODE § 31-63
34:88
ARTICLE I
Salary of Mayor
[Adopted 12-29-1987 by Ord. No. 926, approved 12-29-198727]
§ 34-1. Salary established.
The salary of the Mayor of the Borough of Glenolden, for the year 1988, is
hereby fixed at the sum of $3,996 per annum, payable at the rate of $333
per month.
27.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Salary of Mayor, adopted
12-30-1986 by Ord No. 913, approved 12-30-1986.
§ 34-1 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 34-1
34:89

ARTICLE II
Salaries of Councilmen
[Adopted 12-29-1987 by Ord. No. 927, approved 12-29-198728]
§ 34-2. Compensation of President of Council.
The compensation of the President of Borough Council of the Borough of
Glenolden, for the year 1988, is hereby fixed at the sum of $3,996 per
annum, payable in monthly installments of $333 each.
§ 34-3. Compensation of Councilmen.
The compensation of each of the Councilmen of the Borough of Glenolden,
for the year 1988, is hereby fixed at the sum of $1,992 per annum, payable
in monthly installments of $166 each.
28.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. II, Salaries of Councilmen,
adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. 914, approved 12-30-1986.
§ 34-2 SALARIES AND COMPENSATION § 34-3
34:91
Chapter 35
SMOKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Personnel and employment policies — See Ch.
A166.
§ 35-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the public health and to provide
for the comfort of all parties by regulating and controlling smoking on all
Borough properties, municipal public places and at all municipal public
meetings.
§ 35-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
following meanings:
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC MEETING(S) — All meetings open to the public
pursuant to the act of July 3, 1986 (P.L. 388, No. 84), known as the
"Sunshine Act."
MUNICIPAL PUBLIC PLACE — Any indoor and/or outdoor area owned or
operated by a state or local governmental municipality or agency and used
by the general public or serving as a place of work for municipal employees,
including police officers, or any meeting place for a municipal public body,
including but not limited to an office, auditorium, arena, meeting room or
public conveyance, library, public park or athletic field.
SMOKING — The carrying by a person of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe or
other lighted smoking device.
§ 35-3. Prohibited acts.
No person shall smoke in an area designated "nonsmoking" in accordance
with the terms of this chapter in all municipal public places, during
municipal public meetings and in the municipal public parks.
§ 35-4. Enforcement.
The Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Glenolden and/or his
agent will enforce this chapter and assist in the implementation of this
nonsmoking policy.
§ 35-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall upon conviction,
be subject to a fine and penalty of not more than $300 for each offense.
§ 34-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 35-5
35:92
Such fines and penalties shall be collected as like fines or penalties are now
collected by law.
Chapter 36
SOCIAL SECURITY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Retirement benefits and pensions — See Ch.
31.
§ 36-1. Legislative declaration.
It is the considered opinion of the Borough Council that the extension
of the social security system to employees and officers of the Borough
of Glenolden will be of great benefit not only to the employees of the
Borough by providing that said employees and officers may participate in
the provisions of the old-age and survivors insurance system, but also to the
Borough of Glenolden by enabling it to attract and retain in employment
desirable personnel and thus maintain the efficiency of its government.
§ 36-2. Execution of plan and agreement.
The 1951 Session of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, in regular session, enacted a statute known as "Act No.
491," approved January 5, 1952,29 which is the enabling act provided for
in Section 218 of Public Law 734,30 81st Congress, which designated the
Secretary of Labor and Industry of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
act as the state agency to implement the coverage of employees and officers
under the said old-age and survivors insurance system. The Borough of
Glenolden is hereby authorized to execute and deliver to the state agency
a plan or plans and agreement, required under Section 6 of said enabling
act31 and the Social Security Act, to extend coverage to employees and
officers of the Borough of Glenolden and do all other necessary things
to effectuate coverage of employees and officers under the old-age and
survivors insurance system. Such plan, plans or agreement shall be
executed on behalf of the Borough by the President of Borough Council and
attested by the Secretary thereof, who shall thereunto affix the Borough
Seal.
§ 36-3. System of payroll deductions.
The Secretary is hereby authorized to establish a system of payroll
deductions to be matched by payments by the Borough of Glenolden to be
29.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq.
30.Editor's Note: See 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
31.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 206.
§ 35-5 SOCIAL SECURITY § 36-3
36:93
made into the Contribution Fund of the Social Security Act through the
office of the state agency, and to make charges of this tax to the fund or
funds from which wage or salary payments are issued to employees of the
Borough of Glenolden. Such payments are to be made in accordance with
the provisions of the law and regulations promulgated by the state agency
and the Federal Security Administrator. Such payments as are delinquent
shall bear interest at the rate of 1/2 of 1% per month until such time as
payments are made.
§ 36-4. Appropriation.
Appropriation is hereby made from the proper fund or funds of the Borough
of Glenolden in the necessary amounts to pay into the Contribution Fund
as provided in Section 4 of the enabling act32 and in accordance with the
plan or plans and agreement. Authority is given to the President and the
Secretary of the Borough Council of the Borough of Glenolden to enter
into an agreement with the state agency, which agreement shall be in
accordance with Act No. 491 and with paragraph 218 of the Social Security
Act.33 Such plan and agreement shall provide that the participation of this
Borough of Glenolden shall commence as of January 1, 1951.
§ 36-5. Employees covered.
The plan, plans and agreement shall provide the aforesaid coverage for all
officers and employees of the Borough excepting those rendering services
of an emergency nature; services of any class or classes of part-time
positions and services not authorized to be covered under the said Social
Security Act; services in positions the compensation for which is on a fee
basis and services in any class or classes of elective positions.
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 40
ALARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Duties of firemen — See Ch. 14.
Firemen's Relief Association — See Ch. 16.
Police Department — See Ch. 29.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
Fire prevention code — See Ch. 81.
Smoke and heat detectors — See Ch. 141.
32.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 204.
33.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 201 et seq. and 42 U.S.C.A. § 301 et seq.
§ 36-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 36-5
40:94
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 1000, approved 8-12-1993]
§ 40-1. Title.
This article shall be known as and may be cited as the "False Burglar and
Fire Alarm Control Ordinance."
§ 40-2. Policy.
Whereas the Council for the Borough of Glenolden has determined that the
receipt of false burglary and false fire alarms indicating that emergencies
exist is detrimental to the welfare and safety of the citizens of the Borough
of Glenolden, the Police Department and volunteer fire departments, it is
hereby declared to be the policy to safeguard and protect the residents of
the Borough of Glenolden and the personnel of the Police Department and
volunteer fire departments from such hazards or risks.
§ 40-3. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them:
ALARMS — Any mechanical or electronic signals reporting by means of
telephone cables or other means of transmission, which signals are
monitored by the Police Department of the Borough of Glenolden at its
headquarters, or audible alarms which are heard and/or called in by
another, and which signals, upon receipt or upon activation, indicate to the
Police Department that an emergency exists at the sending location. Said
alarms shall include those types installed to indicate burglaries or fires at
the sending location.
BURGLARY — The attempt to break into, the act of breaking into or the
intrusion on a property of a person, partnership, association, syndicate,
company, firm, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other
entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
FALSE NOTIFICATION — Any report or request for police or fire service
directed to the Police Department or Fire Department by any means of
communication wherein the situation, condition, incident or emergency as
subject of the report or request does not exist.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, firm, syndicate,
company, trust, corporation, department, bureau, agency or other entity
recognized by law as the subject of rights and duties.
§ 40-4. Enforcement.
The Police Department shall have the power and duty to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 40-1 ALARMS § 40-5
40:95
§ 40-5. Prohibited acts.
After the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person
who is the owner, lessee or occupant of any structure in which a burglar or
fire alarm has been installed to:
§ 40-6. Automatic shutoff.
No person shall install or maintain in any building, structure or
establishment in the Borough of Glenolden an external audible alarm of
any type which does not also contain an automatic cutoff system or feature
automatically cutting off the source of power to the alarm after it has
sounded for a period of no longer than 15 minutes.
§ 40-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is the owner, lessee or occupant of any structure in which
a burglar or fire alarm has been installed who violates the provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof by any District Justice, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $300, together with costs of
prosecution. Each instance of a violation shall constitute a separate offense.
In default of the payment of any fine, the defendant shall be imprisoned for
a period not exceeding five days.
A. Cause, suffer, allow or permit the accidental or purposeful transmission
of a false burglar or fire alarm signal from any public or private place in
the Borough of Glenolden to the Police Department or Fire Department
of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. Cause, suffer, allow or permit to be made any report or request for
police or fire service or assistance by any means of communication
wherein the situation, condition, incident or emergency as subject to
the report or request for police or fire service or assistance did not and
does not exist.
§ 40-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 40-7
40:96
Chapter 41
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
Amusement tax — See Ch. 148, Art. III.
§ 41-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CODE ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough of Glenolden.
JUKEBOX — Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated
for the emission of music or similar amusement.
MECHANICAL OR ELECTRONIC AMUSEMENT DEVICE — Any machine,
contrivance or device which, upon the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate,
disk or key into any slot, crevice or other opening, or by the payment of any
price, may be operated or used as a game, entertainment or amusement,
whether or not registering a score and whether or not a prize is offered.
It shall include but not be limited to such devices as marble machines,
pinball machines, skill ball, mechanical grab machines, mechanical bowling
machines, photoelectric shooting or target machines, electronic video
games, air-hockey tables, football games and all games, operations or
transactions similar thereto under whatever name they may be designated
or described. It shall not include devices or machines the primary purpose
of which is to dispense merchandise such as candy, cigarettes or other
tangible personal property.
OPERATOR — Any person, firm, partnership, corporation or association
displaying or maintaining for use and operation any jukebox, mechanical or
electronic amusement device or pool table or otherwise permitting the use
or operation of such devices for a fee or charge. This term encompasses
every natural person, copartnership, association or corporation, and
whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term
as applied to copartnerships or associations shall mean the partners or
members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
POOL TABLE — Any table with cushions and/or pockets upon which games
of pool and/or billiards in any form are played upon payment of a price,
whether or not operated by the insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disk
or key into any slot, crevice or other opening.
§ 40-7 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 41-2
41:97
§ 41-2. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any operator to display or keep or maintain for use
and operation or otherwise permit the use and operation of any jukebox,
mechanical or electronic amusement device, pool table or other similar
machine without first having registered with and obtained a license from
the Code Enforcement Officer as prescribed herein.
§ 41-3. Application for license; issuance; seal.
§ 41-4. License fees.
A. Every person desiring to become an operator shall apply to the Code
Enforcement Officer for a license or licenses and pay the fees
hereinafter set forth. Application forms may be secured from the
Borough Offices, 36 East Boon Avenue, Glenolden, Pennsylvania 19036,
and shall set forth the following information:
(1) The name and business address of the operator.
(2) A plan of the premises showing the location or locations where a
jukebox, mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table
or similar machine or device is to be displayed or maintained, as
well as the location or locations of the supervision of the
establishment. No device may be located within 10 feet of any
doorway.
(3) The type, manufacturer and serial number of each jukebox,
mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table for which
application is being made.
(4) Such other information as the Code Enforcement Officer may deem
necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this
chapter.
B. Upon approval of the application, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
issue a license for each location where a jukebox, mechanical or
electronic amusement device or pool table is to be displayed or
maintained and a seal to be affixed to each mechanical or electronic
device or pool table registered and licensed under this chapter.
A. Registration and license fees shall be paid by the operator to the Code
Enforcement Officer at the time that application is filed. Such fees shall
be as follows:
(1) For each jukebox, $50 per year or fraction thereof.
(2) For each mechanical or electronic amusement device, $150 per
year or fraction thereof.
(3) For each pool table, $100 per year or fraction thereof.
§ 41-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 41-4
41:98
§ 41-5. Number of devices per establishment.
Three or less mechanical or electronic amusement devices and/or pool
tables upon or in any premises are hereby deemed to be an accessory use
and permitted as an accessory use in a business establishment permitted in
a business district. Any premises upon which are displayed or maintained
more than three mechanical or electronic amusement devices and/or pool
tables are hereby deemed to be places of amusement under Article V,
Section 501, of the Glenolden Borough Zoning Code.34
§ 41-6. Regulations.
B. No deductions or refunds of any fee shall be granted in case of a fee
payable for less than a full calendar year or in the case of any device
destroyed, stolen, sold or otherwise disposed of or transferred after
payment of the fee.
C. In the case of the loss, defacement or destruction of any original license
or seal, the person to whom such license or seal was issued shall apply
to the Code Enforcement Officer, who will then issue a new seal or
license upon payment of a fee of $5.
A. A copy of the license must be visibly posted upon the premises where
any jukebox, mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table
is displayed or maintained for use and operation, and the seal which will
be provided shall be affixed to the jukebox, mechanical or electronic
amusement device or pool table for which issued in accordance with the
directions of the Code Enforcement Officer.
B. Any premises upon which any jukebox, mechanical or electronic
amusement device or pool table is displayed or maintained shall be
open to examination and inspection by the Code Enforcement Officer
and Borough of Glenolden police officers during all hours that such
premises are open to use by the public.
C. No mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table shall be
used for gambling or other illegal purposes.
D. Any operator granted a license shall not permit the operation of any
device by a person under the age of 18 years of age during the regular
class hours of any day in which school is in session.
E. After the Borough of Glenolden Police Department has responded to the
third complaint pertaining to disturbances related to the operation of
such devices at any licensed premises, the Borough Council will have
the right to review the complaints, and if a substantial cause of the
complaints is the operator's failure to properly supervise the premises,
Council will have the right to suspend or revoke the license.
34.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning, Art. V, § 162-23, in which places of amusement and
motion-picture theaters are listed as permitted uses in the Shopping Center District B-2.
§ 41-4 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 41-7
41:99
§ 41-7. License expiration and renewal.
Licenses issued under this chapter shall expire on December 31 of each
year. Applications for renewal, accompanied by the required annual fee,
shall be submitted in the month of December and may consist of a signed
verification of the original application contents so long as there have been
no changes.
§ 41-8. Transfer of license.
Licenses shall apply only to the operator and location to which issued, and
any transfer shall require amendment of the original application, approved
by the Code Enforcement Officer, and payment of the fee specified in
§ 41-4A above. A new seal may be issued for a replacement of a jukebox,
mechanical or electronic amusement device or pool table previously
registered under this chapter only upon amendment of the original
application, approval of the Code Enforcement Officer, and payment of a fee
of $5.
§ 41-9. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this chapter shall,
upon summary conviction before any District Justice, be subject to a fine not
exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of fine
and costs, such person may be imprisoned in the county jail for not more
than 30 days. Each and every day in which any person shall be in violation
of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 41-10. When effective; existing operations.
This chapter shall take effect and be in force from and after its approval
as required by law; provided, however, that any operator subject to the
provisions of this chapter shall register and apply for a license as provided
herein within 30 days of the date this chapter takes effect, and such
registration and license shall remain in effect until December 31, 1982,
notwithstanding anything to the contrary herein provided.
Chapter 43
ANIMALS
§ 41-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 41-10
41:100
ARTICLE I
Dog Control
[Adopted 6-14-1956 by Ord. No. 541, approved 6-18-1956]
§ 43-1. Use of terms.
The word "owner," when applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall include
every person having a right of property in such dog and every person who
keeps or harbors such dog or has it in his care and every person who
permits such dog to remain on or about premises occupied by him.
§ 43-2. Running at large; removal of droppings. [Amended
10-19-1972 by Ord. No. 743, approved 10-19-1972; 10-16-2001 by
Ord. No. 1094, approved 10-16-2001]
§ 43-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1972 by Ord. No.
743, approved 10-19-1972; 12-9-1983 by Ord. No. 867, approved
12-9-1983; 1-15-2019 by Ord. No. 2129, approved 1-15-2019]
A. No dog shall be permitted to run at large within the Borough of
Glenolden outside the premises of its owner or custodian, provided that
a dog that is restrained by a leash and in the custody and under the
control and restraint of its owner, custodian or other person authorized
by either shall be permitted to be outside the premises of its owner or
custodian.
B. The owner or custodian of any dog that is restrained by a leash and in
the custody and under the control and restraint of said owner or
custodian or any other person authorized by either, outside the
premises of its owner or custodian, shall be obligated to immediately
remove any and all dog droppings of said dog outside the premises of
said owner or custodian.
A. The owner or custodian of any dog shall be guilty of an offense if such
dog is permitted to run at large within the Borough and, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice,
shall be subject to the following fines, together with the cost of
prosecution, and the cost incurred by the Borough of Glenolden for
seizing, securing and housing at-large unrestrained dogs and, in default
of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for not more than
10 days.
(1) For a violation in the Borough parks: $100 for each offense.
(2) For a violation not in the Borough parks: first offense, $25; second
offense, $50; third and subsequent offense, $100.
B. The owner or custodian of any dog shall be guilty of an offense if such
owner or custodian fails to immediately remove any and all dog
droppings caused by a dog in the custody and under the control and
restraint of said owner or custodian outside of the premises of its owner
§ 43-1 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-3
41:101
§ 43-4. Disposition of dogs at large.
Any police officer or any authorized agent of the Borough may kill or seize,
or seize and kill, any dog at large within the Borough in violation of the
provisions of this article whenever such dog shall not bear a current license
tag.
§ 43-5. Enforcement.
Borough Council shall have authority to appoint special officers to enforce
the provisions of this article, at such rate of pay as shall be set by resolution.
or custodian and, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding
before a District Justice, shall be subject to a fine of $25, together with
the cost of prosecution, and in default of payment thereof, shall be
subject to imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
C. The Borough Council may, from time to time, as it deems appropriate
for the health, safety, morals, general welfare, cleanliness, beauty,
convenience, comfort and safety of the Borough, amend the fines set
forth in this § 43-3 by resolution.
§ 43-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 43-5
41:102
ARTICLE II
Animal Regulations
[Adopted 4-10-1975 by Ord. No. 778, approved 4-10-1975]
§ 43-6. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prohibit the maintaining, keeping or
possessing of certain animals within the Borough of Glenolden and to
regulate the number of certain other animals within the Borough of
Glenolden in order to promote the health, safety and general welfare of
its inhabitants. Where the provisions of this article shall impose greater
restrictions than those of any other ordinance or regulation or resolution,
the provisions of this article shall be controlling.
§ 43-7. Prohibited animals enumerated.
No person or corporation shall maintain, keep or possess within the
Borough of Glenolden any of the following animals, which classifications
shall be broadly construed: apes; cows; goats; horses and ponies; lions;
mice; monkeys; poultry; rats; rodents, including moles, muskrats and
squirrels; all snakes; swine; tigers; wolves.
§ 43-8. Number of cats and dogs permitted. [Amended 10-9-1975 by
Ord. No. 781, approved 10-9-1975]
The number of cats maintained in any dwelling unit shall be limited to two
and the number of dogs maintained in any dwelling unit shall be limited to
two; provided, however, there may also be maintained in any dwelling unit
two puppies up to the age of six months. Also, the following birds may be
maintained in any dwelling unit: canaries, finches, myna birds, parakeets
and parrots.
§ 43-9. Pet shops and veterinary hospitals.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to a duly authorized pet shop
operating under a permit issued therefor under the applicable ordinances of
the Borough of Glenolden, nor to a registered veterinary hospital operating
under a permit issued therefor under the applicable ordinances of the
Borough of Glenolden.
§ 43-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine not exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, the defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county jail
for a period not exceeding 30 days for each and every offense.
§ 43-6 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-10
41:103

ARTICLE III
Pit Bulls
[Adopted 10-8-1987 by Ord. No. 922, approved 10-8-1987]
§ 43-11. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
OWNER — Shall have the meaning set forth in § 43-1 of the Code of the
Borough of Glenolden.
PIT BULL — Includes any of the following breeds and/or types of dogs:
Staffordshire terrier, American pit bull, pit bull, any dog that fits into the
above American Kennel Club definitions, which displays the majority of the
vicious traits of any of the above breeds, and any dog bred or trained for
fighting.
§ 43-12. Findings and purpose.
Pit bulls are considered dangerous dogs which are potentially hazardous to
the community and its residents. The purpose of this article is to regulate
the licensing, ownership, keeping, harboring, care, confinement and
destruction of dogs with dangerous propensities in an effort to safeguard
and promote the health, safety and welfare of the community and its
residents.
§ 43-13. Running at large.
Pit bulls shall at no time and under no circumstances be permitted to
run loose within the Borough of Glenolden. Any pit bull running loose
within the Borough of Glenolden shall be subject to restraint, confinement,
impoundment and/or destruction by any Borough police officer or other
person authorized by the Borough. It shall be the duty of any Borough
police officer or other person authorized by the Borough to take whatever
action is necessary under the circumstances to properly secure and restrain
any loose pit bulls, including immediately destroying the dog, and any
Borough police officer or other person authorized by the Borough is hereby
authorized to take such action.
§ 43-14. Licenses; fees and bond.
A. License required. No person shall own, keep or harbor any pit bulls
over six months of age in any household, residence or on any property
whatsoever within the Borough without first obtaining a pit bull license
from the Secretary of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. Application for license. Applications for a pit bull license shall be filed
with the Borough Secretary, shall provide the following information and
shall be accompanied by the bond required in Subsection G hereof:
(1) The name of the applicant.
§ 43-11 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-14
41:105
§ 43-15. Confinement and restraint; warning signs.
(2) The name of the owner of the pit bull, if different from the
applicant.
(3) The address where the pit bull will be kept.
(4) The number of pit bulls to be kept or housed on the premises.
(5) The exact location on the property where the pit bull(s) will be
kept.
(6) The method to be used to secure or restrain the pit bull(s) on the
property.
(7) The name of the person who will be responsible for the care and
confinement of the pit bull(s).
(8) Any other information requested by the Borough.
C. Application fee. All applications shall be accompanied by an application
fee of $50 for each pit bull for which a license is being sought, which
application fee is nonrefundable. The fee includes the cost of
processing the application and of any inspection made prior to
licensing.
D. Compliance with law. Pit bull licenses shall be issued by the Borough
Secretary only after the appropriate fees have been paid and only if the
applicant has complied fully with all applicable laws.
E. License fees. The pit bull license fee shall be $500 per dog per year.
F. Revocation of license. If the applicant, owner or other person
responsible for any pit bulls kept within the Borough violates any
provision of this article or any other applicable law, then any license
issued hereunder shall automatically be revoked, and the license fee
shall be retained by the Borough.
G. Bond requirement. Any person who owns, keeps or harbors a pit bull
must post a bond of $20,000 with the Borough of Glenolden to ensure
payment of any damages or injuries which might be caused by said pit
bull.
A. All pit bulls must be confined in a secured building or enclosure.
B. Pit bulls may not be kept, housed or harbored in an exterior yard unless
they are securely leashed and muzzled at all times and unless the
exterior yard is securely fenced by a fence which complies with all
applicable provisions of the Code of the Borough of Glenolden.
C. All owners of pit bulls must post a warning sign or signs on the property
where the pit bull is kept, housed, harbored or confined. The size, type
and location of said sign(s) must be approved by the Borough Secretary,
§ 43-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 43-15
41:106
§ 43-16. Destruction of vicious pit bulls.
Any pit bull which bites or attacks a person within the Borough of Glenolden
must be destroyed at the owner's expense or permanently removed from the
Borough of Glenolden within three days after said biting or attack. If said
pit bull is not removed from the Borough or destroyed within three days
after said biting or attack, the pit bull shall be subject to seizure and/or
destruction by the Borough or its duly authorized agent.
§ 43-17. Violations and penalties.
§ 43-18. Applicability and construal of provisions.
Articles I and II of Chapter 43 of the Code of the Borough shall apply to
pit bulls. However, to the extent that any such provisions or any other Code
provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of this article, the provisions
of this article shall control.
and the sign(s) shall, in all respects, comply with all applicable
provisions of the Code of the Borough of Glenolden.
D. Any pit bull which is taken off or removed from the owner's property
must be kept securely leashed and muzzled at all times.
A. Any person violating any provision of this article shall be subject to the
penalties set forth in § 43-10 of the Code of the Borough.
B. In addition, any person violating the provisions of this article shall be
subject to the following;
(1) Forfeiture of his or her bond.
(2) Revocation of his or her pit bull license and retention of the license
fee by the Borough.
(3) Prohibition from obtaining another pit bull license for up to five
years.
§ 43-15 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-18
41:107

ARTICLE IV
Cats
[Adopted 11-10-1994 by Ord. No. 1008, approved 11-10-1994]
§ 43-19. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, the following terms and words shall have
the meanings indicated:
CAT — Any member of the felidae family and any member of the feline
family.
CAT OWNER — Any person in possession of or harboring any cat or who
shall suffer any such animal to remain about his premises for a period of 10
days.
§ 43-20. Running at large; identification tags; penalties.
§ 43-21. Redemption or disposal of impounded cats.
Unless disposed of by the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals
(SPCA) or other impounding agency, any owner of a cat desiring to redeem
such cat from the pound shall have the right to claim such cat upon payment
of $10 for each of the first two days of impoundment and $5 per day for
every day thereafter. Any cat not claimed within 10 days of seizure shall be
disposed of by sale or humane destruction.
§ 43-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions
of this article before any District Magistrate shall be sentenced to pay a
A. It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to permit, knowingly or
unknowingly, such cat to run at large or to stray beyond the limits or
premises of its owner unless under the control of some responsible
person by leash or otherwise. Any cat not under said control of some
responsible person found in any street or other public place or on the
premises of a private person, provided that such person makes a
written complaint to the Borough Police Department, shall be deemed
to be running at large, and it shall be lawful for the Borough to cause
such cat to be trapped and impounded by the police or other duly
designated representative or agent of the Borough of Glenolden, herein
collectively called "officer," and such officer is empowered to pursue
such cat into any building or other enclosure to seize it.
B. All cats must wear identification tags or collars at all times when off the
premises of the owner.
C. Any person who shall violate this section of this article is hereby subject
to a fine of $25 for the first violation hereof and to an additional fine of
$25 for each subsequent offense, in addition to all other penalties listed
in this chapter.
§ 43-19 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-22
41:109
fine of not more than $300, together with the costs of prosecution, or to
imprisonment in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both.
§ 43-22 GLENOLDEN CODE § 43-22
41:110
ARTICLE V
Animal Noise Control
[Adopted 7-21-1998 by Ord. No. 1056, approved 7-21-1998]
§ 43-23. Intent and purposes.
The Council, finding that excessive levels of sound are detrimental to the
physical, mental and social well-being of people as well as to their general
welfare and safety, and being, therefore, a public health and welfare hazard,
hereby declares it to be necessary to provide for the greater control and
more effective regulation of excessive sound and the sources of excessive
sound within the Borough.
§ 43-24. Noise disturbances by animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person who owns or has control over an animal
within the Borough to permit such animal to emit excessive sound on a
continuous basis for 10 minutes or more or intermittently for a period of 30
minutes or more, whether such animal is physically situated on private or
public property, and whether such noise is emitted at any time, day or night.
§ 43-25. Exceptions.
The regulation in § 43-24 shall not apply if at the time of the emission of
excessive noise a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon the
private property in or upon which the animal making such noise is situated,
or if there is any other legitimate cause which justifiably provoked the
animal.
§ 43-26. Enforcement.
This article shall be enforced by the Police Department in the Borough.
§ 43-27. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $300 and/or a term of imprisonment, or both, not to exceed 90 days.
§ 43-28. Authority to remedy noncompliance.
If the owner of animals in violation of this article does not comply with a
notice to abate the violation which constitutes a nuisance or health hazard
within the time limit prescribed, the Borough shall have the authority to
take measures to correct the conditions and to collect the cost of such
correction plus 10% of all costs. The Borough, in such event and pursuant
to its statutory or otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the rights
and power to enter upon the offending premises to accomplish the
foregoing.
§ 43-23 AMUSEMENT DEVICES § 43-29
41:111
§ 43-29. Severability.
The provisions of this article shall be severable and, if any of the provisions
hereof shall be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remaining provisions
of this article shall remain in effect.
§ 43-29 GLENOLDEN CODE § 43-29
41:112
Chapter 47
BATHING PLACES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fences — See Ch. 71.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Sewers — See Ch. 135.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 43-29 BATHING PLACES § 43-29
47:113

ARTICLE I
Definitions
§ 47-1. Definition of terms.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BATHING PLACES — Any body of water used for swimming and
recreational bathing and shall include but not be limited to indoor and
outdoor pools, including wading pools, whether operated for profit or not.
This term does not include baths where the main object is the cleaning of
the body or the practice of healing under medical supervision, unless such
baths contain pools or tanks used collectively by a number of individuals.
CLEAN WATER — Clean water used to fill the pool, refill the pool or
replenish the pool.
OPERATOR — The person responsible for the operation and maintenance of
a bathing place.
PRIVATE POOL — Any pool located on residential or other property, the use
of which is limited by the owner to his or her own family and such guests as
shall be admitted to the pool and its accessory facilities.
PUBLIC POOL — Any pool open to the general public with or without the
payment of a fee for the use of the pool and its accessory facilities.
SEMIPUBLIC POOL — Any pool the use of which is limited to persons who
have qualified for membership in a club, association, company, corporation
or similar organization as a prerequisite to the use of the pool or its
accessory facilities.
STANDARD METHODS OF WATER ANALYSIS — All applicable procedures
and methods recorded in the latest issue of Standard Methods for the
Examination of Water and Sewage published by the American Public Health
Association.
§ 47-1 BATHING PLACES § 47-1
47:115

ARTICLE II
Approval of Plans
§ 47-2. Approving agencies.
Every person who constructs or installs or intends to construct or install
or who desires to extend, alter or modify a public or semipublic pool shall
have plans and specifications for such construction, installation, alteration,
extension or modification approved in writing by the Pennsylvania
Department of Health and by the Building Inspector of Borough of
Glenolden before beginning the work or before permitting the work to be
started by a contractor or any employee.
§ 47-3. Application for approval.
The application for approval of plans required above shall contain complete
plans and specifications fully describing the bathing place or extension,
alteration or change contemplated in the application and shall be made
on forms provided by the Pennsylvania Department of Health and by the
Building Inspector of the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 47-4. Application fee. [Added 7-13-1967 by Ord. No. 658, approved
7-17-1967]
At the time of submission of an application to the Building Inspector of
the Borough of Glenolden for approval of plans for such construction,
installation, alteration, extension or modification of a public or semipublic
pool, the applicant shall pay a fee therefor of $10 for the first $500 in value
of such improvement and $5 for each additional $1,000 in value of such
improvement.
§ 47-2 BATHING PLACES § 47-4
47:117

ARTICLE III
Licensing and Supervision
§ 47-5. License for operation.
§ 47-6. Supervision.
§ 47-7. Inspections.
Bathing places shall be open at all reasonable times to inspection by the
Health Officer.
§ 47-8. Records of operation.
A. Every person, club, association, company, corporation or organization
owning, managing or maintaining a public or semipublic pool shall
obtain a license from the Board of Health of the Borough of Glenolden.
The license shall be renewed annually. There shall be an annual
inspection fee of $100, which shall include seven inspections per year
and laboratory costs incidental thereto. The fee for required additional
inspections shall be $5 each. Such licenses shall not be transferable.
Applications for renewal shall be made at least 10 days prior to the
seasonal opening of said pool or 10 days before expiration of the
existing license.
B. Such license shall be posted, together with the Pennsylvania
Department of Health's permit and the electrical certificate, in the
principal office of the bathing place or in the entryway or in any other
conspicuous place approved by the Health Officer. The operator of the
pool shall be held responsible for compliance with all the provisions of
this chapter on and within the premises operated under such license.
C. If it is found that the provisions of this chapter are not being complied
with or that any condition exists which, in the opinion of the Board of
Health or Health Officer of the Borough of Glenolden, endangers the
life, safety or health of the users of any swimming pool or other bathing
place, the said Board or Health Officer may revoke the said license and
immediately close the said pool until violations are corrected and said
pool is approved by the Health Officer for reopening.
A. The operator shall have had experience in the use of any treatment
processes necessary in order to maintain clean water in the pool at all
times and shall have knowledge of the basic scientific principles
relating to the proper operation of bathing places, including the
treatment processes and the pool plumbing.
B. Every public or semipublic pool shall be provided with lifeguards
holding currently valid lifesaving certificates, who shall be in
continuous attendance at all times during which the bathing place is
open and in use.
§ 47-5 BATHING PLACES § 47-8
47:119
A. It shall be the duty of every operator and every employee in every
public or semipublic bathing place to furnish such records and
information as are required by the Health Officer for ascertaining
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. All operators of such public or semipublic bathing places shall keep
records of operations, which shall include daily records of chemicals
added, the time of cleansing the filters, the time of cleaning the pool,
the daily bathing load, a record of all breakdowns of equipment
operation, and hourly, daily and monthly records of the amount of free
bromine-chlorine residual in the pool from locations designated by the
Health Officer. The aforesaid records shall be open to the inspection of
the Health Officer.
§ 47-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § 47-8
47:120
ARTICLE IV
Standards
§ 47-9. Plumbing systems.
Plumbing systems, both house and pool, shall conform to the standards
established in the Borough of Glenolden Plumbing Code.35
§ 47-10. Waste. [Amended 6-13-1968 by Ord. No. 673, approved
7-11-1968]
All sewage and liquid waste shall be disposed of in the Borough's sanitary
sewer system. This shall include pool wastewater except where the same
can be drained directly into a creek or a storm sewer without draining onto
or over the property of others. After obtaining a proper permit therefor from
the Plumbing Inspector, a pool shall be connected with the sanitary sewer
system by installing a four-inch-by-two-inch Y in the four-inch lateral sewer
line. The size of the line entering the sanitary sewer line from the discharge
side of the pump draining such pool will be governed by the capacity of said
pump but in no case shall exceed two inches. There shall be placed in said
discharge line a permanent disconnect system, and after pool is drained
such system must be disconnected and line plugged or sealed.
§ 47-11. Location.
No bathing place shall be so located as to be within the influence of the
discharge of sewage or of injurious or objectionable industrial wastes.
§ 47-12. Dressing rooms. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867,
approved 12-9-1982]
Public or semipublic pools shall have separate dressing rooms for each
sex which are adequate for the maximum number of persons who can
be accommodated at any one time. Adequate minimum requirements for
bathing places are as follows: An area of 3.5 square feet for each man and
seven for each woman shall be provided for. Since normal attendance of
public pools is two men to each woman, the total areas allotted to men and
women should be equal. An acceptable size for both dressing rooms is a
total of 20% of the area of the pool.
§ 47-13. Toilets.
Adequate and separate toilet facilities for each sex shall be provided at all
bathhouses. Flush toilets and urinals shall be provided and shall be properly
maintained.
35.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Plumbing.
§ 47-9 BATHING PLACES § 47-14
47:121
§ 47-14. Lavatories.
Lavatories shall be provided and located adjacent to the toilet facilities and
there shall be provided soap and towels.
§ 47-15. Common use of articles.
The common use of drinking cups, towels, hairbrushes or any other toilet
articles is prohibited.
§ 47-16. Cleanliness.
All parts of the premises shall be adequately clean, safe and maintained in
a sanitary manner at all times.
§ 47-17. Lighting.
A complete system of artificial lighting shall be provided for all pools,
bathing beaches, bathhouses and dressing rooms that are to be used at
night. Lighting fixtures shall be of such number and design as to light
all parts of the swimming pool and the water therein, Such lights and
electrical wiring in all bathing places shall be installed in accordance with
the provisions of applicable existing laws. The electrical certificate showing
approval of installation of electrical systems shall be posted in a
conspicuous place.
§ 47-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 47-17
47:122
ARTICLE V
Quality of Water
§ 47-18. Minimum requirements.
The chemical and physical quality of the water shall be as prescribed in
the recommendations of the American Public Health Association's current
edition of Recommended Practice for Design, Equipment and Operation
of Swimming Pools and Bathing Places. Licenses shall be suspended
automatically if the minimum requirements as provided are not complied
with.
§ 47-19. Purification.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Glenolden will determine what
purification processes are necessary to maintain the standards herein
required. When filtration equipment is provided or required, such
equipment shall operate at a rate of filtration not to exceed three gallons
per square foot per minute with an eight-hour turnover and wash rate of 12
to 15 gallons per square foot per minute.
§ 47-20. Disinfection.
Bromine, liquid chlorine, sodium or calcium hypochloride or other approved
chlorine compounds shall be used for swimming pool disinfection. The
amount of free chlorine residual in the water at all times when the pool is
in use shall not be less than 0.4 part per million nor exceed 1.0 part per
million. Bromine, using a bromine test kit, shall not fall below 1.0 part per
million nor exceed 3.0 parts per million, and when using a chlorine test kit,
shall not fall below 0.5 part per million nor exceed 1.5 parts per million.
§ 47-21. Alkaline reaction.
The water at all times when the pool is in use shall show an alkaline reaction
of not less than 7.2 pH and not exceeding 7.8 pH for chlorine, and for
bromine reaction shall show a pH of 7.1 and not exceeding 7.5 pH.
§ 47-22. Clearness of water.
At all times when the pool is in use the water shall be sufficiently clear to
permit a black disk six inches in diameter in a white field, when placed on
the bottom of the pool at the deepest point, to be clearly visible from the
sidewalk around the pool.
§ 47-23. Temperature.
The water of any inside pool shall be heated to a temperature of 69° F.
to 72° F. The temperature of the air surrounding an artificially heated
swimming pool shall not be permitted to become more than 8° F. warmer
nor more than 2° F. cooler than the water in a pool at any time when the
pool is in use.
§ 47-18 BATHING PLACES § 47-24
47:123
§ 47-24. Bacteria analysis.
A. Not more than 10% of representative samples of pool water taken on
different days shall contain more than 100 bacteria per cubic
centimeter of water according to a bacteria count as determined by a
standard nutrient agar test with 24 hours' incubation at 37° C.
B. No more than two out of five samples collected on the same day, nor
more than three out of 10 consecutive samples collected on different
days, shall have a positive presumptive test for B. coli in ten-cubiccentimeter
portions.
C. Bacteriological analysis of the water in bathing places when in use shall
be made at least weekly or more often if required, and copies of the
results of such analysis shall be filed promptly in the office of the
Borough of Glenolden.
D. Samples collected from public or semipublic bathing places shall be
examined for bacteriological analysis in accordance with the latest
edition of Standard Methods of Water Analysis of the American Public
Health Association by a laboratory approved by the Board of Health of
the Borough of Glenolden equipped for carrying out the techniques
specified.
§ 47-24 GLENOLDEN CODE § 47-24
47:124
ARTICLE VI
Pool Construction
§ 47-25. Construction requirements.
A. A swimming pool shall be constructed so as to be watertight and easily
cleaned. It shall be made of nonabsorbent material with a smooth
surface and shall be free of open cracks and joints.
B. Two ladders with handrails shall be provided at the deep end of the
pool, and two ladders or steps with handrails shall be provided at the
shallow end of the pool. Wooden steps or ladders shall not be used. The
ladders and steps shall be kept safe and clean.
C. Walks in the pool area shall have a nonslip surface which can be cleaned
readily. Floor mats, if provided, shall be made of a nonporous, rough
surface of perforated rubber, plastic or other suitable material and shall
be of such size that they can be readily removed and cleaned.
D. The area for sale and service of food and for spectators shall be
separated from the pool so as to prevent contamination of the pool.
E. A pool shall be provided with outlets, including one at the deepest
point, of a sufficient size to drain the entire pool within eight hours. The
drain outlets shall be properly covered with gratings and shall be in
accordance with the Plumbing Ordinance of the Borough of
Glenolden.36
F. A pool constructed after the effective date of this chapter shall have an
overflow scum gutter at the high-water line or a cleaning device which
is approved by the Board of Health of the Borough of Glenolden.
Drainage outlets in all pools shall be provided every 15 feet in the
gutters. Such outlets shall have a trap at least the size of the drainpipes
and shall be covered with gratings. The drainage pipes shall be at least
three inches in diameter. The drains shall be designed with an air gap
so as to prevent the reversal of flow into the pool and shall be installed
under the provisions of the Plumbing Ordinance of the Borough of
Glenolden.
G. A pool shall have inlets of such size and spacing in relation to the
outlets and to the size and shape of the pool as to facilitate uniform
circulation of water throughout the pool. There shall be no direct
connection between the piping system of the pool and the domestic
water supply system.
36.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Plumbing.
§ 47-25 BATHING PLACES § 47-25
47:125

ARTICLE VII
Private Pools
§ 47-26. Standards.
All private pools shall be required to meet all standards of cleanliness as set
forth hereinbefore and are subject to inspections at any reasonable time by
the Health Officer or the Board of Health.
§ 47-26 BATHING PLACES § 47-26
47:127

ARTICLE VIII
Penalties
§ 47-27. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
In addition to any other remedy herein provided, any person, organization
or corporation, whether owner, operator, agent, occupant or contractor for
or of any pool, ground or premises within the Borough, who shall violate
any of the terms or provisions hereof or of any amendment hereto, or who
shall permit or suffer the violation of the terms hereof by any servant,
agent, employee or other person or persons, or who knowingly maintains
any pool, ground or premises in or upon which any violation hereof or of any
amendment hereto shall exist, shall, in every such instance, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be liable to a fine
of not more than $100 or, in default thereof, to imprisonment for not more
than 30 days, for each such offense. The said penalties may be imposed
upon any or all of the foregoing persons, organizations or corporations in
addition to or in lieu of any other remedy herein contained or provided by
law.
§ 47-27 BATHING PLACES § 47-27
47:129
Chapter 51
BRUSH, GRASS AND WEEDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 47-27 GLENOLDEN CODE § 47-27
47:130
ARTICLE I
Brush, Grass, Weeds, Trees and Bushes
§ 51-1. Cutting required; declaration of nuisance.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within the
Borough of Glenolden shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose,
to grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of 18
inches or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor or to conceal any
filthy deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other
vegetation growing upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any
of the provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and
detrimental to the health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants
of the Borough.
§ 51-2. Duty of owner or occupant.
The owner of any premises, as to vacant premises or premises occupied
by the owner, or the occupant thereof, in the case of premises occupied by
other than the owner thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or
other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of
the provisions of the first section of this chapter.
§ 51-3. Notice to remove; removal by Borough; costs.
The Borough Council or any officer or employee of the Borough designated
thereby for the purpose is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of the provisions of the first section of this chapter,
directing and requiring such owner or occupant to remove, trim or cut
such grass, weeds or vegetation so as to conform to the requirements of
this chapter within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any
person, firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such
notice within the period of time stated therein, the Borough authorities
may remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, and the cost
thereof, together with any additional penalty authorized by the law, may
be collected by the Borough from such person, firm or corporation in the
manner provided by law for the abatement, prohibition and removal of
nuisances.
§ 51-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982; 9-8-1988 by Ord. No. 936, approved
9-8-1988]
Any person or other legal entity who or which shall violate or fail, neglect
or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be punished by a fine of not more than $600 and costs of
prosecution or, in default thereof, be imprisoned for a period not to exceed
§ 51-1 BATHING PLACES § 51-4
47:131
60 days. Each day's failure to comply with any provision of this chapter shall
constitute a separate violation thereof.
§ 51-5. through § 51-10. (Reserved)
§ 51-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 51-5
47:132
ARTICLE II
Bamboo
§ 51-11. Purpose and intent.
The Borough of Glenolden has determined that the planting, cultivating
and growing of certain running noxious plants and grasses, particularly
those plants and/or grasses commonly referred to as "bamboo," within the
Borough of Glenolden has a negative impact on the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the Borough of Glenolden and the public at
large, as the uncontrolled planting, cultivating and growth of said bamboo
plants and grasses results in the destruction of private and public property
and constitutes a nuisance within the Borough. The Borough has therefore
determined that is in the best interests of its residents and the public at
large to control the planting, cultivating and/or growing of said bamboo
plants and grasses within the Borough of Glenolden, primarily by
prohibiting the future planting, cultivating and/or growing of said bamboo
plants and grasses within the Borough, and by requiring the use of barriers
to prevent the invasive spread of existing bamboo plants and grasses within
the Borough.
§ 51-12. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BAMBOO — Any monopodial (running) tropical or semi-tropical grasses
from the genera Bambusa including, but not limited to Bambusa,
Phyllostachys, and Pseudosasa as well as common bamboo, golden bamboo
and arrow bamboo.
BAMBOO OWNER — Any property owner or resident who has planted
and/or grows bamboo, or who maintains bamboo on the property, or who
permits bamboo to grow or remain on the property even if the bamboo has
spread from an adjoining property. Any property owner or resident at which
bamboo is found on the property will be considered a bamboo owner, except
any property owner or resident who:
BOROUGH — Borough of Glenolden, County of Delaware, Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
Did not plant or grow or cause bamboo to be planted or grown on his
property;
A.
Has provided satisfactory proof to the Borough that, within a
reasonable period of time after discovering the encroachment of
bamboo onto the property from an adjoining or neighboring property,
he advised the owner of such property of his objection to the
encroachment of the bamboo; and
B.
Has initiated steps for the removal of the bamboo from the property,
including remedies at law.
C.
§ 51-11 BATHING PLACES § 51-13
47:133
§ 51-13. Prohibition.
§ 51-14. Applicability.
For the purposes of this article, bamboo found growing upon a property
shall constitute presumptive evidence that bamboo was planted and/or
grown by and/or with the consent of the bamboo owner.
§ 51-15. Regulation.
A. Upon the effective date of this article the planting or growing of
bamboo shall be prohibited within the Borough. Any person who
thereafter plants, or grows, or causes to be planted or grown, bamboo
within the Borough shall be deemed to be in violation of this article, and
shall be subject to such penalties as are set forth hereunder.
B. Any bamboo either planted or caused to be planted or existing on a
property prior to the effective date of this article may not be replanted
or replaced in kind once such running bamboo is or has become, for any
reason, dead, destroyed, uprooted or otherwise removed.
A. Any bamboo that has been previously planted or already in existence on
any property within the Borough prior to the effective date of this
article may remain on such property, subject to the following
regulations:
(1) Bamboo shall not be planted, maintained or otherwise be permitted
to exist within 20 feet of the edge of the pavement or traveled
portion of any public roadway in the Borough; and
(2) Any bamboo owner whose property contains bamboo shall remove
and abate the growth of the bamboo within 20 feet of edge of the
pavement or traveled portion of a public road in the Borough; and
(3) Each bamboo owner shall be responsible to ensure that the bamboo
planted or growing on the property prior to the effective date of
this article does not encroach or grow upon any adjoining or
neighboring property or properties, including all public property
and Borough rights-of-way; and
(4) Each bamboo owner shall be required to take such measures as are
reasonably expected to prevent bamboo planted or growing on the
property from invading, encroaching or growing onto adjoining or
neighboring properties. Such measures shall include, but not
limited to, installation of a sheathing barrier comprised of metal or
other material impenetrable by the bamboo's root system at a
sufficient depth within the property line or lines where the running
bamboo is planted or is growing to prevent the growth or
encroachment upon adjoining or neighboring property by the
bamboo.
§ 51-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 51-15
47:134
§ 51-16. Removal.
§ 51-17. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
article shall, in addition to the other charges hereinbefore provided for each
offense, upon summary conviction before any magisterial District Justice,
pay a fine not exceeding $1,000 and costs of prosecution; and in the
default of payment of the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to
imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days for each violation of which
the violator has been found guilty. Each and every day in which any person,
firm or corporation shall be in violation of this article shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 51-18. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, laws or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this article which shall remain in
full force and effect and for this purpose, the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
(5) Whether planted or growing as described in this article, all bamboo
plants shall be located, trimmed and maintained so that no part of
the plant or root system is closer than 10 feet to any property line.
A. In the event that bamboo growing on a bamboo owner's property
invades or grows on an adjoining or neighboring property that is owned
or held on behalf of the Borough, the Borough shall notify the bamboo
owner in writing that the bamboo has invaded the Borough property
and that the bamboo owner is responsible for the removal of such
running bamboo from the Borough property. This notice shall be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested and by regular mail to the latest
address of the bamboo owner on file with the Borough and a copy of the
notice shall also be posted at the bamboo owner's property.
B. In the event that the bamboo owner does not remove or contract for the
removal of the bamboo from the Borough property, or does not make an
arrangement with the Borough for removal of such bamboo within 30
days from the date the Borough first provided notice pursuant to the
above, the Borough, at its discretion, may remove or arrange for the
removal of such bamboo from the Borough property. The bamboo owner
shall be liable and responsible to the Borough for all costs incurred in
removing the bamboo from the Borough property. Such costs may be
assessed against the property of the bamboo owner.
C. This article shall not be deemed to alter any rights of common law or
otherwise that any property owner may have to recover the cost of
removal of running bamboo on their own property from another
property owner from whose property the running bamboo has spread.
§ 51-15 BATHING PLACES § 51-19
47:135
§ 51-19. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. The Borough
reserves the right at any time by ordinance to amend or otherwise modify
or repeal this article.
§ 51-19 GLENOLDEN CODE § 51-19
47:136
Chapter 53
BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64. Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 53-1. Purpose.
§ 53-2. Adoption of code.
A certain document three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Secretary of the Borough of Glenolden, being marked and designated as the
International Property Maintenance Code as published by the International
Code Council, Inc., be and is hereby adopted as the Property Maintenance
Code of the Borough of Glenolden, in the State of Pennsylvania, for control
of structures as herein provided, and each and all of the regulations,
provisions, penalties, conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance
Code are hereby referred to, adopted, and made part thereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes, if
any, prescribed in § 53-3 of this chapter.
§ 53-3. Revisions to code sections.
The following sections are hereby revised by the insertion of the following:
A. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough of Glenolden by preventing, correcting and preserving the
integrity of buildings, parts of buildings and property, and, as a direct
result, maintaining the neighborhood qualities. It is not the intent
hereof to apply these requirements to the standards, which are the
basis for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, required by Chapter
61 or Chapter 93 of the Code of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. This chapter is an ordinance establishing the minimum regulations
governing the condition and maintenance of all property, buildings and
structures by providing the standards for supplied utilities and facilities
and other physical things and conditions essential to ensure that
structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupation and use and
providing the standards for the condemnation of buildings and
structures unfit for human occupancy and use and the demolition of
such structures. This chapter is to be known as the “Property
Maintenance Code.”
A. Section 101.1. Borough of Glenolden.
§ 51-19 BUILDING AND PROPERTY MAINTENANCE § 53-3
53:137
§ 53-4. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are
hereby repealed.
§ 53-5. Affect on impending action.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Property Maintenance Code hereby
adopted shall be construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in
any court, or any rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or
causes of action acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby
repealed as cited in § 53-4 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal right
or remedy of any character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 54
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 56.
Licensing of contractors — See Ch. 65.
Fire prevention code — See Ch. 81.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Inspections — See Ch. 95.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Smoke and heat detectors — See Ch. 141.
§ 54-1. Adoption of standards.
The Building Officials and Code Administrators Basic/National Building
Code of 1993, Twelfth Edition, and all future editions as well as all
supplements to and revisions of any edition, is hereby adopted as the
Building Code of the Borough of Glenolden, and all of the terms and
provisions of the BOCA Basic/National Building Code, 1993, and all future
editions as well as all supplements to and revisions of any edition are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in this chapter.
B. Section 103.6. Fee Schedule, The fee for inspection shall be established
by a resolution, as Council may from time to time adopt.
C. Section 303.14. May 1st to October 15th.
D. Section 602.3. September 15th to May 1st.
E. Section 602.4. September 15th to May 1st.
§ 53-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 54-2
54:138
§ 54-2. Repealer.
Any and all ordinances in conflict with this chapter, including but not limited
to Ordinance No. 890,37 are hereby repealed.
§ 54-3. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following additions and insertions in the BOCA National Building Code
are hereby made as follows:
A. Section 101.1 is amended to read as follows:
101.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the Building Code of
the Borough of Glenolden hereafter referred to as "this code."
B. In Section 107.1.1, Repairs, the following shall be added: "Single-family
residential: Permits shall not be required for the installation of wood or
vinyl siding, replacement of windows in existing openings, installation
of storm windows and doors, or replacement of kitchen cabinets and
counters or any nonstructural cosmetic work. Installation of new
shingles on an existing roof does not require a permit; however, in no
case shall more than two layers of shingles be installed on a roof."
C. Section 112.3.1 is amended to read as follows:
112.3.1 Fee schedule: A fee for each plan examination, building
permit and inspection shall be determined by resolution of Borough
Council, which may be amended from time to time, which will be
enumerated on a Schedule of Building Permit Fees.
D. Section 116-4 is amended to read as follows:
116.4 Violation penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision
of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof
or who shall erect, construct, alter or repair a building or structure in
violation of an approved plan or directive of the Code Official, or of
a permit or certificate issued under the provisions of this code, shall
be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than
$1,000 or by imprisonment not exceeding 15 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after due notice
has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
E. Section 117.2 is amended to read as follows:
117.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
work in or about the structure after having been served with a stopwork
order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $100 or more than $1,000.
37.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 890, adopted 1-10-1985, comprised former Ch. 54, Building
Construction.
§ 54-2 BUILDING CONSTRUCTION § 54-3
54:139
F. Section 121.0 is amended to read as follows:
SECTION 121.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
121.1 Application for appeal: An owner or other person with a
legal or equitable interest in the affected property may appeal to the
Board of Appeals from an adverse decision of the Code Official. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of
this code has been incorrectly interpreted, that the provisions of this
code do not fully apply or an alternate method or material can be used,
consistent with the health, safety and welfare of the public. The appeal
shall be in writing and served upon the Borough Secretary. The appeal
shall cite the provision(s) of the code for which relief is requested and
the reasons supporting the request for relief. The Code Official shall
file a written response to the application for appeal with a copy to the
appellant at least seven days prior to the hearing.
121.2 Membership of Board of Appeals: The members of the
Borough Council shall constitute the Board of Appeals.
121.3 Hearings: Hearings on the appeals are to be held within 30
days from the date the application for appeal is filed or at such other
time as the Board of Appeals establishes. The hearing procedures
shall be established by the Board of Appeals. The recording and
transcribing of testimony shall not be required.
121.4 Decisions of the Board of Appeals: The Board of Appeals
shall make decisions upon the majority vote of a quorum of its
members present and qualified to vote. The Board of Appeals may
make its decision based upon the written application for appeal with
or without hearing.
121.5 Administration: The Code Enforcement Official shall comply
with the decisions of the Board of Appeals.
G. The provisions of Section 310.6, Use Group R-4 structures, are hereby
deleted in their entirety.
H. In Section 707.1, Fire Walls and Party Walls - General, the following
provision shall be and is hereby added: "Fire walls and party walls
separating residential dwelling units shall be of masonry construction a
minimum of eight inches in thickness. In the event that a dwelling unit
projects farther to the front or rear, or is taller than the adjacent unit,
these portions of the wall shall also be masonry."
I. In Section 707.5.2, Combustible roofs:
(1) Section 2 be and is hereby amended to read as follows:
2. The roof sheathing or deck is to be constructed of approved
noncombustible materials or of fire-retardant treated wood for a
distance of four feet (1,219 mm) on both sides of the wall.
(2) Sections 3 and 4 are hereby deleted.
§ 54-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 54-3
54:140
§ 54-4. Construction of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Building Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 54-2 of this chapter; nor shall any just or legal rights or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
Chapter 56
BUILDINGS, UNSAFE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54. Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
§ 56-1. Investigation and examination; reports.
Whenever it shall be reported to the Borough Council that any structure,
completed or in the process of construction, or any portion thereof is in
a dangerous condition, the Borough Council shall immediately cause an
investigation and examination to be made of such structure. The Borough
Council shall request the Fire Chief, Health Officer and Building Inspector
to inspect the said structure and to report in writing to Borough Council the
J. Section 709-1, Fire Separation Assemblies - General, is hereby
amended to add the following: "Fire walls and party walls separating
residential dwelling units shall be of masonry construction a minimum
of eight inches in thickness. In the event that a dwelling unit projects
farther to the front or rear, or is taller than the adjacent unit, these
portions of the wall shall also be masonry."
K. Section 711.1, Fire Partitions - General, is hereby amended to add the
following: "Fire walls and party walls separating residential dwelling
units shall be of masonry construction a minimum of eight inches in
thickness. In the event that a dwelling unit projects farther to the front
or rear, or is taller than the adjacent unit, these portions of the wall
shall also be masonry."
L. Section 114.1 is hereby amended to read as follows: [Added
5-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1059, approved 5-12-1998]
114.1 General: The construction documents for new construction,
alteration, repairs, expansion, addition or modification for buildings
or structures shall be prepared by a registered design professional.
The construction documents shall include the name and address of the
registered design professional and shall be signed, sealed and dated
by the registered design professional.
§ 54-3 BUILDINGS, UNSAFE § 56-1
56:141
findings made with respect to the said structure and its danger and menace
to the health and safety of the public.
§ 56-2. Notice to repair or remove.
If any said structure is found to be in a dangerous condition, the Borough
Secretary shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of such
structure. Such notice shall require the owner of such structure to
commence the repair or removal of such building within 10 days of such
notice and to complete such repair or removal within 30 days thereof,
provided, in any case where the notice prescribes the repair of any
structure, the owner thereof shall have the option of removing such
structure instead of making the repairs thereto within the said time limit.
§ 56-3. Service of notice.
The notice required by § 56-2 shall be served personally upon the owner
of a structure, if such owner resides in the Borough, or upon the agent of
such owner, if such agent has a residence or place of business within the
Borough. If neither the owner nor the agent thereof can be served within
the Borough as hereby provided, such notice shall be sent to the owner of
such structure by registered mail, at the last known address thereof.
§ 56-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
If the owner of any dangerous structure to whom or which a notice to
repair or remove such structure shall be sent under the provisions of this
chapter fails to commence or to complete such repair or removal within
the time limit prescribed by such notice, he shall be guilty of a violation of
this chapter and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution and,
upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county
jail for not more than 30 days. Each day's continuance of a violation shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 56-5. Performance of work by Borough; costs.
If the owner of any dangerous structure to whom or which a notice to
repair or to remove such structure shall be sent under the provisions of
this chapter fails to commence or to complete such repair or removal within
the time limit prescribed by such notice, the Borough Council shall be
empowered to cause such work of repair or removal to be commenced
and/or completed by the Borough, and the cost and expense thereof with
a penalty of 10% shall be collected from the owner of such structure
in the manner provided by law, provided that the recovery of such cost
and expense, together with the penalty, may be in addition to the penalty
imposed as provided in § 56-4.
Chapter 59
§ 56-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 56-5
59:142
BURIALS AND INTERMENTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances on property — See Ch. 112, Art. II.
§ 59-1. Prohibition of burials and cemeteries.
The burial or interment of deceased persons and the establishment,
acquisition or maintenance of any ground or place for the burial or
interment of deceased persons, to be used either privately or by the public,
are hereby prohibited within the limits of the Borough.
§ 59-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person or persons making or attempting to make any burial or
interment of deceased persons, or causing the same to be done by others, or
establishing, acquiring or maintaining any ground or place for the burial or
interment of deceased persons as aforesaid, shall, upon conviction thereof
in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be liable to a fine of
not more than $100, to be levied and collected for the use of the Borough
as like fines are now levied and collected, and, in default of the payment
thereof, to imprisonment for not over 30 days in the county prison, for each
offense, and thereafter, during any continuance of such offense, to a fine not
exceeding $50 for each 24 hours of said continuance.
§ 59-3. Abatement of nuisances.
Any such burial or interment or the establishment, acquisition or
maintenance of any ground or place for the burial or interment of deceased
persons as aforesaid is hereby declared inimical to the health, beauty,
convenience, comfort and safety of the Borough and a public and common
nuisance, and the same may, at the discretion of Borough Council, be
summarily abated in the manner provided by Section 3 of Ordinance No.
299 of the Borough, entitled "An Ordinance of the Borough of Glenolden
Defining, Prohibiting and Providing for the Removal of Certain Nuisances,
and Providing Penalties for the Maintenance Thereof," approved November
1, 1932.38
§ 59-4. Exception.
The provisions hereof shall not apply to an existing private burial ground
commonly known and described as the "Knowles Burial Ground," situate
between Parker and Scott Avenues, east of South Avenue, in the Borough,
and the same is hereby exempted from all operation of this chapter;
provided, however, that use and occupation thereof remain those of a
38.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Nuisances, § 112-4.
§ 56-5 BURIALS AND INTERMENTS § 59-4
59:143
private family burial ground and that any change in said use and occupation
shall immediately, without further action by said Borough, subject the said
burial ground to all of the provisions and operation hereof.
Chapter 61
CERTIFICATES OF OCCUPANCY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 56.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 59-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 59-4
59:144
ARTICLE I
Requirements for Sale of Property
§ 61-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to update the Borough of Glenolden's
requirements for a certificate of occupancy to comply with the requirements
and provisions of 68 P.S. § 1081, known as the "Pennsylvania Municipal
Code and Ordinance Compliance Act" ("MCOCA").39
§ 61-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms are defined as follows, unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise:
DATE OF PURCHASE — The date on which title and right to possess the
property transfers to the purchaser or, in cases where the property is sold
pursuant to the act of May 16, 1923, referred to as the "Municipal Claim
and Tax Lien Law," the first day following the right of redemption period
authorized under the Municipal Claim and Tax Lien Law.40
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership and/
or other legal entity.
SUBSTANTIAL VIOLATION — A violation of an adopted building, house
property maintenance or fire code or maintenance, health or safety
nuisance ordinance that make a building, structure or any part thereof unfit
for human habitation and is discovered during the course of a municipal
inspection of property and disclosed to the record owner or prospective
purchaser of the property through issuance of a municipal report.
TEMPORARY ACCESS CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the Borough
as a result of the inspection of a property incident to the resale of the
property that identifies at least one substantial violation, and the purpose of
the certificate is to authorize the purchaser to access the property for the
purposes of correcting substantial violations pursuant to the maintenance
and repair provision of this act. No person may occupy a property during
the term of a temporary access certificate, but the owner shall be permitted
to store personalty that is related to the proposed use or occupancy of the
property or is needed to repair the substantial violations during the time of
the temporary access certificate.
TEMPORARY USE AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued
by the Borough as a result of an inspection of a property incident to the
resale of the property that reveals a violation but no substantial violation
and the purpose of the certificate is to authorize the purchaser to fully
utilize or reside in the property while correcting violations.
UNFIT FOR HUMAN HABITATION — A condition which renders a building
or structure, or any part thereof, dangerous or injurious to the health,
39.Editor's Note: See 68 P.S. § 1081 et seq.
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
§ 61-1 BURIALS AND INTERMENTS § 61-2
59:145
safety or physical welfare of an occupant or the occupants of neighboring
dwellings. The condition may include substantial violations of a property
that show evidence of a significant increase to the hazards of fire or
accident; inadequate sanitary facilities; vermin infestation; or a condition
of disrepair, dilapidation or structural defects such that the costs of
rehabilitation and repair would exceed 1/2 of the agreed-upon purchase
price of the property.
USE AND OCCUPANCY CERTIFICATE — A certificate issued by the
Borough stipulating that the property meets all ordinances and codes and
may be used or occupied as intended.
VIOLATION — A violation of a properly adopted building, housing, property
maintenance or fire code or maintenance, health or safety nuisance
ordinance that does not rise to the level of a substantial violation and is
discovered during the course of a Borough inspection of a property and
disclosed to the record owner or prospective purchaser of the property
through issuance of a Borough inspection report.
§ 61-2.1. Certificate required.
§ 61-3. Issuance of certificates.
The Borough of Glenolden shall issue certificates in the following manner:
A. No person, unless otherwise excepted by Pennsylvania law or § 61-5
below, shall occupy any lot or portion of any lot, dwelling, dwelling unit,
building, building unit, office or business or storage unit in the Borough
of Glenolden, and no person owning any dwelling, dwelling unit, lot,
building, building unit, office or storage unit shall lease, rent or allow
such dwelling, dwelling unit, lot or any portion of such lot, building,
building unit, office, business or storage unit to be occupied by another
without each first making application to and obtaining from the
Borough Council or its designated agent a certificate of occupancy for
such dwelling, dwelling unit, lot or portion of lot, building, building unit,
office, business or storage unit.
B. Fees.
(1) A fee for the certificate of occupancy shall be paid by each
applicant upon or before the issuance of the following: certificates
for single-family dwellings, apartment dwelling units, all other lots,
buildings, building units, offices, business or storage units
commercial or industrial, and follow-up inspections.
(2) Fees for certificates of occupancy shall be fixed by resolution of the
Borough Council and may be amended from time to time.
C. Owners of existing structures that do not have a valid use and
occupancy certificate shall complete an application for use and
occupancy certificate, pay the applicable fees and schedule an
inspection with the Code Official or its designee.
§ 61-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 61-3
59:146
§ 61-4. Escrows and bonds prohibited.
The Borough will not require the escrowing of funds, the posting of a
bond or require a similar financial security as a condition of issuing a
certificate; however, the Borough may require an owner or purchaser, prior
to accessing the property, to acquire the necessary permits and meet all
other related obligations in other statutes that pertain to building, property
maintenance, fire codes or other health and safety codes. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit the Borough from requiring an owner, prior
to accessing the property, to acquire the necessary permits and meet all
other related obligations in other statutes that pertain to building, property
maintenance, fire codes or other health or safety codes.
§ 61-5. Applicability.
A. If the Borough inspection reveals no deficiencies or violations a use and
occupancy certificate will be issued.
B. If the Borough inspection reveals at least one deficiency or violation,
but no substantial violations, the Borough will issue a temporary use
and occupancy certificate.
C. If the Borough inspection reveals at least one substantial violation, the
Borough will specifically note those substantial violations on the
inspection report and will issue a temporary access certificate.
D. Any deficiencies, violations or substantial violations revealed by an
inspection shall be identified by the Borough, in writing, and shall
accompany the certificate that is issued.
A. Except as set forth in Subsection B, this chapter shall not apply to, and
the Borough will not require, a use and occupancy certificate, a
temporary use and occupancy certificate or temporary access
certificate for real estate transfer, including a residential or
nonresidential transfer as provided under 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 7103(b)(2), to
any of the following which take title to the property for the purposes of
holding the property for sale to offset losses incurred on a loan or other
obligation in default secured by a mortgage, deed of trust or other lien
on the property:
(1) Bank.
(2) Savings association.
(3) Credit union.
(4) Mortgage lender.
(5) Financial institution similar to institutions listed in Subsection A(1)
through (4).
(6) Subsidiary of a financial institution listed in Subsection A(1)
through (5).
§ 61-3 BURIALS AND INTERMENTS § 61-5
59:147
B. Exception. A financial institution not subject to this act under
Subsection A may be required by a municipality to correct a substantial
violation.
§ 61-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 61-5
59:148
ARTICLE II
Compliance and Enforcement
§ 61-6. Compliance requirement.
A. Within 12 months of the date of purchase, the purchaser of a property
known to be in violation of a Borough Code or ordinance shall, at the
purchaser's option, either:
(1) Bring the property into compliance with the Borough codes; or
(2) Demolish the building or structure in accordance with the law.
B. At the request of the property owner, the municipality may negotiate, at
its discretion, longer time periods for maintenance and repair of the
structure under a temporary certificate, but the time periods stated in
Subsection A may not be shortened.
C. Reinspection of property.
(1) At the expiration of the twelve-month compliance period or before
that time, if requested by the property owner, the Borough will
reinspect the property for the purpose of determining compliance
with the cited violations.
(2) If a temporary access permit has been issued and inspection
indicates that the noted substantial violations have been corrected
but other cited violations have not yet been corrected, the Borough
shall issue a temporary use and occupancy permit to be valid for
the time remaining on the original temporary access permit.
(3) If the reinspection indicates that all noted violations have been
corrected, the Borough shall issue a use and occupancy certificate
for the property.
D. Violation of § 61-6A shall result in:
(1) Revocation of the temporary certificate;
(2) The purchaser being subject to any existing Borough ordinances or
codes relating to the occupation of a property without a use and
occupancy certificate; and
(3) The purchaser being personally liable, for the costs of
maintenance, repairs or demolition sufficient to correct the cited
violations, a fine of not less than $1,000 nor more than $10,000.
E. Exception. A violation of a municipal code or ordinance, for which a
fine, other penalty or a judgment to abate or correct was imposed by a
magisterial district judge or municipal court, or a judgment at law or in
equity was imposed by a court of common pleas prior to purchase, shall
not be subject to the requirements of this chapter.
§ 61-6 BURIALS AND INTERMENTS § 61-7
59:149
§ 61-7. Changes to property; occupancy or use without certificate to
be violation.
The applicant shall promptly inform the Borough Secretary in writing of
any change made to a property which alters the information provided in
the application for a certificate of occupancy. Occupancy or use of any
dwelling, dwelling unit, building, building unit, office, business or storage
unit without first securing a certificate of occupancy, temporary occupancy
certificate or temporary access certificate shall constitute a breach and a
violation of this chapter, and violators shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punished by a fine of not more than $600 and costs of prosecution or,
upon the default of the payment of such fine and costs, by imprisonment in
the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days. Each day's failure to
comply with any provision of this article shall constitute a separate violation
thereof.
§ 61-8. Notice of violation.
When the Code Official or Code Officer determines that there exists a
violation of any provisions of this chapter, he shall serve written notice of
such violation on the person or persons responsible therefor, as hereinafter
provided:
§ 61-9. Inconsistent provisions.
Any section of this Chapter 61 which is inconsistent with 68 P.S. § 1081
et seq., known as the "Pennsylvania Municipal Code and Ordinance
Compliance Act," shall not be enforced. The provisions of MCOCA shall
prevail over any inconsistent provisions of this chapter, and same is hereby
adopted by the Borough. Nothing herein shall be construed or intended
to supersede any other Borough ordinances allowing for other fines and
citations for the condition of the property, including violations on the
A. Such notice shall:
(1) Be put in writing.
(2) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires.
(4) Be served upon the owner or his/her agent, as the case may
require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to be properly
served upon such person if a copy thereof is sent, by registered or
certified mail, to his/her last known address, or if he/she is served
by any other method authorized or required under the laws of this
state.
B. Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken,
will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
§ 61-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 61-9
59:150
inspection report, separate and apart from any failure to obtain a certificate
of occupancy within 12 months from the date of purchase.
§ 61-9 BURIALS AND INTERMENTS § 61-9
59:151
Chapter 63
CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Noise — See Ch. 109. Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
§ 63-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXHIBITION — All public circuses, carnivals, sideshows, exhibitions and
amusements of similar nature, except such as are operated entirely by
organizations within the Borough.
§ 63-2. Permit required.
Hereafter any exhibition as hereinbefore defined is prohibited from
opening, operating, setting up equipment or occupying land within the
Borough unless and until a permit for such operation and occupancy shall
be issued as herein provided.
§ 63-3. Requisites for issuance of permit.
The aforesaid permit may be issued in writing by the Borough Secretary,
upon the direction of the Borough Council, signed by the said Borough
Secretary and by the President of the Borough Council and sealed with
the seal of the Borough, upon full compliance by the applicant with the
following terms and conditions:
A. Before the issuance of any such permit, there shall be filed with the
Borough Secretary such written information as he shall require with
regard to the character of the proposed exhibition, the person, persons,
organization, association or institution operating the said exhibition
and the officers thereof, and likewise the said application shall be
executed by some reliable organization, association or institution within
the Borough which desires to sponsor the said exhibition. Permits shall
be issued only to such applicants as are sponsored by organizations,
associations or institutions of the Borough which, in the opinion of the
Borough Council, are worthy and reliable, and the said application shall
contain an agreement by the applicant that the amount deposited with
the Borough over and above the permit fee hereinafter referred to may
be used and expended by the Borough in placing the grounds occupied
by the exhibition in a satisfactory condition after the closing of the said
exhibition.
B. Before issuance of any such permit, the applicant shall deposit with the
Borough Treasurer the sum of $100, of which sum the amount of $25
§ 61-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 63-3
63:152
§ 63-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person or any officer, manager or agent of any firm, corporation or
organization who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or who
shall permit, encourage or assist in the violation of the provisions hereof or
in the operation of any exhibition contrary to the terms hereof shall, upon
conviction, be liable to a fine of not less than $25 and not exceeding $200,
in addition to the costs of prosecution, and, upon default in payment of the
fine and costs, to imprisonment not exceeding 30 days.
§ 63-5. Continuing violations.
Each day's operation of any exhibition as hereinbefore defined contrary
to the terms hereof shall and it does constitute a separate and distinct
violation of this chapter, and each such day's operation after the first day
shall, in addition to the penalties hereinbefore provided, be punishable by a
further fine of not more than $100.
Chapter 64
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and property maintenance — See Ch.
53.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 64-1. Election to administer and enforce Act.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
- 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 64-2. Adoption of Uniform Code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapter 401 -
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this municipality.
shall constitute a permit fee or charge and the balance shall be retained
by the said Borough Treasurer pending the closing of the said
exhibition and its vacation of the grounds within the Borough occupied
by it. Upon the vacation of the said exhibition, the balance aforesaid
shall be expended and applied against any repairs, cleaning or other
work necessary to place the grounds formerly occupied by the said
exhibition in a condition satisfactory to Borough Council; thereafter any
unexpended balance shall be returned to the said applicant.
§ 63-3 CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM § 64-3
64:153
§ 64-3. Methods of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the Code within this municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing
body of this Borough from time to time by resolution:
§ 64-4. Board of appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing
body of this Borough in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the Code, as amended from time to time, and for the purpose
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipality, said Board of
Appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 64-5. Effect on existing ordinances.
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering onto a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of this
municipality;
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which are
equal to or exceed the requirements of the Code shall continue in full
force and effect until such time as such provisions fail to exceed the
minimum requirements of the Code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the Code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the Code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
covered by the Code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 64-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 64-6
64:154
§ 64-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the Code shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 65
CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF
§ 65-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Glenolden Borough
Contractor Licensing Ordinance."
§ 65-2. Purpose.
The Council and the Planning Commission find it to be in the best interest of
the residents of the Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
that persons or firms who engage in construction, repairs, remodeling,
rehabilitation or demolition and/or operating as general contractors,
subcontractors, specialty contractors and/or home improvement
contractors shall be required to obtain a license from the Borough of
Glenolden for such purpose, to the end that only responsible and qualified
persons shall be permitted to engage in such business in said Borough of
Glenolden.
§ 65-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, unless the context clearly indicates a different
meaning, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
CONTRACT — An agreement, whether oral or written, and whether
contained in one or more documents, between a contractor and an owner or
another contractor for the performance of work, including all labor, services
and materials to be furnished and performed thereunder.
CONTRACTORS — Any person, other than a bona fide employee of the
owner, who undertakes or offers to perform construction, repair, reroofing,
remodeling, rehabilitation, demolition, paving and any other residential or
nonresidential construction or demolition work in the Borough, whether
as a general contractor, subcontractor, specialty contractor or home
improvement contractor.
ENGINEER — The Borough Engineer.
INSPECTOR — The Building Inspector and/or the Code Enforcement Officer
of the Borough.
LICENSE YEAR — The twelve-month period beginning on January 1 of each
year.
§ 64-6 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 65-3
65:155
OWNER — Any property owner, tenant or other person who orders,
contracts for or purchases the services of a contractor, or any person
entitled to the work of a contractor pursuant to a contract, gift or otherwise.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, limited partnership, corporation
and/or other such similar entity.
§ 65-4. Enforcement.
The Inspector or his or her designated representative shall administer and
enforce this chapter.
§ 65-5. Compliance required; complicity.
No person shall act as a contractor in the Borough except in compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. Any person, including an owner, who
willfully aids a contractor or participates with a contractor in violating any
provision of this chapter is also in violation of this chapter.
§ 65-6. Craft license.
A license issued pursuant to this chapter shall not be construed to authorize
the licensee to perform any particular type of work or type of business
which is reserved to qualified licensees under the other provisions of state
or local law.
§ 65-7. License required; applications and renewals.
A. Application for contractor's license. [Amended 5-9-1996 by Ord. No.
1028, approved 5-9-1996]
(1) Prior to issuing a building permit to a contractor, the said
contractor shall make application for a license to act as a
contractor in the Borough. Such application shall be made by the
completion of an application form furnished by the Borough and the
payment of a license fee as hereinafter set forth in this chapter.
Each application must contain information as set forth hereinafter
in this chapter, and each applicant must present satisfactory proof
of insurance as set forth hereinafter in this chapter. Each
application for a license shall be signed by the applicant, if a
natural person, and in the case of an association or a partnership
and/or any similar business entity, by a member or partner thereof,
and in the case of a corporation, by an officer thereof.
(2) All electricians that must obtain a "no fee permit" must obtain a
contractor's license in accordance with Subsection A(1).
(3) All contractors working above first-story level, including but not
limited to exterior repairs or maintenance contractors, roofers,
tree care contractors, siding contractors, masonry and painting
contractors, must obtain a contractor's license, although a building
permit may not be required.
§ 65-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 65-7
65:156
§ 65-8. Exceptions and exemptions.
§ 65-9. Insurance required.
B. Each successful applicant shall be issued a license, which shall be in the
form of a wallet-size card and in the form of a vehicle sticker which
must be prominently displayed. Every licensed contractor, while
actually acting as a contractor in the Borough, shall carry such license
card with him or her and shall display it to the Inspector or his or her
representatives upon demand. Every licensed contractor shall at all
times display his or her sticker license on the vehicle he or she
primarily uses in his or her activities as a contractor.
C. All contractors' licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31
of each license year unless the license is revoked or suspended prior
thereto under § 65-13.
D. A person with an unexpired license which has not been revoked or
suspended during the current license year who makes application for a
license for the following license year need not complete an application
form but must submit the required license fee and current certificate of
insurance, and if he or she qualifies for licensing and renewal under the
terms of this chapter, his or her license shall be renewed for the
following license year and he or she will be issued a new license card
and bumper sticker for the following license year.
E. (Reserved)41
A. This chapter shall not apply to the official transactions of any
authorized representative of the government of the United States, any
state or commonwealth of the United States, any political subdivision of
any state or commonwealth, or any agency or instrumentality of the
foregoing governments.
B. No contractor's license shall be required of the following:
(1) A person who performs labor or services for a contractor for wages
or salary; or
(2) A person who is required by other state or local law to attain
standards of competency or experience and who must obtain
licensing under such other state or local law as a prerequisite to
engage in a craft or profession and is acting exclusively within the
scope of such craft or profession for which he or she is currently
licensed pursuant to such other law.
A. No contractor's license shall be issued unless the applicant files a
certificate of insurance with the Inspector at the time of the license
application. The certificate of insurance shall contain a provision that
41.Editor's Note: Former Subsection E, regarding contractor's licenses, was repealed
5-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1028, approved 5-9-1996.
§ 65-7 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 65-9
65:157
§ 65-10. License fees. [Amended 5-9-1996 by Ord. No. 1028,
approved 5-9-1996]
§ 65-11. License issuance or denial; form of license application.
coverage afforded under the policy will not be canceled until at least
15 days' prior written notice of such cancellation has been given to
the Borough. The certificate of insurance must evidence policies of
insurance, maintained at the expense of the application, for public
liability, property damage, products liability and completed operations,
each of which must have a single occurrence limit of at least $250,000.
Blasting and demolition insurance shall also be required for blasting
and demolition contractors, and the reasonable limits of such insurance
shall be determined by the Inspector or the Engineer at the time of the
application, based on the nature and extent of the applicant's proposed
operations.
B. All types and limits of insurance for which certificates are presented at
the time of application and upon the basis of which a license is issued
shall be maintained throughout the license year or the license will be
suspended or revoked as set forth in § 65-13. The Inspector must
approve the responsibility of new insurance carriers prior to a change
in a carrier during a license year.
C. No contractor's license shall be issued unless the applicant files a
certificate of insurance evidencing workmen's compensation coverage
with said Inspector at the time of the license application. The certificate
of insurance shall contain a provision that coverage afforded under the
policy will not be canceled until at least 15 days' prior written notice of
such cancellation has been given to the Borough.
A. At the time of the application for a new license or for the renewal of a
current license, the applicant shall pay to the Inspector a license
application fee of $50 made payable to the Borough.
B. No fee or portion thereof shall be returned to any applicant.
C. The license fee shall be doubled to $100 for any contractor that does
not obtain the license before commencing to work in the Borough.
A. When an application has been filed with the Borough in proper form,
the Inspector must, within a period of 30 days from the date following
the date the application is received, issue or refuse to issue the
appropriate contractor's license to the applicant. If issuance of a license
is denied, the Inspector shall mail to the unsuccessful applicant a
written statement setting forth the reason or reasons for the denial,
within the aforesaid thirty-day period.
B. The application for a license shall be a printed form provided to the
applicant by the Inspector, and the application shall require a written
answer to all questions contained thereon. Failure to answer all
§ 65-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 65-11
65:158
§ 65-12. Notification of changes.
Every contractor licensee shall, within 10 days after a change in ownership,
directors, officers, management, address or trade name, notify the Borough,
in writing, of such change.
§ 65-13. Reasons for denial, renewal or revocation of license.
Any of the following circumstances is sufficient cause to deny the issuance
of a license under this chapter or a renewal thereof or for revoking a license
previously issued:
questions on the application form shall mean that the applicant is not
entitled to consideration of his or her application until he or she has
answered all questions. The application form shall be signed by the
applicant under oath. The questions and information requested on the
application form shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following:
(1) The names of owners, partners, directors and officers of the
applicant and the business address and trade names of the
applicant.
(2) A statement as to whether or not any municipality has refused to
issue to the applicant or has revoked from the applicant any similar
contractor's license within two years previous to the date of the
application. If there has been such denial or revocation, the
applicant must explain, in writing, the reasons for the same.
A. The applicant falsely answered any question contained on the
application form.
B. The applicant has been refused a similar contractor's license or has had
a similar contractor's license revoked or suspended by another
municipality within two years prior to the date of application for
issuance or renewal if the refusal, revocation or suspension by the other
municipality was due to failure to comply with that municipality's
building codes.
C. The licensee fails to maintain, during the license year, the policies of
insurance required under this chapter.
D. The licensee violates any of the provisions of the Building Code
(Chapter 54, Building Construction)42 or any provision of this chapter.
E. The licensee violates any condition or requirement of a building permit,
sewer construction permit or highway permit issued by the Borough.
F. The licensee willfully deviates from or disregards any plans or
specifications for a contracting job in a material respect without first
42.Editor's Note: See Ch. 64, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 65-11 CONTRACTORS, LICENSING OF § 65-13
65:159
§ 65-14. Violations and penalties.
In addition to refusal or revocation of a license as provided in § 65-13,
whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined up to $1,000 for each offense, together with the costs of
prosecution, or shall be subject to imprisonment in the county jail for a term
not to exceed 30 days or an equal amount of time in community service to
be designated by the District Justice, or both. The fine imposed under this
section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by this chapter.
Chapter 66
CURFEW
§ 66-1. Curfew established for juveniles; hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person under 18 years of age (such persons
hereafter being referred to as "juveniles") to be or remain on the streets,
sidewalks, alleys, parks or public places of the Borough of Glenolden at
night after 10:30 p.m. on Sundays to Thursdays, inclusive, or after 11:00
p.m. on Fridays and Saturdays, unless such juvenile is accompanied by a
parent, guardian or other person having custody of such juvenile or unless
the juvenile is performing an emergency errand for his or her parent,
guardian or other person having custody and the juvenile has a written
statement to such effect signed by the parent, guardian or person having
legal custody of said juvenile.
§ 66-2. Duties of parents.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having the
legal care or custody of any juvenile to allow or permit such juvenile while
in such legal custody to be or remain on the streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parks or public places of the Borough of Glenolden at night after 10:30
p.m. on Sundays to Thursdays, inclusive, or after 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays, except as is permitted in § 66-1 hereof.
§ 66-3. (Reserved)
obtaining the consent of the owner, in writing, to such change and
without first notifying the Inspector of such change.
G. The licensee does business through a person who is subject to the
licensing requirements of this chapter but who is not licensed as
required by this chapter.
H. The licensee conducts a contractor's business in the Borough under a
name other than that under which he or she is licensed.
I. The licensee fails to comply with an order, demand or requirement
lawfully made by the Inspector under the authority of this chapter or
any other Borough ordinance.
§ 65-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 66-4
66:160
§ 66-4. Duties of police.
It shall be the duty of the Glenolden Borough police who shall find any
juvenile on the streets, sidewalks, alleys, parks or public places of the
Borough at night in violation of § 66-1 to note the name and address of
the juvenile and the name and address of the parents, guardian or person
having legal custody of said juvenile.
§ 66-5. (Reserved)
§ 66-6. Violations and penalties.
Any parent, guardian or person having legal custody of any juvenile who
shall permit any juvenile to be or remain on the streets, sidewalks, alleys,
parks or public places of the Borough of Glenolden after 10:30 p.m. on
Sundays to Thursdays, inclusive, or after 11:00 p.m. on Fridays and
Saturdays shall be guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof by
summary conviction, as regulated by the Borough Code, shall be subject to
a fine or penalty of not less than $25 and not exceeding $100 and, upon
default in the payment of the fine or penalty imposed and the costs, the
defendant may be sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days. Any prosecution hereunder shall be commenced by
summons.
Chapter 68
DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 66-4 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 66-6
68:161

ARTICLE I
Drug-Free School Zones
[Adopted 2-9-1989 by Res. No. R-4-89]
§ 68-1. Zones established.
All areas within 1,000 feet of the real property on which is located a public,
private or parochial school within the Borough of Glenolden are hereby
declared to be drug-free zones.43
§ 68-2. Erection of signs.
The Council of the Borough of Glenolden hereby authorizes the expenditure
of funds sufficient to purchase and erect the necessary signs to identify
all drug-free zones around all public, private and parochial schools within
the Borough of Glenolden, and the appropriate officers of the Borough of
Glenolden are hereby directed to purchase and erect said signs.
43.Editor's Note: For violations and penalties, see 18 Pa. C.S.A. § 6314(b).
§ 68-1 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 68-2
68:163
Chapter 68A
DUMPSTERS AND CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building and property maintenance — See Ch.
53.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 86.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 68A-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter the following terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them therein:
COMPACTION CONTAINER — Any receptacle designed or utilized for the
purpose of crushing, compressing, storage and/or collection of refuse,
trash, debris or other solid waste materials.
CONTAINER — The types of receptacle defined in this section.
DUMPSTERS — Any uncovered, wheeled or otherwise movable receptacle
utilized for the storage and/or collection of refuse, trash, debris or other
solid waste materials.
OPEN-TOP CONTAINERS — Any uncovered receptacle utilized for the
storage and/or collection of refuse, trash, debris or other solid waste
materials.
PERMIT — A permit issued by the Department of Code Enforcement and
Inspections authorizing the temporary placement of a dumpster, portable
storage facility or container in or upon a street or public grounds or upon
private property.
PORTABLE OUTDOOR STORAGE FACILITY — A portable device or
container of three cubic yard(s) or more in size and intended for the storage
of personal property.
§ 68A-2. Applicability; enforceability.
A. This chapter shall be applicable to and shall be enforced upon the use of
any container as described in § 68A-1 above only as used on a
temporary basis. "Temporary" shall be defined as such use for 30 days
or less.
B. Furthermore, this chapter shall not be applicable to or enforced upon
any business within Glenolden Borough which uses any container as
described in § 68A-1 above as a regular part of their business or as part
of any regularly scheduled trash removal.
§ 68-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 68A-3
68:164
§ 68A-3. Insurance.
Each application for a permit hereunder shall be accompanied by a
certificate or certificates of insurance, in a form approved by the Borough
Manager, issued by one or more insurance companies authorized to do
business within the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania certifying that said
company or companies have issued or have written the following policies,
which shall not be cancelled except on 15 days' written notice to the
Borough:
§ 68A-4. Permit requirement.
Every person, firm or corporation desiring to utilize any dumpster, opentop
container, portable outdoor storage facility or compaction container
on a public street or private property within the Borough shall apply for
the permit required by this chapter by submitting an application on a
form prepared and furnished by the Department of Code Enforcement. The
application shall set forth the name of the owner and operator, if not the
same, the location and size of the container, the dates of use and such other
information as the Department of Code Enforcement may require.
§ 68A-5. Permit fee and time limit.
The permit shall be issued only for the actual period of use not to exceed
30 days from the date of issuance. In the event any permit expires while the
container is still in use, the applicant on or before the expiration date must
apply for and receive a renewal permit for another thirty-day period. When
an initial application is filed, a permit fee in the amount of $25 shall be paid
to the Borough, with a renewal fee of $15.
§ 68A-6. Nuisances.
Any container not maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and shall be subject to the
appropriate abatement procedures.
§ 68A-7. Restrictions and requirements.
A. Comprehensive general liability, naming the Borough as an additional
insured, from the applicable hauling company in limits acceptable to
the Borough.
B. A policy to protect the Borough in the sum of at least $20,000 against
any loss due to damage caused to any street or other public property
owned by the Borough by reason of the placement, maintenance, or use
of the any items as defined in § 68A-1 above pursuant to any permit
issued hereunder.
C. If any item as listed in § 68A-1 above is placed solely on private
property, a certificate of liability insurance will not be required at the
discretion of the Borough Manager.
§ 68A-3 DRUGS AND DRUG PARAPHERNALIA § 68A-7
68:165
§ 68A-8. General placement; visibility.
Containers shall not be placed closer than 30 feet from any intersection, or
upon any one-way street, or within 15 feet of any fire hydrant.
§ 68A-9. Emergency removal.
In the event of an emergency, any container may be removed by the
Glenolden Borough Police Department, Highway Department or Emergency
Management Coordinator.
§ 68A-10. Revocation of permit.
Violation of any terms and conditions of this chapter by the applicant, his
agents, employees or any container hired by the applicant shall be reason
for immediate revocation of the permit. The container shall be removed
A. No container shall be transported, emptied, or serviced between the
hours of 7:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., Monday through Friday, 7:00 p.m. and
8:30 a.m. on Saturday or at anytime on any Sunday or legal holiday, nor
shall any mechanical, hydraulic or electric loader, compactor, packer of
conveyor be utilized during such hours. The aforesaid shall not be
applicable to Township trash haulers or private trash haulers.
B. No container shall be filled beyond the top of such container.
Containers shall be emptied as soon as practical when full, or within 48
hours upon receipt of written notice by the Borough.
C. No container shall be filled by means of a chute, conveyor, belt or other
device located in, above, on or across a street, or by dropping or
throwing items in, above, on or across a street, unless the permit
authorizing placement of such container specifically authorizes such
method.
D. When not in use, all containers shall be covered with a lid of tarpaulin
or otherwise secured, to prevent debris from blowing out of said
container.
E. No container may be placed on a public street within Glenolden
Borough unless the container has reflectors or some other type of
reflective materials attached to all four of its sides and no permit shall
be issued for the use of any such container which does not have such
reflectors attached to all four sides. All such reflectors or reflective
materials must be located on areas of the container which are readily
visible to vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
F. On or before the expiration of the permit, the permit holder shall
remove or cause to be removed the container, unless a renewal permit
is obtained through the Department of Code Enforcement. The permit
holder is responsible for the cleanup of the area where the container is
located.
§ 68A-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 68A-10
68:166
from the public or private property immediately upon revocation. Such
action shall be in addition to the penalties provided for in § 68A-11.
§ 68A-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be subject to a fine of not more than $300 per container, and
upon default of the payment thereof, be sentenced to undergo imprisonment
for a period not exceeding 30 days. Each violation of the provisions of this
chapter shall constitute a separate offense for each day a violation exists.
Chapter 69
EMERGENCY OPERATIONS
§ 69-1. Plan adopted; copies of file; annual review.
We, the undersigned Council for the Borough of Glenolden, do hereby
approve, adopt and place into immediate effect the Emergency Operations
Plan of the Borough of Glenolden, the original of which shall be kept
at the Glenolden Borough Hall and copies thereof placed in the Police
Department and library. This plan shall be reviewed on an annual basis
to make certain it conforms to the requirements of the Delaware County
Emergency Operations Plan.
Chapter 71
FENCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 71-1. Certain fences prohibited; exception.
In all residential districts as designated on the Borough Zoning Map,44 solid
fences which exceed three feet in height from the ground are expressly
prohibited, except as hereinafter provided.
§ 71-2. Permissible solid fences [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Solid fences up to a maximum of six feet in height may be erected in the
following instances:
A. When they are erected in compliance with Ordinance No. 849, which
requires the erection of fences for swimming pools.45
44.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 68A-10 EMERGENCY OPERATIONS § 71-2
69:167
§ 71-3. Open or ornamental fences.
In all residential districts as designated on the Borough Zoning Map,46 open
or ornamental fences may be erected to a height not exceeding six feet from
the ground only from the rear building line to the rear property line and
then across the rear property line, and to a maximum height not exceeding
four feet from the rear building line to the property side of the sidewalk line
and then across the property side of the sidewalk line. Open or ornamental
fences shall have a ratio of at least one part solid to three parts open.
§ 71-4. Fences for swimming pools.
Fences required under Ordinance No. 849 for the purpose of enclosing
either an in-ground swimming pool or an aboveground swimming pool are
expressly excepted from the requirements of this chapter and are to be
governed by Ordinance No. 849.47
§ 71-5. Prohibition in front yards. [Added 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
2116, approved 9-19-201748]
In all residential districts of the Borough, no fence shall be erected in
the front yard area of any lot, tract or parcel of land, unless it is natural
living vegetation (i.e., plants, trees, hedges) of which the height shall not be
greater than four feet. For a living fence (vegetation) no permit is required.
§ 71-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-19-2017 by Ord. No.
2116, approved 9-19-2017]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
B. When they are erected for the enclosure of patios, but only in the area
from the rear building line to the rear property line. [Amended
10-11-1990 by Ord. No. 954, approved 10-11-1990]
C. When they are to be erected on a property line but only on either side
property line from the rear building line to the rear property line and on
the rear property line, if written permission of the affected adjacent
property owner(s) is obtained and presented to the Building Inspector
upon application for a permit for the erection of such fences. The abovementioned
written permission of the adjacent property owner(s) shall
not be required if the fence is erected a minimum of six inches from the
property line described hereinbefore. [Amended 10-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 954, approved 10-11-1990; 1-9-1992 by Ord. No. 978,
approved 1-9-1992]
45.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning, § 162-11.
46.Editor's Note: A copy of the Zoning Map is included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
47.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning, § 162-11.
48.Editor's Note: This chapter also renumbered former § 71-5 as § 71-6.
§ 71-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 71-6
69:168
not more than $500 for each and every violation. Each day the violation
occurs shall be considered a separate offense.
§ 71-7. Severability. [Added 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2116, approved
9-19-2017]
If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase, or any portion of
this chapter be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, or of any provision of any part of this chapter as applied
to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid
or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the
remaining portions of this chapter not so held to be invalid, or the
application of this chapter not so held to be invalid.
§ 71-8. Repealer. [Added 9-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2116, approved
9-19-2017]
This chapter repeals any prior ordinances, resolutions or parts thereof
which are in conflict or are inconsistent herewith with respect to the
Codified Ordinances of the Borough of Glenolden and provisions of Chapter
71. All other existing ordinances, resolutions or parts thereof not
inconsistent herewith shall remain in effect.
Chapter 74
FINES, PAYMENT OF
§ 74-1. Fines for enumerated violations.
Any person who commits any of the following ordinance violations in the
Borough of Glenolden shall have the privilege of paying a fine in the amount
of $5 to the Chief of Police of the Borough of Glenolden, which said fine
shall be in satisfaction of any penalty which might be imposed under the
provisions of said ordinance which has been violated, so long as said fine is
paid to the Chief of Police within 48 hours from the time of a ticket issuance
for said violation:
A. Ordinance No. 541 prohibiting the running at large of dogs.49
B. Ordinance No. 581 requiring the removal, trimming or cutting of grass
or weeds.50
C. Ordinance No. 590 relating to the prevention of fire.51
D. Ordinance No. 600 requiring the removal of snow from sidewalks.52
49.Editor's Note: See Ch. 43, Animals, Art. I.
50.Editor's Note: See Ch. 51, Brush, Grass and Weeds.
51.Editor's Note: See Ch. 80, Fire Prevention, currently derived from Ord. No. 836, adopted
and approved 9-11-1990.
52.Editor's Note: See Ch. 144, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. VI.
§ 71-6 FINES, PAYMENT OF § 74-1
74:169
§ 74-2. Authority of Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police of the Borough of Glenolden is hereby authorized to
accept the sum as set forth in § 74-1 hereof as a fine for the violation of said
ordinances.
§ 74-3. Institution of summary proceedings.
In the event that the person who violates the said ordinances as set forth
in § 74-1 hereof fails to pay the fine as provided in § 74-1 within 48 hours
from the time of issuance of the said ticket, summary proceedings shall
be instituted for violation of the pertinent provisions of the said ordinance
or ordinances which have been violated in accordance with the provisions
thereof.
Chapter 77
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fireworks — See Ch. 82.
E. Ordinance No 685 providing for restricted motor vehicle parking during
snow emergencies.53
F. Ordinance No. 721 regulating the collection and disposal of garbage
and rubbish.54
53.Editor's Note: Currently, see Ch. 157, Vehicles and Traffic, Art. IV.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse, Art. I.
§ 74-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 74-3
77:170
ARTICLE I
Hunting and Firearms
[Adopted 5-10-1934 by Ord. No. 314, approved 6-4-1934]
§ 77-1. Hunting and discharge of firearms prohibited.
§ 77-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction
thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $500
and costs of prosecution or, upon default in payment of the fine and costs,
by imprisonment in the county prison for not more than 30 days.
A. All gunning, hunting with guns of any description or other deadly
weapons, and all use or discharge of any shotgun, rifle, pistol or other
firearm, or use of any deadly weapon or explosive in any manner
whatsoever are hereby prohibited within the limits of the Borough,
excepting, however, the use and discharge of firearms or other weapons
or explosives by legally constituted police officers in the discharge of
their duties and by persons acting in the defense of their life or property
or the life or property of other persons, and excepting also such legal
use of explosives as may be required in any construction work of
whatsoever nature.
B. This section shall not be construed as prohibiting the discharge of
firearms on a supervised rifle or pistol range which has been approved
by the Chairman of Police and Fire and the operation of which as a
special exception use has been authorized, after public hearing, by the
Zoning Hearing Board under the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance.
[Added 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
§ 77-1 FIREARMS § 77-2
77:171

ARTICLE II
Air Rifles and Spring Guns
[Adopted 3-9-1950 by Ord. No. 480, approved 3-9-1950]
§ 77-3. Possession, sale and use prohibited.
It shall be unlawful and it is hereby prohibited for any person, persons,
firms or corporations to store, sell, offer or expose for sale or have in their
possession with intent to sell or with intent to use or to use within the limits
of the Borough of Glenolden any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun or
any implement which impels with force a pellet of any kind.
§ 77-4. Authority of police.
The Department of Police is hereby authorized to seize, remove and destroy
any air rifle, air gun, air pistol, spring gun or any implement which impels
with force a pellet of any kind which shall be used or discharged within the
Borough of Glenolden or which shall be held and possessed in violation of
this article.
§ 77-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $500 and costs of prosecution or, upon default in
payment of the fine and costs, by imprisonment in the county prison for not
more than 30 days.
§ 77-3 FIREARMS § 77-5
77:173
Chapter 80
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms — See Ch. 40.
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 56.
Smoke and heat detectors — See Ch. 141.
§ 77-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 77-5
80:174
ARTICLE I
Fire Prevention Board; Fire Prevention Standards
[Adopted 9-11-1980 by Ord. No. 836; approved 9-11-1980]
§ 80-1. Fire Prevention Board created; composition.
There is hereby created in the Borough of Glenolden a Fire Prevention
Board for the purpose of directing the enforcement of this chapter. Said
Board shall be composed of the Fire Chief of Glenolden Fire Company No.
1, elected annually (hereinafter called the "Fire Chief"); the Fire Inspector
approved by Borough Council; and one member of Borough Council,
appointed by Council. Said Fire Chief and Fire Inspector shall be appointed
to said Board and directed to enforce this chapter by Borough Council at its
regular meeting in October 1980 and at the regular meeting in January of
each subsequent year.
§ 80-2. Reports of Board.
The Fire Prevention Board shall report to Borough Council from time to time
such proposals or actions as it may deem necessary and proper toward the
furtherance of the intent and purposes of this chapter.
§ 80-3. Maintenance of fire hazards prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation in possession of or having control of any
building or premises shall permit or allow therein or thereon any fire hazard
nor any installation, construction equipment, matter or thing which is not
installed, constructed or maintained according to recognized standards and
practices for the prevention of fire and which hereby creates or produces a
danger to persons or property from fire.
§ 80-4. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector to enforce all laws
and ordinances relating to the prevention of fires, the storage and use
of explosives and flammables, the installation and maintenance of private
fire alarm systems and fire extinguishing equipment, the maintenance and
regulation of fire escapes, the means or adequacy of exit in case of fire from
all buildings covered by the law or this chapter and other places in which
persons work or congregate for any purpose, and to investigate the cause,
origin and circumstances of fires.
§ 80-5. Right of entry.
The Fire Chief or Fire Inspector may at all reasonable hours and not less
than twice yearly enter any public or private building used for any business,
commercial or industrial purpose and any apartment house or converted
dwelling with two or more apartments for the purpose of making such
inspection or investigation as he may deem necessary for the prevention of
fire and to secure the safety of persons from fire.
§ 80-1 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-6
80:175
§ 80-6. Removal of fire hazards.
Whenever the said Fire Chief or Fire Inspector shall find in any public
building or apartment or upon any premises covered by this chapter,
combustible or explosive matter or dangerous accumulation of rubbish or
unnecessary accumulation of wastepaper, boxes, shavings or any highly
flammable material and which is situated as to endanger property, or shall
find obstructions to or on fire escapes, stairs, passageways, doors or
windows liable to interfere with the operation of the Fire Department or
egress of occupants in case of fire, he shall order the same to be removed
or remedied.
§ 80-7. Remedying of dangerous conditions.
Whenever the said Fire Chief or Fire Inspector shall find any public building
or apartment or other structure covered by this chapter which, for want
of repairs, lack of sufficient fire escapes, automatic or other fire alarm
apparatus or fire-extinguishing equipment, or by reason of age or
dilapidated condition, or from any other cause, is especially liable to fire,
and which is so situated as to endanger other property or the occupants
thereof, and whenever such officer or authorized assistant shall find in
any building covered by this chapter, combustible or explosive matter or
flammable conditions dangerous to the safety of such buildings or the
occupants thereof, he shall order such dangerous conditions or materials to
be removed or to be remedied in accordance with recognized standards and
practices for the prevention of fire.
§ 80-8. Reports of Fire Chief and Inspector.
The Fire Chief and Fire Inspector shall keep records of all inspections, fires
and of all facts concerning the same and shall report to the Borough Council
at such times as Borough Council shall request.
§ 80-9. Compensation of Chief and Inspector.
The Fire Chief and Fire Inspector shall receive no compensation but shall
be reimbursed by Borough Council for actual and necessary expenses
approved by Council.
§ 80-10. Standards and practices to be followed. [Amended
12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867]
The "recognized standards and practices for the prevention of fire" shall
be held to mean the standard practices and requirements set forth by the
National Fire Protection Association and as from time to time adopted by
said Association.
§ 80-11. Compliance with standards.
The owner, occupant or person in charge of or managing any building or
premises covered by this chapter shall forthwith, after notice from the Fire
§ 80-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 80-11
80:176
Chief or Fire Inspector so to do, correct such condition in such building or
premises so that the premises, building, processes or materials shall be in
such condition as to comply with the recognized standards and practices for
the prevention of fire.
§ 80-12. Soliciting sales.
Neither the Fire Chief nor Fire Inspector shall solicit sales of any fire
protective appliances in conjunction with the enforcement of this chapter.
§ 80-13. Violations.
The failure or neglect of any person responsible hereunder to comply with
any order of the Fire Chief or Fire Inspector made pursuant to the
provisions of the chapter shall be deemed to be a violation of this chapter.
§ 80-14. Bonfire and rubbish fire regulations. [Amended 9-18-2001
by Ord. No. 1092, approved 9-18-2001]
No person shall kindle or maintain any bonfire, rubbish fire or burning of
recyclable materials, including leaf and yard waste, or authorize any such
fire to be kindled or maintained on any private land. No person shall kindle
or maintain any fire on public land or highways except where permitted in
proper park areas.
§ 80-15. Penalties for violations. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867]
Any person, persons, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the
provisions of this chapter or any of the regulations pursuant thereto shall
be deemed guilty of a breach of this chapter and shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $10 nor more than $100 and, in default of payment thereof,
shall be liable to imprisonment in the county jail for a period not exceeding
30 days. The application of the above penalty or penalties, however, shall
not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. Such
fine and penalty shall be collected as like fines and penalties are now by law
collected.
§ 80-11 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-15
80:177

ARTICLE II
Sprinkler Systems
[Adopted 9-18-2001 by Ord. No. 1093, approved 9-18-2001]
§ 80-16. Applicability.
This article applies to residential, educational, commercial and industrial
buildings with a maximum of three stories in height.
§ 80-17. Combination system allowed.
In single-family and multifamily residential structures, a combination fire
protection/sprinkler system shall be allowed. A combination fire protection
system and domestic water system can utilize the same (common) water
service supply pipe to the premises so long as they meet NFPA-13 and
Philadelphia Suburban Water Company requirements.
§ 80-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY HAVING JURISDICTION — The Borough of Glenolden.
COMMERCIAL STRUCTURES — Any structure used for retail and service
use which is intended to service both regional and neighborhood customers.
EDUCATIONAL STRUCTURES — Schools and other public facilities.
INDUSTRIAL STRUCTURES — Any structure used for light/limited
industrial use in the form of both industrial parks and individual industrial
structures.
MULTIPLE-OCCUPIED DWELLINGS — Occupancies where there are three
or more living units, including but not limited to apartment houses,
convents and rectories within the Borough.
SINGLE-FAMILY DWELLING — An occupancy where a living unit is
occupied by members of one family, including occupancies of the same
description where rooms are rented.
SPRINKLER SYSTEM — For fire protection purposes, an integrated system
of underground and overhead piping designed in accordance with fire
protection engineering standards. The installation includes a water supply
and/or connection by underground piping to a city main. The portion of
the sprinkler system aboveground is a network of specially sized or
hydraulically designed piping installed in a building, structure or area,
generally overhead, and to which sprinklers are connected in a systematic
pattern. The system includes a controlling valve and a device for activating
an alarm when the system is in operation. The system is usually activated
by heat from a fire and discharges water over the fire area. The sprinkler
system shall meet NFPA-13 specifications for sprinkler performance.
§ 80-16 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-18
80:179
TWO-FAMILY DWELLING — An occupancy where the living units are
occupied by two separate families with independent cooking, sleeping and
bathroom facilities.
§ 80-19. Compliance requirements.
§ 80-20. Installation of system.
§ 80-21. Maintenance.
It shall be the duty of the owner of each dwelling and/or building to maintain
the fire protection system in proper operating condition at all times as per
NFPA 13.
A. All buildings and/or structures hereinafter constructed shall be
equipped with an approved automatic sprinkler system.
B. Plans of all proposed automatic fire protection system installations shall
first be approved by a certified fire protection engineer and then
submitted to the Borough Fire Marshal for approval, prior to the
issuance of any building permit.
C. Vacant or unoccupied buildings or portions thereof which now have a
sprinkler system shall be maintained in a workable condition at all
times.
D. Where buildings are being renovated or modified for more than 50% of
their value or having the existing area increased to an area greater than
50% of the existing area, whichever is less, the renovated, modified
and/or increased area shall conform to the provisions of this article.
E. All buildings that shall be converted from single-family dwellings to
multiple-family dwellings or increasing the number of dwelling units
shall conform to the provisions of this article.
A. All sprinkler systems shall be installed in compliance with the
applicable sections of NFPA 13, 13-D or 13-R and any requirements
imposed by the Borough Fire Marshal.
B. When an automatic sprinkler system is required by these regulations, it
shall be meant to require one-hundred-percent-complete coverage,
except as specifically allowed by exception of the Borough Fire Marshal
and the Borough Engineer.
C. A complete set of drawings showing the design, spacing and location of
all equipment as well as a listing of all hydraulic calculations shall be
submitted to the Borough Fire Marshal with approved engineer seals
prior to the commencement of any work.
D. A permit shall be obtained from the Borough Manager prior to the
commencement of any work.
§ 80-18 GLENOLDEN CODE § 80-22
80:180
§ 80-22. Testing of system.
§ 80-23. Enforcement.
The Borough Fire Marshal shall ensure proper compliance of all sections of
this article.
§ 80-24. Liability of Borough.
This article creates no legal liability to the Borough of Glenolden other
than to ensure that, at the time of inspection, the system was present and
functional.
§ 80-25. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this article before any District Justice shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000, together with the cost of prosecution, or to imprisonment
in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both.
A. All systems shall be flow tested and inspected once a year by a certified
fire protection engineer. A report on the system shall then be filed with
the Borough Fire Marshal.
B. All systems in existence at the time of this article shall be tested and
inspected in compliance with the appropriate section of this article.
§ 80-22 FIRE PREVENTION § 80-25
80:181
Chapter 81
FIRE PREVENTION CODE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80
§ 81-1. Adoption of standards.
The Building Officials and Code Administrators' Basic Fire Prevention Code/
1981, Fifth Edition, is hereby adopted by the Borough of Glenolden, and all
of the terms and provisions of the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code/1981
are hereby incorporated herein and adopted and made a part hereof as if
fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and
changes prescribed in § 81-2 of this chapter.
§ 81-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the BOCA Basic Fire Prevention Code/1981, Fifth
Edition, and Appendix C thereof are hereby revised to read as follows:
A. Section F-100.1, Title, shall be revised as follows:
F-100.1 Title: These regulations as set forth herein shall be known as
the "Fire Prevention Code of the Borough of Glenolden," hereinafter
referred to as such or as "this code."
B. Section F-105.5.1, Penalty for violations, shall be revised as follows:
F-105.5.1 Penalty for violations: Any person who shall violate a
provision of this code or shall fail to comply with any of the
requirements thereof shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable
by a fine of not more than $300 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30
days, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation
continues shall be deemed a separate offense.
C. Appendix C.
(1) The ordaining clause shall be revised as follows: "Be it ordained by
the Borough of Glenolden as follows:"
(2) Section 1 shall be revised as follows:
Section 1. Adoption of fire control measures and
regulations. There is hereby adopted by the Borough of
Glenolden the fire control measures and regulations as herein
set forth for the purposes of controlling conditions which could
impede or interfere with fire suppression forces.
(3) Section 6 shall be revised as follows:
§ 80-25 GLENOLDEN CODE § 81-2
81:182
Chapter 82
FIREWORKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms — See Ch. 77.
§ 82-1. Permit required for displays.
It shall be unlawful for any person, copartnership, association or
corporation within the Borough of Glenolden, from the date of the approval
of this chapter, to sell, expose or offer for sale; discharge or fire, use or
set off or explode any rocket, torpedo, roman candle, squib, firecrackers,
sparkler or other fireworks of any kind, or any substance or explosive
intended for pyrotechnic display, without first obtaining a permit in writing
from the Mayor or other designated officer.
§ 82-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, copartnership, association or corporation that shall violate the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof under summary
proceedings instituted before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
not exceeding $100 or, upon default in payment of the fine and costs of
prosecution, to be imprisoned in the county prison not more than 30 days.
Chapter 84
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 143A.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
Section 6. Definition of authorized emergency vehicle.
Authorized emergency vehicles shall be restricted to those which
are defined and authorized under the laws of the State of
Pennsylvania.
(4) Section 20 shall be revised as follows:
Section 20. Effective date. This ordinance shall take effect and
be in force from and after its passage.
§ 81-2 FIREWORKS § 82-2
82:183

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 84-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978, delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Glenolden does hereby
order as follows.
§ 84-1 FIREWORKS § 84-1
82:185

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 84-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 84-3. Applicability.
§ 84-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 84-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the Ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 84-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Glenolden unless a
permit has been obtained from the Floodplain Administrator.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
§ 84-2 FIREWORKS § 84-6
82:187
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Glenolden or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 84-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-6
82:188
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 84-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 84-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 84-9. Duties and Responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Borough Manager is hereby appointed to administer and enforce
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
The Floodplain Administrator may: A) Fulfill the duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations; B) Delegate duties and
responsibilities set forth in these regulations to qualified technical
personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other employees; or C)
Enter into a written agreement or written contract with another agency
or private sector entity to administer specific provisions of these
regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by another
entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities pursuant to
the participation requirements of the National Flood Insurance
Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44 CFR
59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the Borough Engineer.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);55 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);56 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);57 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development/permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
55.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
56.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
57.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 84-7 FIREWORKS § 84-9
82:189
§ 84-10. Application procedures and requirements.
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
concerns can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Council for whatever
action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter including, but not
limited to, finished construction elevation data, permitting, inspection
and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator is the official responsible for submitting a
biennial report to FEMA concerning community participation in the
National Flood Insurance Program.
I. The responsibility, authority and means to implement the commitments
of the Floodplain Administrator can be delegated from the person
identified. However, the ultimate responsibility lies with the person
identified in the floodplain ordinance as the floodplain administrator/
manager.
J. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
Pa. Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Glenolden. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
§ 84-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-10
82:190
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred where appropriate.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage;
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards;
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral
movement;
(5) Building materials are flood-resistant;
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used;
and
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 84-10 FIREWORKS § 84-10
82:191
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 Pa.
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC or latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(b) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(c) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(d) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 84-25F, Storage, and § 84-26, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 84-25F and 84-26 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
§ 84-10 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-10
82:192
§ 84-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 84-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., planning commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 84-13. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing, and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 84-14. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard,
or similar document, which shall be displayed on the premises during
the time construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number
of the permit, the date of its issuance, and be signed by the Floodplain
Administrator.
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 84-26
during a base flood.
(e) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(f) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection, to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
D. Applications for permits shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
municipality based upon the estimated cost of the proposed
construction as determined by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 84-10 FIREWORKS § 84-15
82:193
§ 84-15. Start of construction.
§ 84-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance of the development permit. Work
shall also be completed within 12 months after the date of issuance of
the permit or the permit shall expire unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The issuance of
development permit does not refer to the zoning approval.
B. The actual start of construction means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of
slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a
manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not
include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it
include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the
property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied
as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial
improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration
of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether
or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.
C. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, who sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for the
Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request and the original
permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect at the
time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
§ 84-15 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-16
82:194
§ 84-17. Appeals.
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a summary offense and upon conviction shall pay a fine
to Borough of Glenolden of not less than $25 nor more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other actions
are hereby reserved including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue. All such persons
shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter may be declared by
the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider
the appeal in accordance with the Municipal Planning Code58 and any
other local ordinance.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
state including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act.59
58.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-16 FIREWORKS § 84-17
82:195

ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 84-18. Identification.
§ 84-19. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be:
(1) Any areas of Borough of Glenolden, classified as special flood
hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS) and the
accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps (FIRMs) dated
November 18, 2009, and September 2, 2015, and issued by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) or the most
recent revision thereof, including all digital data developed as part
of the Flood Insurance Study; and
(2) Any community-identified flood hazard areas.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by Borough of Glenolden and
declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on the
FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no base
flood elevations have been provided. For these areas, elevation and
floodway information from other federal, state, or other acceptable
sources shall be used when available. Where other acceptable
information is not available, the base flood elevation shall be
determined by using the elevation of a point on the boundary of the
identified floodplain area which is nearest the construction site. In lieu
of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to determine
the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering techniques.
Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the municipality.
B. The AO and AH Area/District shall be those areas identified as Zones
AO and AH on the FIRM and in the FIS. These areas are subject to
inundation by one-percent-annual-chance shallow flooding where
average depths are between one foot and three feet. In Zones AO and
AH, drainage paths shall be established to guide floodwaters around
and away from structures on slopes.
C. Community-identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Borough of Glenolden has identified local flood hazard or ponding
§ 84-18 FIREWORKS § 84-19
82:197
§ 84-20. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Council
where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or person
documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such change
to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from FEMA.
Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months after the
date such information becomes available, a community shall notify FEMA
of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting technical
or scientific data. See § 84-23B for situations where FEMA notification is
required.
§ 84-21. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator and
any party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 84-22. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
areas, as delineated and adopted on a "local flood hazard map" using
best available topographic data and locally derived information such as
flood of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
§ 84-19 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-22
82:198
ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 84-23. General.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have first
been obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
Regional Office.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood-carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. When Borough of Glenolden proposes to permit the following
encroachments: 1) any development that causes a rise in the base flood
elevations within the floodway; or 2) any development occurring in
Zones A1-30 and Zone AE without a designated floodway, which will
cause a rise of more than one foot in the base flood elevation; or 3)
alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited to
installing culverts and bridges); the applicant shall (as per 44 CFR
65.12):
(1) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(2) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of map
change and prior to approving the proposed encroachments, a
community shall provide evidence to FEMA of the adoption of
floodplain management ordinances incorporating the increased
base flood elevations and/or revised floodway reflecting the postproject
condition.
(3) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final map
revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance with 44
CFR Part 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
§ 84-23 FIREWORKS § 84-24
82:199
§ 84-24. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to, or above,
the regulatory flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 84-19A of this chapter.
(2) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the
highest adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(3) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In A Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to, or above, the regulatory flood elevation,
or be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below
the regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In AO Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed
above the highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth
number specified on the FIRM.
(3) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
§ 84-24 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-24
82:200
§ 84-25. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the latest edition
thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania, and ASCE 24 and 34
Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as amended) shall be utilized,
where they are more restrictive.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Basements are prohibited.
(2) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement,
shall be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry
and exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic
forces on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also
includes crawl spaces.
(3) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect, or meet or exceed
the following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter must comply with all chapter requirements that
do not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure. Documentation that a specific chapter requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from chapter requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
§ 84-24 FIREWORKS § 84-25
82:201
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points;
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted;
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(4) Be no steeper than one vertical to two horizontal feet unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to, and
approved by, the Floodplain Administrator; and
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall ensure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site waste disposal system shall be located within
any identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all
state and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, "Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages" and "The
International Private Sewage Disposal Code" shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 84-26, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
§ 84-25 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-25
82:202
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain without causing structural
damage to the building.
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
§ 84-25 FIREWORKS § 84-25
82:203
§ 84-26. Development which may endanger human life.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination. The standards and
specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401 through 405, as
amended) and not limited to the following provisions shall apply to the
above and other sections and subsections of this chapter, to the extent
that they are more restrictive and supplement the requirements of this
chapter.
(1) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition thereof
adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Secs. 801, 1202, 1403, 1603,
1605, 1612, 3402, and Appendix G.
(2) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania: Secs. R104,
R105, R109, R322, Appendix E, and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,60
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which: 1) will be used for the production or storage
of any of the following dangerous materials or substances; or 2) will be
used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than
550 gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following
dangerous materials or substances on the premises; or 3) will involve
the production, storage, or use of any amount of radioactive
substances; shall be subject to the provisions of this section, in addition
to all other applicable provisions. The following list of materials and
substances are considered dangerous to human life:
Acetone
Ammonia
Benzene
Calcium carbide
Carbon disulfide
Celluloid
Chlorine
60.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-25 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-26
82:204
§ 84-27. Special requirements for subdivisions and development.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision and letter of map revision. Submittal
Hydrochloric acid
Hydrocyanic acid
Magnesium
Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen
Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.)
Phosphorus
Potassium
Sodium
Sulphur and sulphur products
Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and rodenticides)
Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not otherwise
regulated
B. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited. Where permitted within any
identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved residential
structure of the kind described in § 84-26A, above, shall be elevated to
remain completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood
elevation and built in accordance with §§ 84-23, 84-24 and 84-25.
D. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, any new or
substantially improved nonresidential structure of the kind described in
§ 84-26A, above, shall be built in accordance with §§ 84-23, 84-24 and
84-25 including: 1) elevated, or designed and constructed to remain
completely dry up to at least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
2) designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity during
the course of a base flood. Any such structure, or part thereof, that will
be built below the regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and
constructed in accordance with the standards for completely dry
floodproofing contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations"
(U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 84-26 FIREWORKS § 84-27
82:205
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 84-28. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
§ 84-29. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zones A, A1-30, AH and AE must either:
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the criteria in
Article VIII, then the following provisions apply:
B. Within any identified floodplain area manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation;
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation; and
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 "International
Residential Building Code" or the "U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing," 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto and 34 Pa. Code
Chapters 401 through 405 shall apply.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC, and the 2009 IRC or the latest edition thereto adopted by the
State of Pennsylvania, and 34 Pa. Code, as amended where appropriate
and/or applicable to units where the manufacturers' standards for
anchoring cannot be provided or were not established for the proposed
unit(s) installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; and
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 84-28.
§ 84-27 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-29
82:206
ARTICLE VI
Activities Requiring Special Permits
§ 84-30. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,61 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area unless a special permit
has been issued by the Borough of Glenolden:
§ 84-31. Application requirements for special permits.
Applicants for special permits shall provide five copies of the following
items:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities; or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
A. A written request including a completed permit application form.
B. A small-scale map showing the vicinity in which the proposed site is
located.
C. A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one inch
being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(1) North arrow, scale and date;
(2) Topography based upon the North American Vertical Datum
(NAVD) of 1988, showing existing and proposed contours at
intervals of two feet;
(3) All property and lot lines including dimensions, and the size of the
site expressed in acres or square feet;
(4) The location of all existing streets, drives, other accessways, and
parking areas, with information concerning widths, pavement types
and construction, and elevations;
61.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-30 FIREWORKS § 84-31
82:207
(5) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
buildings, structures and other public or private facilities,
including railroad tracks and facilities, and any other natural and
man-made features affecting, or affected by, the proposed activity
or development;
(6) The location of the floodplain boundary line, information and spot
elevations concerning the base flood elevation, and information
concerning the flow of water including direction and velocities;
(7) The location of all proposed buildings, structures, utilities, and any
other improvements; and
(8) Any other information which the municipality considers necessary
for adequate review of the application.
D. Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other improvements,
clearly and legibly drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(1) Sufficiently detailed architectural or engineering drawings,
including floor plans, sections, and exterior building elevations, as
appropriate;
(2) For any proposed building, the elevation of the lowest floor
(including basement) and, as required, the elevation of any other
floor;
(3) Complete information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces, and other factors associated
with the base flood;
(4) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures;
(5) Cross-section drawings for all proposed streets, drives, other
accessways, and parking areas, showing all rights-of-way and
pavement widths;
(6) Profile drawings for all proposed streets, drives, and vehicular
accessways including existing and proposed grades; and
(7) Plans and profiles of all proposed sanitary and storm sewer
systems, water supply systems, and any other utilities and
facilities.
E. The following data and documentation:
(1) Certification from the applicant that the site upon which the
activity or development is proposed is an existing separate and
single parcel, owned by the applicant or the client he represents;
(2) Certification from a registered professional engineer, architect, or
landscape architect that the proposed construction has been
§ 84-31 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-31
82:208
§ 84-32. Application review procedures.
Upon receipt of an application for a special permit by the Borough of
Glenolden the following procedures shall apply in addition to those of
Article III:
adequately designed to protect against damage from the base
flood;
(3) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, landscape architect, or other qualified person which
contains a complete and accurate description of the nature and
extent of pollution that might possibly occur from the development
during the course of a base flood, including a statement concerning
the effects such pollution may have on human life;
(4) A statement certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the effects the proposed development will
have on base flood elevation and flows;
(5) A statement, certified by a registered professional engineer,
architect, or landscape architect, which contains a complete and
accurate description of the kinds and amounts of any loose buoyant
materials or debris that may possibly exist or be located on the site
below the base flood elevation and the effects such materials and
debris may have on base flood elevation and flows;
(6) The appropriate component of the Department of Environmental
Protection's Planning Module for Land Development;
(7) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting the
requirements of the Department of Environmental Protection to
implement and maintain erosion and sedimentation control;
(8) Any other applicable permits such as, but not limited to, a permit
for any activity regulated by the Department of Environmental
Protection under Section 302 of Act 1978-166;62 and
(9) An evacuation plan which fully explains the manner in which the
site will be safely evacuated before or during the course of a base
flood.
A. Within three working days following receipt of the application, a
complete copy of the application and all accompanying documentation
shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission by registered or
certified mail for its review and recommendations. Copies of the
application shall also be forwarded to the Borough of Glenolden
Planning Commission and Borough of Glenolden Engineer for review
and comment.
62.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 84-31 FIREWORKS § 84-32
82:209
§ 84-33. Special technical requirements.
B. If an application is received that is incomplete, the Borough of
Glenolden shall notify the applicant in writing, stating in what respect
the application is deficient.
C. If the Borough of Glenolden decides to disapprove an application, it
shall notify the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the disapproval.
D. If the Borough of Glenolden approves an application, it shall file written
notification, together with the application and all pertinent information,
with the Department of Community and Economic Development, by
registered or certified mail, within five working days after the date of
approval.
E. Before issuing the special permit, the Borough of Glenolden shall allow
the Department of Community and Economic Development 30 days,
after receipt of the notification by the Department, to review the
application and decision made by the Borough of Glenolden.
F. If the Borough of Glenolden does not receive any communication from
the Department of Community and Economic Development during the
thirty-day review period, it may issue a special permit to the applicant.
G. If the Department of Community and Economic Development should
decide to disapprove an application, it shall notify the Borough of
Glenolden and the applicant, in writing, of the reasons for the
disapproval, and the Borough of Glenolden shall not issue the special
permit.
A. In addition to the requirements of Article V of this chapter, the following
minimum requirements shall also apply to any proposed development
requiring a special permit. If there is any conflict between any of the
following requirements and those in Article V of this chapter or in any
other code, ordinance, or regulation, the more restrictive provision
shall apply.
B. No application for a special permit shall be approved unless it can be
determined that the structure or activity will be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner which will:
(1) Fully protect the health and safety of the general public and any
occupants of the structure. At a minimum, all new structures shall
be designed, located, and constructed so that:
(a) The structure will survive inundation by waters of the base
flood without any lateral movement or damage to either the
structure itself, or to any of its equipment or contents below
the BFE.
(b) The lowest floor (including basement) will be elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
§ 84-32 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-33
82:210
(c) The occupants of the structure can remain inside for an
indefinite period of time and be safely evacuated at any time
during the base flood.
(2) Prevent any significant possibility of pollution, increased flood
levels or flows, or debris endangering life and property.
C. All hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken only by
professional engineers or others of demonstrated qualifications, who
shall certify that the technical methods used correctly reflect currently
accepted technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc.,
shall be submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical
review by the Borough of Glenolden and the Department of Community
and Economic Development.
§ 84-33 FIREWORKS § 84-33
82:211

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 84-34. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 84-35 shall apply.
§ 84-35. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall be
undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC or most recent
revision thereof adopted by the State of Pennsylvania.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of
its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 84-34 FIREWORKS § 84-35
82:213

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 84-36. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Borough of Glenolden may, upon request, grant relief from the strict
application of the requirements.
§ 84-37. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Borough of Glenolden in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 84-17 and the following:
A. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
special permit (Article VI) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 84-26).
B. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
C. In granting any variance, the Borough of Glenolden shall attach
whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary
in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and to achieve
the objectives of this chapter.
D. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of Glenolden shall notify
the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
E. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough of Glenolden shall
consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will neither result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense; nor create
nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or conflict with
any other applicable state or local ordinances and regulations.
F. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Borough of Glenolden. In addition, a report of all
§ 84-36 FIREWORKS § 84-37
82:215
variances granted during the year shall be included in the annual report
to the FEMA.
G. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent-annual-chance flood.
§ 84-37 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-37
82:216
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 84-38. General.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 84-39. Specific definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
"one-percent-annual-chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zones AE, AH, A1-30 that indicates the
water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent-orgreater
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets, and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 84-38 FIREWORKS § 84-39
82:217
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
D.
§ 84-39 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-39
82:218
IDENTIFIED FLOODPLAIN AREA — This term is an umbrella term that
includes all of the areas within which the community has selected to enforce
floodplain regulations. It will always include the area identified as the
special flood hazard area on the Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood
Insurance Study, but may include additional areas identified by the
community. See §§ 84-18 and 84-19 for the specifics on what areas the
community has included in the identified floodplain area.
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring, mechanical or other work affecting public
health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this Floodplain
Management Ordinance and includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. Any construction started after November 18, 1981, and before
the effective start date of this Floodplain Management Ordinance is subject
to the ordinance in effect at the time the permit was issued, provided the
start of construction was within 180 days of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 84-39 FIREWORKS § 84-39
82:219
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November
18, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) dated November
18, 1981, whichever is later, and, as such, would not be required to be
compliant with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood-related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent-or-greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99 or AH.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks/subdivisions and
substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such development is
located in all, or a designated portion of, a floodplain.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 84-39 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-39
82:220
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days after the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally aboveground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, of which the cost equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the "start of
construction" of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage" or "repetitive loss" regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999 applicable to new
construction in all municipalities whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the Code adopted the International
§ 84-39 FIREWORKS § 84-39
82:221
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
VARIANCE — A grant of relief by a community from the terms of a
floodplain management regulation.
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4) or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 84-39 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-39
82:222
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 84-40. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on the date of adoption and shall remain
in force until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Glenolden,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 84-40 FIREWORKS § 84-40
82:223
Chapter 86
GARBAGE, RUBBISH AND REFUSE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 51.
Public health — See Ch. 90.
Landfills — Ch. 101.
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 84-40 GLENOLDEN CODE § 84-40
82:224
ARTICLE I
Municipal Garbage Collection
[Adopted 12-30-1970 by Ord. No. 721, approved 12-30-1970; last
reenacted 12-27-1977 by Ord. No. 807, approved 12-27-1977]
§ 86-1. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and consumption of foods. It shall not include more
than a minimum amount of free liquids. It shall not include food-processing
waste from canneries, packing plants or similar industries nor large
quantities of condemned food products.
ONE REFUSE CAN — Thirty gallons in volume or 50 pounds in weight.
ONE UNIT or ONE UNIT OF REFUSE — Means two refuse cans (60 gallons
in volume or 100 pounds in weight) in a single collection day. Any part of a
unit shall be considered a full unit.
PERSON — A natural person, firm, association, corporation or housing
authority.
REFUSE — Garbage and rubbish as herein defined.
RUBBISH — All waste materials except building rubbish from building
construction, street refuse, industrial refuse, dead animals, machinery or
vehicles or parts thereof or such other waste materials as are not commonly
produced in homes, stores and institutions.
§ 86-2. Classification of properties.
For the purposes of this article, properties shall be divided into four classes:
§ 86-3. Administration.
A. Residential: a property designed for and occupied exclusively as a home
or residence.
B. Multiple dwellings: a property used as a dwelling house or unit for
several families, each family separate and apart from the other.
C. Commercial: a property used for the conduct of business or service.
D. Industrial: a property used for assembling, fabricating, finishing,
manufacturing or processing operations.
A. Multiple dwellings may place for collection by the Borough one unit of
refuse for the first dwelling plus one unit of refuse for each additional
dwelling.
§ 86-1 FIREWORKS § 86-3
82:225
§ 86-4. Storage of refuse.
§ 86-5. Collection practices.
B. Commercial or industrial establishments. By reason of the great
amount of refuse being accumulated by commercial or industrial
establishments, the collection of which would unduly burden the
facilities of the Borough, all commercial or industrial establishments
shall be limited to five units of refuse. [Amended 12-27-1973 by Ord.
No. 764]
(1) The number of refuse units for commercial or industrial
establishments shall be determined by the Sewers and Health
Committee of Council.
(2) The number of refuse units shall be determined by the following
formula: An average shall be taken for a one-month period to
determine the amount of refuse. The decision of the Sewers and
Health Committee may be appealed to the Borough Council.
(3) The Sewers and Health Committee shall have the authority to
require industrial properties to dispose of their own refuse.
C. All refuse shall be kept in watertight containers provided with tight
covers and so covered at all times as to prevent offensive odors from
escaping therefrom and refuse from being blown, dropped or spilled.
D. It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any refuse within the
Borough of Glenolden.
A. No person shall place any refuse in any street or highway, alley or other
public place nor upon any private property, whether owned by such
person or not, within the Borough, except that the same be in
receptacles for collection. No person shall throw or deposit any refuse
in any stream or body of water.
B. Any unauthorized accumulation of refuse is hereby deemed to be a
nuisance and is hereby prohibited. Failure to remove any existing
accumulation of refuse within 30 days after the effective date of this
article shall be deemed a violation of the revisions hereof.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person, other than the occupants of the
premises upon which the refuse receptacles are stored or the collector,
to remove covers or any of the contents of refuse receptacles.
A. Refuse shall be collected at least twice a week. Commercial and
industrial establishments which are required to dispose of their refuse
must dispose of the same at least twice a week, and where necessary to
protect the public health and safety, the Board of Health of the Borough
may require that more frequent collections be made.
§ 86-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-5
82:226
§ 86-6. Fees. [Amended 12-27-1973 by Ord. No. 764]
B. It is the intent of this article that the reasonable accumulation of
residential and multiple dwelling refuse for the collection period will be
collected at standard charges.
C. It is the intent of this article that commercial or industrial
establishments with units of refuse in excess of those set forth in
§ 86-3B shall privately contract for and have their accumulation of
refuse collected at reasonable times so as to protect the public health
and safety.
D. Contagious disease refuse. The removal of wearing apparel, bedding or
other refuse from homes or other places where highly infectious or
contagious diseases have prevailed shall be performed under the
supervision and direction of the Health Officer. Such refuse shall not be
placed in containers for regular collections.
E. Highly flammable, explosive and poisonous materials shall not be
placed in containers for regular collection, but shall be disposed of as
directed by the Chairman of the Sewers and Health Committee at the
expense of the owner or possessor thereof.
F. Refuse for collection shall be placed at ground level and not more than
three feet distant from the side of the street or highway or alley from
which collection is made.
A. Subject to the limitations set forth in this article, the Borough of
Glenolden shall charge the following annual fees for the collection of
refuse: [Last amended 12-17-2019 by Ord. No. 2134, approved
12-17-2019]
(1) Residential: $198 for each residential unit.
(2) Multiple dwellings: $198 for each dwelling unit.
(3) Commercial and industrial: $198 for each refuse unit as
determined by the Health Committee of the Borough Council.
(4) Commercial plus a residence: the combined fee established by
Subsection A(1) and (3) hereinabove.
(5) Commercial plus multiple dwellings: the combined fee established
by Subsection A(2) and (3) hereinabove.
B. All the accounts shall be due and payable by the owner of the real
estate, and if the same be unpaid within 60 days from the time of the
delivery of said bills, the said account shall be considered delinquent
and service of collection of said refuse shall be stopped without further
notice and a ten-percent penalty shall then be added to the amount then
due for late payment and an additional charge of 1/2% per month
interest shall be added for each additional month of delinquency until
the same shall be paid in full. The Borough Secretary shall certify to the
§ 86-5 FIREWORKS § 86-6
82:227
§ 86-7. Exemptions.
§ 86-8. Violations and penalties. [Added 5-11-1972 by Ord. No. 740,
approved 5-11-1972]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
subject to the following penalties, together with the costs of prosecution,
and in default of payment thereof, shall be subject to imprisonment for not
more than 10 days:
person in charge of directing the collections that service on such
delinquent accounts shall cease. Service shall be resumed thereafter
only on payment of the annual collection charge, unless the Borough
Council specifically directs otherwise. The stoppage of service
hereinbefore authorized for nonpayment of collection charges shall be
in addition to the right of the Borough to proceed for the collection of
such unpaid charges by an action in assumpsit or, at the election of the
Borough, in any other manner provided by law. [Amended 6-12-1975
by Ord. No. 779]
A. Multiple dwellings and commercial and industrial properties shall be
exempted from the service fee upon showing proof of private collection.
B. Residential property owners living on the premises who are 62 years of
age or older, with an annual income of $3,600 or less, shall be exempt
from the service fee upon certification of their qualifications to the
Borough. [Added 5-11-1972 by Ord. No. 740, approved 5-11-1972]
A. First offense: $5.
B. Second offense: $10.
C. Third offense: $25.
§ 86-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-8
82:228
ARTICLE II
Containers
[Adopted 7-12-1951 by Ord. No. 492, approved 7-20-1951]
§ 86-9. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASHES — Ashes from coal or other fuel. The term includes such floor
sweepings as may accumulate in connection with the ordinary conduct of
dwellings and buildings, except buildings using steam boilers for power, but
not such as may accumulate as the result of building operations.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable waste, including offal, carcasses, fat,
bone, swill and vegetable and animal refuse resulting from the storage,
handling, preparation and consumption of food. It shall not contain glass,
china, metal, disinfectants, sprays, antiseptics or other foreign matters
injurious to hogs.
RUBBISH — All rubbish from places of residence and a reasonable amount
from store buildings. The term includes bottles, paper, rags, mattresses,
worn-out furniture, old clothes, old shoes, leather, carpets, broken glass,
crockery, tin cans, metals, rubber, wallpaper, discarded Christmas trees and
greens, small branches from shrubs, vines, cut grass and leaves, but does
not include any material whatever in the nature of earth, sand, lumber,
brick, stone, plaster or other substance that may accumulate as the result
of building operations, nor will it include dead animals or night soil.
§ 86-10. Regulations.
A. The occupants of dwellings, apartments, tenements and other houses
and the proprietors of commission houses, stores, stands, markets,
boardinghouses, hotels, restaurants and other places where ashes,
rubbish and garbage are produced shall provide and maintain
containers as required hereinafter for all ashes, rubbish or garbage
accumulated on the premises thereof.
B. Containers for ashes, rubbish and garbage shall not exceed 50 pounds
each in weight when full, and a sufficient number of containers shall be
provided so that the aggregate capacity shall be sufficient for normal
needs between the intervals of collection given hereinafter.
C. Separate containers shall be provided for garbage, and said garbage
containers shall be made of nonabsorbent material, be watertight and
flytight and be provided with handles and closely fitting covers made of
nonabsorbent material. The containers shall be kept in repair so as to
be at all times watertight, and said containers shall be kept covered.
D. Ashes and rubbish shall be kept in tight boxes, baskets or cans.
§ 86-9 FIREWORKS § 86-10
82:229
§ 86-11. Placement for collection.
§ 86-12. Enforcement.
It shall be the duty of the Board of Health and the Police Department to
assist Council in enforcing the terms of this article in securing compliance
with the requirements hereof.
§ 86-13. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof before a District Justice, be subject to the following
penalties:
E. Newspapers and wastepaper shall be tied tightly in bundles, each
bundle not to exceed 50 pounds in weight.
F. Hedge and grass clippings, bushes, tree limbs, etc., shall be placed in
containers or tied in bundles not to exceed three feet in length, one foot
in depth and 50 pounds in weight.
G. On the days when collection is to be made, the occupant or proprietor of
the place where the ashes, rubbish and garbage have accumulated shall
place the proper container along the curbline in front of the premises at
a place where it is readily accessible to collectors.
H. No ashes, rubbish or garbage shall be allowed to accumulate on the
ground or be deposited on highways, vacant lots or commons, nor shall
any be thrown into any stream or other body of water.
A. Ashes, rubbish and garbage shall be collected on such days, at such
times and in such localities as shall be decided by Borough Council in
its sole discretion, and proper notice of such collection dates, times and
places shall be given to the residents of the Borough.
B. Containers, boxes, baskets, cans and bundles, as aforementioned, shall
be placed along the curb for collection not before 6:00 p.m. on the day
prior to collection and removed not later than 9:00 a.m. on the day
following collection.
C. It is hereby made the duty of each owner, occupant, householder or
tenant to clean up and remove such of the contents of the said
containers, cans, boxes, baskets or bundles as shall have been spilled or
scattered therefrom by any means or cause other than the negligence of
the collectors.
A. First offense: fine of $5 and costs or five days in county jail.
B. Second offense: fine of $10 and costs or 10 days in county jail.
C. Third offense: fine of $20 and costs or 30 days in county jail.
§ 86-10 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-13
82:230
ARTICLE III
Garbage Disposal Units
[Adopted 12-8-1960 by Ord. No. 592, approved 12-8-1960]
§ 86-14. Council to regulate sewers.
The sanitary sewers in the Borough of Glenolden and the plumbing in any
building connected therewith shall be used only in such manner and for
such purposes as permitted by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Glenolden.
§ 86-15. Installation of disposal units prohibited.
No person, firm or corporation shall, after the effective date of this article,
install or permit the installation of any food or garbage grinder, chopper
or disposal unit in any building in the Borough of Glenolden which will or
may result in or permit the discharge into any drain, pipe or receptacle
connected with a public or private sewer of any garbage, food, papers,
rags, vegetable parings, cinders, food remains, flammable, combustible or
poisonous liquids or kitchen or household refuse, of any kind, whether
whole, ground, chopped or otherwise processed or treated.
§ 86-16. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, firm or corporation violating the provisions of this article shall
be subject to and pay a penalty of not less than $10 nor more than $100
for any such offense, to be recovered as other fines are collected, and upon
default in payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment in the county jail
for a period not exceeding 10 days.
§ 86-17. Right of entry.
The Board of Health of the Borough of Glenolden shall have the power
as a body or by committee, as well as the Health Officer, together with
their assistants, subordinates, workmen or others appointed by them or by
Borough Council, to enter at any reasonable time upon any premises in the
Borough to inspect said premises to determine whether this article has been
violated and also whether such disposal units are installed in said premises,
and the Board of Health shall have the power of enforcing this article by
abatement as set forth in the Borough Code.
§ 86-14 FIREWORKS § 86-17
82:231

ARTICLE IV
Recycling of Newspapers63
[Adopted 2-14-1985 by Ord. No. 899, approved 2-14-1985]
§ 86-18. Definitions.
The following words, when used in this article, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section, except in those instances where the context
clearly indicates otherwise:
NEWSPAPER — Includes paper of the type commonly referred to as
"newsprint" and distributed at stated intervals, usually daily or weekly,
having printed thereon news and opinions and containing advertisements
and other matters of public interest. The term shall not include magazines,
periodicals or other paper products of any nature.
RECYCLABLES — Material having an economic value in the secondary
materials market. The following materials have such economic value:
aluminum cans and articles, bimetal cans, glass containers, corrugated
paper (cardboard and paper boxes), magazines, computer printout paper,
computer tab cards, office paper, steel cans, newspaper and paper products
not chemically coated.
§ 86-19. Program established.
A recycling program is hereby established for the mandatory separating of
recyclables from garbage and rubbish in the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 86-20. Separation and placement.
Newspapers shall be kept separate from other refuse and shall be collected
by the Borough or under subcontract by its designated agent. Individual
household units shall separate and prepare for collection these materials in
the following manner: Newspapers shall be kept dry and shall be either tied
both across and lengthwise in easy-to-manage bundles or placed in paper
bags. These materials shall be placed either at the curbside to be collected
at times designated by the Borough or in recycling shelters at any time.
§ 86-21. Collection by unauthorized persons.
A. From the time of placement of recyclables at the curb or in recycling
shelters for collection in accordance with the terms hereof, items shall
be and become the property of the Borough of Glenolden or its
authorized agent. It shall be a violation of this article for any person
unauthorized by the Borough to collect or pick up or cause to be
collected or picked up any such items. Any and each such collection
violation hereof from one or more locations shall constitute a separate
and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter provided.
63.Editor's Note: See also Art. VI, Recyclable Waste Separation and Collection, of this
chapter.
§ 86-18 FIREWORKS § 86-21
82:233
§ 86-22. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who violates or neglects to comply with
any provision of this article or any regulation promulgated pursuant thereto
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300,
except that the maximum fine for failure to comply with § 86-20 hereof
shall not exceed $10 for the first offense or $50 for any succeeding offense.
Section 86-20 shall not be enforced until two months from the effective date
hereof.
§ 86-23. Additional means of disposal.
Any resident may donate or sell used newspapers to any person, partnership
or corporation, whether operating for profit or not for profit. However, the
person, partnership or corporation may not pick up said newspapers from
the curbside in the Borough of Glenolden under any circumstances.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect, remove or dispose of solid
waste which contains newspaper combined with other forms of solid
waste.
C. The Borough Council, or its agent, is empowered to designate the day
or days of the month on which recyclables shall be collected, removed
and disposed of from a particular area.
§ 86-21 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-23
82:234
ARTICLE V
Municipal Solid Waste
[Adopted 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 920, approved 7-9-198764]
§ 86-24. Definitions.
A. The following terms shall have the following meanings in this article:
COLLECTOR — Any person collecting or transporting municipal solid
waste for owners or occupants of property in the municipality, including
the municipality itself if it undertakes the collection of municipal solid
waste directly, and any business or institution within the municipality
which generates municipal solid waste and uses its own employees and
equipment for the collection and transport of the waste.
CONTRACTOR — One or more contractors with whom the county or the
Delaware County Solid Waste Authority (hereinafter referred to as the
"Authority") contracts for construction and operation of the proposed
resource recovery plant or plants or other solid waste facilities.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Glenolden.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial
lunchroom or office waste and other material, including solid or
semisolid material generated in residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional establishments and from community activities, and other
solid waste which is within the definition of "municipal solid waste" as
set forth in the Act65 and which the county, authority or contractor by its
ordinance or regulations is willing to accept at the plant, but excluding:
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation or
governmental entity, with the exception of the county, Authority or
designated contractor.
PLANT — The energy and/or material recovery facility or facilities,
transfer station or solid waste plants owned by the county or Authority
or the contractor, including all associated property and equipment.
SOLID WASTE FACILITY — Any site owned and operated by the county,
the Authority or its designated contractor for the purpose of transfer,
(1) Any liquid waste or sludge;
All wastes which are defined by existing or future federal or state
law or regulations as hazardous waste or industrial residual waste;
(2)
Any waste which may be marketable and which is intentionally
segregated for purposes of recycling; and
(3)
Materials specifically excluded under applicable county
ordinances.
(4)
64.Editor's Note: This ordinance also provided for the repeal of former Art. V, Municipal Solid
Waste, adopted 5-8-1986 by Ord. No. 907, approved 5-8-1986.
65.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
§ 86-24 FIREWORKS § 86-24
82:235
§ 86-25. Unlawful acts.
It is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance for any person
to accumulate upon any property in this municipality any municipal solid
waste or to dispose of it except in accordance with this article and other
applicable laws, ordinances or regulations.
§ 86-26. Operations and changes.
The municipality has been advised by the county that the solid waste plan
proposes to provide for a plant or plants which will be operated efficiently
and economically by the contractor and/or by the county and in accordance
with all applicable laws and regulations and also that the contractor and/or
the county will impose reasonable charges which will be uniform among all
classes of users of the plant or plants.
§ 86-27. Collectors to be licensed.
Except as it pertains to municipal solid waste collected directly by this
municipality, all collectors of municipal solid waste generated within the
municipality shall be licensed by the municipality and shall be responsible
for collecting municipal solid waste from properties in the municipality
pursuant to a contract between them and the municipality and/or contracts
between them and the owners or occupants of properties.
§ 86-28. Disposal at designated site.
All collectors shall deliver and dispose of all municipal solid waste collected
within the municipality at the solid waste facility designated by the county,
subject to such reasonable regulations for the operation thereof as may be
established by the county and/or contractor. Delivery and disposal at any
other place shall be a violation of this article and cause for revocation of
the collector's license, except in special circumstances approved in advance
by the municipality and the county and/or contractor. All collectors shall
comply in their operation with all applicable laws, ordinances and
regulations pertaining to the collection and transportation of municipal
solid waste.
§ 86-29. Public and private dumps, transfer stations and landfills
prohibited.
No person shall use or permit to be used any property owned or occupied
by him within the municipality as a public or private dump, transfer station
or landfill for municipal solid waste, whether generated within the
municipality or elsewhere, without the express written approval of the
municipality.
processing or disposal of municipal solid waste, including landfills,
resource recovery plants and transfer stations.
B. Certain terms used herein are also defined in the recitals to this article.
§ 86-24 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-30
82:236
§ 86-30. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $300 and, in default of payment
thereof, shall be committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days, and each day's continuance of a violation of this article, as well as
each truckload of illegally delivered municipal solid waste, shall constitute
a separate offense.
§ 86-31. Abatement of nuisance.
In addition to the remedies provided in § 86-30 herein, any continued
violation of this article or other applicable law which shall constitute a
nuisance in fact or which, in the opinion of the governing body of this
municipality, shall constitute a nuisance may be abated by proceeding
against the violator in a court of equity for relief.
§ 86-32. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
The collection of municipal solid waste in the municipality and the disposal
thereof shall be subject to such further reasonable rules and regulations
as may from time to time be promulgated by the governing body of the
municipality, including but without limitation regulations as to the form of
license application, the amount of fee to be charged for said licenses and the
terms of the licenses and license issuance procedures; provided, however,
that no such rules and regulations shall be contrary to the provisions of this
article, the County Solid Waste Plan or applicable law.
§ 86-33. Amendments; contract.
The municipality reserves the right to amend this article or repeal it at any
time, provided, however, that the requirement for use of the designated
solid waste facility for disposal of municipal solid waste from the
municipality shall not be amended or repealed without the prior express
written approval of the county during the term of the contract between
the county (or Authority) and contractor providing for the construction
and operation of the plant, which contract shall have a term of 25 years.
For the purposes of securing the contractor's financing, such requirement
shall be deemed to be a contract between the county, the contractor and
the municipality which the municipality (subject to the terms of the joint
cooperation agreement set forth below) agrees to enforce so that the
municipal solid waste from the municipality will be available to provide a
source of energy for the plant. If the municipality is not now a collector but
in the future it becomes a collector, it agrees to deliver all municipal solid
waste so collected to the plant.
§ 86-34. Joint cooperation agreement.
A. The municipality agrees to deliver or cause to be delivered during the
term of this agreement all municipal solid waste, as defined herein,
§ 86-30 FIREWORKS § 86-34
82:237
§ 86-35. Adoption of solid waste management plan.67
generated within the municipality for disposal at a facility designated
by the county.
B. The county agrees to accept for disposal all such municipal solid waste
described in Subsection A above upon the completion and
commencement of operation of the plant in accordance with a contract,
containing terms satisfactory to the county, with the contractor
providing for the construction and operation of the plant.
C. The term of the agreement shall be for a period of 25 years, and said
term shall commence on January 1, 2017. The municipality, at its
option, may terminate this agreement with 30 days' written notice to
the county in the event that the municipality will incur substantial costs
over and above the costs generally accepted by the other municipalities
in delivering municipal solid waste to the county during the term of this
agreement, provided that the municipality has first obtained final
approval from the Department of Environmental Resources for their
own plan under the Act66 or an approval from the Department for a
modification that brings the municipality under another plan that has
already obtained final approval. It is understood, however, that upon
any such termination of this agreement by the municipality, the county,
the Authority and/or the county's contractor shall be relieved of any
responsibility to accept and dispose of municipal solid waste generated
within the municipality. It is further understood that any such
termination of this agreement by the municipality shall constitute a
repeal, whether express or implied, of § 86-35 of this article.
[Amended 5-17-2016 by Ord. No. 2110, approved 5-17-2016]
D. The county shall hold harmless and defend the municipality from any
suit, claim or action challenging the legality of this article against the
municipality. In the event that any such suit, claim or action is brought
against the municipality, the municipality shall authorize the county,
through its designated legal counsel, to defend against the same, and
the municipality shall cooperate with the county in said defense and
shall give the County Solicitor notice of any such suit, claim or action
within five days of the municipality's receiving notice thereof.
A. The Department of Environmental Resources has recommended that
the requirements of the Solid Waste Management Act68 can best be
accomplished on a county-wide basis.
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
67.Editor's Note: Resolution 3-91, adopted 1-10-1991, approved 1-10-1991, provided as
follows: "The Borough of Glenolden does hereby ratify the Delaware County Municipal
Solid Waste Management Plan revision, which includes Volumes One and Two, as the
officially adopted plan for the Borough of Glenolden, pursuant to the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction Act of 1988."
68.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. 6018.101 et seq.
§ 86-34 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-35
82:238
§ 86-36. Severability.
If any part of this article is for any reason found to be illegal or invalid,
such illegality or invalidation shall not affect any of the remaining parts of
this article, which shall continue to be as fully operative as if the illegal or
invalid part had not been enacted.
§ 86-37. Repealer.
All provisions of any other ordinance which are inconsistent with the
provisions of this article are hereby repealed.
§ 86-38. When effective.
This article shall become effective immediately upon adoption.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, this municipality shall have neither the
right nor the obligation to dispose of its municipal solid waste at the plant
which is contemplated under this article until said plant is constructed and
fully operational.
B. The county, through the staff of its Public Works Department, its
Planning Commission and Charles M. Harris and Associates, Inc.,
consulting engineers, prepared a ten-year plan for solid waste
management.
C. The appropriate municipal officials of this municipality have reviewed
the findings and recommendations of the plan as it affects this
municipality, have found the plan acceptable and have recommended
that the plan be adopted.
D. The municipality, accordingly, hereby accepts and adopts the solid
waste management study prepared by the county as the ten-year plan
for solid waste management required by the Act.
E. The county is hereby authorized to submit the plan to the Department
of Environmental Resources for the final approval on behalf of the
municipality.
§ 86-35 FIREWORKS § 86-38
82:239

ARTICLE VI
Recyclable Waste Separation and Collection
[Adopted 9-12-1991 by Ord. No. 969, approved 9-12-1991]
§ 86-39. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Glenolden Borough Recyclable Waste
Separation and Collection Ordinance."
§ 86-40. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following words or terms are defined as set forth
hereinafter:
ACT — The Pennsylvania Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, Act No. 101 of 1988.69
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty all-aluminum beverage and food containers.
BIMETALLIC CANS — All empty beverage and food containers made of a
metal other than aluminum.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Council of the Borough of Glenolden.
COLLECTION LOCATION — That location on any residential dwelling
property from which the Borough has authorized the collection of municipal
waste pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
COMMERCIAL, INDUSTRIAL AND INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENTS
— The definition of said terms as set forth in the Glenolden Borough Zoning
Ordinance,70 which establishments are not provided with municipal waste
collection services pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
GLASS CONTAINERS — All empty bottles and jars made of clear, green or
brown glass, but does not mean or include noncontainer glass, plate glass,
blue glass, porcelain products and ceramic products.
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — A building or a group of buildings containing
residential rooms or apartment units in excess of four rooms or units, which
are not provided with municipal waste collection services pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
NEWSPAPER — The definition of said term as set forth in this chapter.71
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association, partnership and/
or other legal entity.
PLASTICS — Only those plastics and/or plastic materials classified as
"HDPE" and "PET."
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning.
71.Editor's Note: See § 86-18.
§ 86-39 FIREWORKS § 86-40
82:241
RECYCLABLE PAPER PRODUCTS — The definition of said term as set forth
in this chapter.
RECYCLABLE WASTE — Solid waste consisting of newspapers, as defined
in this chapter,72 aluminum cans and bimetallic cans and such other waste
materials as may be designated in the future by a duly enacted resolution of
Borough Council.
RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any residential unit, including multifamily
dwellings of four or fewer rooms or units, which are provided with
municipal waste collection services pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 86-41. Purpose.
Pursuant to the provisions of the Act, the purpose of this article is to
facilitate the disposal of solid waste generated within the Borough in the
most economical and environmentally accepted manner, to reduce the total
amount of solid waste disposed of by the Borough and by other collectors
as provided herein and to protect and to promote the health, welfare and
safety of the Borough and its residents.
§ 86-42. Program established.
As mandated by the Act, the Borough hereby establishes a program for the
mandatory separation of recyclable waste and of recyclable paper products
from solid waste by the owner, landlord, tenant, occupant and/or his, her
or their agent of all residential dwellings, all multifamily dwellings and all
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments in the Borough and
for the collection of such recyclable waste and of recyclable paper products
by the Borough or by other collectors, as the case may be.
§ 86-43. Obligations of owners and occupants.
A. Residential dwellings.
(1) All owners, landlords, tenants, occupants and/or his, her or their
agent shall be obligated to and shall be responsible for the
separation of recyclable waste and recyclable paper products from
all residential solid waste and for the placement of the same for
collection as follows:
(a) All recyclable waste shall be completely cleaned and rinsed of
all contents thereof and shall be placed in a separate container
supplied by the Borough for collection of recyclable waste.
Also, all caps shall be removed from glass containers before
their placement into such collection containers.
72.Editor's Note: See § 86-18.
§ 86-40 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-43
82:242
(b) No solid waste other than recyclable waste shall be placed in
such containers supplied by the Borough for the collection of
recyclable waste.
(c) Such recyclable waste containers shall be placed at a
collection location as directed by the Borough so that such
recyclable waste can be collected.
(d) At all times, such recyclable waste containers shall be kept in a
clean and sanitary condition and shall not be kept in violation
of any health laws or codes of the Borough.
(e) No recyclable paper products shall be placed in the recyclable
waste container for collection or for any other purpose. Such
recyclable paper products shall be tied in bundles or placed in
a brown bag for collection at the collection location as directed
by the Borough.
(2) The Borough is hereby empowered to designate the day of the week
on which recyclable waste and recyclable paper products shall be
collected and removed from a particular area. The same shall not
be collected or removed from any area except on the day of the
week so designated by the Borough. Ownership of all recyclable
waste and/or recyclable paper products placed at a collection
location shall vest in the Borough.
B. Multifamily dwellings. All owners, landlords, tenants, occupants and/or
his, her or their agent of multifamily dwellings shall establish a
separation program and a collection procedure for recyclable waste
and recyclable paper products, which shall be submitted to and
approved by the Borough. Such separation program and collection
procedure shall at least meet the requirements set forth in Subsection A
hereinbefore. The collection procedure must provide for suitable and
sanitary containers for sorting and collecting the recyclable waste,
which containers must be located in accessible locations. Once said
separation program and collection procedure have been approved by
the Borough, written instructions thereof shall be given to each and
every occupant who is obligated to comply therewith. Annually, as
directed by the Borough, the Borough shall be provided with written
documentation of the separation program and collection procedure
then in existence and of the total number of tons of recyclable waste
and/or recyclable paper products which have been collected and
recycled for the prior twelve-month period or any portion thereof.
C. Commercial, industrial and institutional establishments. All owners,
landlords, tenants, occupants and/or his, her or their agent of
commercial, industrial and institutional establishments shall establish a
separation program and a collection procedure for recyclable waste
and recyclable paper products, which shall be submitted to and
approved by the Borough. Such separation program and collection
procedure shall at least meet the requirements set forth in Subsection A
§ 86-43 FIREWORKS § 86-43
82:243
§ 86-44. Authorized collection; permit application.
hereinbefore. The collection procedure must provide for suitable and
sanitary containers for sorting and collecting the recyclable waste,
which containers must be located in accessible locations. Once said
separation program and collection procedure have been approved by
the Borough, written instructions thereof shall be given to each and
every occupant who is obligated to comply therewith. Annually, as
directed by the Borough, the Borough shall be provided with written
documentation of the separation program and collection procedure
then in existence and of the total number of tons of recyclable waste
and/or recyclable paper products which have been collected and
recycled for the prior twelve-month period or any portion thereof.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person other than the Borough or its
designee to collect recyclable waste and/or recyclable paper products
from any residential dwelling without first applying for and obtaining a
permit therefor from the Borough as provided hereinafter.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect recyclable waste and/or
recyclable paper products from any multifamily dwelling and/or any
commercial, industrial and institutional establishment without first
applying for and obtaining a permit therefor from the Borough as
provided hereinafter.
C. Any person desiring to collect recyclable waste and/or recyclable paper
products as provided in Subsections A and B above shall file with the
Borough a written application for a permit allowing such collection,
which application shall include the following:
(1) All relevant information concerning the applicant, including but not
limited to the applicant's name, business address, business
telephone number, business experience, business references,
number of employees and number of collection vehicles.
(2) A detailed description of the residential dwelling(s), the multifamily
dwelling(s) and/or the commercial, industrial and institutional
establishment(s) from which the recyclable waste and/or recyclable
paper products are to be collected, including the name, address
and telephone number of the owner, landlord, tenant, occupant
and/or his, her or their agent, as the case may be, the location from
which the same is to be collected, the amount to be collected, the
days and times such collection is to take place and the type of
recyclable waste containers to be used.
(3) The name, address and telephone number of the person(s) to which
the recyclable waste and/or recyclable paper products are to be
delivered and/or sold.
(4) A copy of the contract under which the applicant is seeking to
collect the recyclable waste and/or recyclable paper products.
§ 86-43 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-44
82:244
§ 86-45. Commingling prohibited.
Except when permitted and/or authorized by the Borough, it shall be
unlawful for any person to commingle and/or to mix recyclable waste with
recyclable paper products and/or any other solid waste when separating the
same, when placing the same for collection, when collecting the same and/
or when transporting the same after collection to the place where the same
is to be delivered or sold.
§ 86-46. Containers.
§ 86-47. Enforcement; private collection agreements.
(5) Payment of a permit fee of $25 per contract or per property if more
than one property is included in the contract, which fee is hereby
imposed for the issuance of any permit hereunder. Any initially
issued permit shall expire at the end of the calendar year in which
it is issued without the abatement in the permit fee. Prior to
December 31 of the initial calendar year and every calendar year
thereafter, if such initial permit has been continuously renewed,
any initially issued permit can be renewed for the following
calendar year by filing with the Borough a written application for
renewal setting forth the same information requested in the initial
application and by the payment of an annual renewal permit fee of
$25 per contract or per property, if more than one property is
included in one contract.
A. The Borough shall provide to the occupant of each residential dwelling,
free of charge, one recyclable waste container. Upon receiving a
container, each occupant thereof shall immediately place his, her or
their name(s) and address upon the same in the designated locations. If
the container is lost or damaged to the extent that it can not be used for
its designed purpose, such occupant to whom it has been issued shall
immediately apply, in writing, to the Borough for a replacement
container and shall pay a fee for each replacement container requested
in such sum as established by the Borough.
B. The owner, landlord, tenant, occupant and/or his, her or their agent, as
the case may be, of every multifamily dwelling and every commercial,
industrial and institutional establishments shall provide, at his or their
own cost and expense, all necessary and required recyclable waste
containers, which must be approved as to type and size by the Borough
upon written application to it.
A. The Borough Council or its designee is hereby authorized and
empowered to enforce the provisions of this article and to establish and
promulgate reasonable rules and regulations relative to the separation,
collection, management and disposal of recyclable waste and recyclable
paper products.
§ 86-44 FIREWORKS § 86-47
82:245
§ 86-48. Violations and penalties.
§ 86-49. Construal of provisions.
If any section, provision, part or clause of this article is in conflict with and
contrary to any other section, provision, part or clause of this chapter, the
more restrictive section, provision, part or clause shall be applicable, shall
take precedence and shall be enforced.
§ 86-50. Severability.
If any section, part or clause of this article is declared void by a court of
competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall remain valid and
in full force and effect.
B. The Borough Council is also authorized and empowered to enter into an
agreement or agreements with any public or private agency or firm for
the collection of all or any part of the recyclable waste and/or recyclable
paper products as provided herein.
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of § 86-44 of this
article shall, upon conviction before any District Justice legally
empowered to hear such matters, be punished by a fine of not less than
$200 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 30 days, or both. Each day's failure to comply with any
provision of § 86-44 of this article shall constitute a separate offense or
violation thereof.
B. Any person who shall violate any of the other provisions of this article
shall, upon conviction before any District Justice legally empowered to
hear such matters, be punished as follows:
(1) For the first conviction, by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than
$25 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding five days, or both.
(2) For the second conviction within one year, by a fine of not less than
$25 nor more than $50 or by imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 10 days, or both.
(3) For a third conviction within one year, by a fine of not less than $50
nor more than $100 or by imprisonment for a term not exceeding
15 days, or both.
(4) For a fourth and each subsequent conviction within one year, by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 or by imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 30 days, or both.
C. Each day's failure to comply with any applicable provision of this article
shall constitute a separate offense or violation thereof.
§ 86-47 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-51
82:246
§ 86-51. When effective.
This article is effective immediately; however, the provisions of this article
pertaining to the separation, collection, management and disposal of
recyclable waste and recyclable paper products shall take effect as directed
by Borough Council.
§ 86-51 FIREWORKS § 86-51
82:247
Chapter 90
HEALTH, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 51.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 86.
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
Sewers — See Ch. 135.
§ 86-51 GLENOLDEN CODE § 86-51
90:248
ARTICLE I
Miscellaneous Provisions
§ 90-1. Prohibited disposal of sewage and waste.
It shall be unlawful for any owner or occupier of land bounding or abutting
upon any of the streets, roads, lanes or alleys within the Borough in which
a sewer has been laid at the expense of the Borough, to discharge fecal
matter, wastewater from the house or other building erected thereon or
any kitchen, bathroom or water closet waste, on or over the surface of
said land or into any vault or depression of the ground, whether artificial
or otherwise, or into any of the streets of said Borough, except through a
connection to said sewers made under existing ordinances.73
§ 90-2. Offensive matter on premises.
It shall be unlawful for any person to have or cause to exist or suffer to
remain upon his premises in said Borough any noisome or offensive matter
for more than the space of 12 hours.
§ 90-3. Stagnant water on premises; stables.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit stagnant water to collect or
lay upon his premises or upon any open or unenclosed lot belonging to him,
or to permit any privy, stable or manure pit belonging to him to become
noisome or offensive.
§ 90-4. Sidewalk obstructions; weeds.
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit the paved or other sidewalk or
footway in front of or connected with and belonging to his premises in said
Borough to become obstructed with ashes, rubbish, grass, dirt or weeds, or
to permit rubbish to accumulate or high grass or weeds to grow upon any
vacant or unimproved lot.
§ 90-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867]
For any violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, which is enacted
for the preservation of the public health and cleanliness of the Borough,
the offender shall be liable, upon conviction thereof on the complaint of any
citizen or officer, to pay a fine of not less than $1 nor more than $50, in the
discretion of the District Justice imposing the same, to be collected, besides
the costs of the suit, as fines and penalties are by law collectible.
73.Editor's Note: See Ch. 135, Sewers, Art I.
§ 90-1 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 90-6
90:249
§ 90-6. Inspection fee. [Added 7-14-1983 by Ord. No. 877, approved
7-14-1983; amended 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2027, approved
12-28-2004]
The Health Officer shall charge an inspection fee, as established by Borough
Council, for the inspection of any premises in conjunction with his/her
duties as Health Officer under the laws and regulations of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. The fee for such inspection shall be set
from time to time at the discretion of Borough Council by resolution.
§ 90-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 90-6
90:250
ARTICLE II
Retail Food Stores
[Added 10-13-1983 by Ord. No. 878; approved 10-13-1983]
§ 90-7. Standards; copies on file; amendments.
The definitions; the inspection of retail food stores; the issuance, suspension
and revocation of a permit to operate a retail food store; the prohibiting
of the sale of unsound food or drinks; and the enforcement of this code
shall be regulated in accordance with the 1982 Edition of the Association of
Food and Drug Officials and the Food and Drug Administration's Retail Food
Stores Sanitation Code, three certified copies of which shall be on file in the
office of the Borough Secretary. The words "municipality of . . . " appearing
in said code shall be understood to refer to the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 90-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating any of the requirements of this
code may be fined not more than $500 and imprisoned not more than
10 days. In addition, such person may be enjoined from continuing such
violations. Each day upon which such violation occurs constitutes a separate
violation.
§ 90-7 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 90-8
90:251

ARTICLE III
Food and Beverage Vending Machines
[Added 10-13-1983 by Ord. No. 879, approved 10-13-1983]
§ 90-9. Standards; copies on file; amendments.
§ 90-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating any of the requirements of this
code may be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than 10
days, or both. In addition, such persons may be enjoined from continuing
such violations. Each day upon which such violation occurs constitutes a
separate violation.
A. The definitions; the requiring of permits for the installation and
operation of vending machines; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or
misbranded food or drink; the enforcement of this article; and the fixing
of penalties shall be regulated in accordance with the terms of the
unabridged form of Vending of Food and Beverages - 1978
Recommended Sanitation Ordinance of the Food and Drug
Administration, three certified copies of which are on file in the Office
of the Secretary of the Borough. The words "municipality of . . . " in said
unabridged form shall be understood to refer to the Borough of
Glenolden.
B. Section 6-601 of said unabridged ordinance is hereby replaced by
§ 90-10.
§ 90-9 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 90-10
90:253

ARTICLE IV
Food Service Establishments
[Added 10-13-1983 by Ord. No. 880, approved 10-13-1983]
§ 90-11. Standards; copies on file; amendments.
The definitions; the inspection of food and service establishments; the
issuance, suspension and revocation of permits to operate food service
establishments; the prohibiting of the sale of unsound or mislabeled food or
drink; and the enforcement of this article shall be regulated in accordance
with the 1976 Edition of the Food and Drug Administration's Food Service
Sanitation Ordinance, three certified copies of which shall be on file in the
office of the Borough Secretary. The words "municipality of . . . " in said
ordinance shall be understood to refer to the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 90-12. Violations and penalties.
Any person who is convicted of violating any of the requirements of this
code may be fined up to $500 or imprisoned up to 10 days, or both. In
addition, such person may be enjoined from continuing such violation. Each
day upon which such violation occurs constitutes a separate violation.
§ 90-11 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 90-12
90:255
Chapter 93
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 51.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 53.
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
§ 93-1. Purposes. [Amended 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2081, approved
8-16-2011]
This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote and protect
the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants, both
residential and commercial, of the Borough of Glenolden by abating
overcrowded housing conditions; securing adequate lighting, heating,
ventilation, access and egress; and preventing or correcting unhygienic,
unsanitary or unsafe conditions and other nuisances which might constitute
a menace to residents of the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 93-2. Interpretation. [Amended 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2081,
approved 8-16-2011]
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, said provisions
shall be held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any other ordinance
or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling. Where
the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose greater
restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute, ordinance or
regulation shall be controlling.
§ 93-3. Definitions. [Amended 8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2081,
approved 8-16-2011]
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words and phrases shall
be construed throughout this chapter to have the meaning herein indicated.
The singular shall include the plural, and the plural shall include the
singular. The present tense shall include the future tense.
BASEMENT — The portion of any dwelling located partly underground but
having less than 1/2 its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade
of the adjoining ground.
CELLAR — The portion of any dwelling having 1/2 or more than 1/2 of
its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average grade of the adjoining
ground.
§ 90-12 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-3
90:256
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — An establishment, situated on
property within the Borough, leased and used for commercial purposes;
for example, bars, restaurants, private offices, fitness clubs, oil rigs, retail
stores, banks and financial institutions, supermarkets, auto and boat
dealerships, and other establishments with common business areas and
purposes.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located in a multiple
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit, with facilities that are used or
intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying,
fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pestelimination
method.
GARBAGE — Includes waste or decayed fruit or animal and vegetable
matter, liquid or otherwise, which attends the preparation, use, cooking or
storing of meat, fish, fowl or fruit.
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping or eating purposes, excluding bathrooms,
laundries, foyers, pantries, communicating corridors, stairways, closets,
basement recreation rooms, storage spaces and other nonhabitable areas.
HOUSING OFFICER — The official of the Borough of Glenolden designated
by the Borough Council to assist in the enforcement of this chapter.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a multiple dwelling, of any
insects, rodents or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any building, including an apartment or
condominium building, containing two or more dwelling units.
NEW OR CONVERTED DWELLING UNIT — A newly constructed dwelling
unit or a dwelling unit located in a single-family dwelling converted into a
multiple dwelling.
OCCUPANT — Any person living and sleeping in a dwelling unit or rooming
unit.
OPENABLE AREA — The part of a window or door that is available for
unobstructed ventilation and that opens directly to the outdoors.
OPERATOR — Any person having charge, care, management or control of
any multiple dwelling or part thereof in which dwelling units or rooming
units are let.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
Shall have legal title to any multiple dwelling or dwelling unit or
commercial establishment, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
A.
§ 93-3 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-3
90:257
PERSON — An individual, firm, corporation, association or partnership.
ROOMING UNIT — Any rented room or group of such rooms forming a
single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Any waste, discarded or rejected matter or substance,
vegetable, animal or mineral, including unused chattels, furnishings, tools,
vehicles, implements, trash, debris, scrap, junk, garbage, leaves, decayed
or fallen trees, the branches or other parts thereof, stones, ashes, cinders,
papers and all other superfluous, abandoned or unused materials or
substances of whatsoever kind and condition.
SUPPLIED — Installed, furnished or provided by the owner or operator at
his expense.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure or to any utilities system and
is not permitted to be used for habitation in the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 93-4. Plumbing, heating and electrical facilities.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling unit which does
not comply with the following requirements:
Shall have charge, care or control of any multiple dwelling, dwelling
unit, or commercial establishment as owner or agent of the owner,
or as executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the
owner. Any such person thus representing the actual owner shall be
bound to comply with the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto to the same extent as if he were
the owner.
B.
A. Water supply. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with a properly
installed pressurized potable water supply.
B. Kitchen facilities. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with:
(1) A kitchen sink in good working condition and properly installed in
conformity with the Plumbing Code of Glenolden Borough.74
(2) Installed cooking facilities or utility connections for such facilities.
Every piece of cooking equipment shall be so constructed and
installed that it will function safely and effectively and shall be
maintained in sound working condition. Stove heating and flame
units shall be at least six inches from any facing wall.
(3) Every new or converted dwelling unit shall be equipped with an
approved exhaust fan capable of removing cooking odors and
smoke from all kitchens.
74.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Plumbing.
§ 93-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-4
90:258
C. Bathroom facilities. Every dwelling unit shall contain one or more
rooms which afford privacy to a person and which are supplied with a
flush toilet, a lavatory basin and a bathtub or shower, all of these
facilities in good working condition and properly installed in conformity
with the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Glenolden.
D. Hot and cold water. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin and bathtub or
shower required by this chapter shall be properly connected in
conformity with the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Glenolden and
supplied with both hot and cold water. The hot-water lines shall be
connected to water-heating facilities which are capable of heating and
supplying continuous hot water at a minimum temperature of 120° F.
even when the heating facilities required by this chapter are not in
operation.
E. Plumbing fixtures. All plumbing fixtures shall be properly connected in
accordance with the Plumbing Code of the Borough of Glenolden.75
F. Heating facilities, Every multiple dwelling shall be supplied with
properly installed heating facilities which are capable of safely and
adequately heating all habitable rooms and bathrooms within its walls
to a temperature of at least 68° F. at a distance three feet above floor
level at an outdoor temperature of 0° F. Portable heating facilities
employing flame and which use gasoline, kerosene or gas as fuel do not
meet the standard.
G. Electrical service. Every multiple dwelling shall be provided with an
approved adequate electrical service as defined by the National
Electrical Code. Every habitable room and bathroom of such new or
converted dwelling shall be supplied with at least two separate electric
convenience outlets in the wall. Every bathroom, laundry room, furnace
room and public hall shall contain at least one switch-operated light
fixture on the ceiling or the wall. Every such outlet or fixture shall be
properly installed and shall be maintained in good and safe working
condition.
(1) All exposed wiring shall have insulation that is not frayed, dryrotted
or brittle and generally in good condition. Switches and
outlets shall be operable at all times and plates shall be secured in
position. No temporary wiring shall be used except extension cords
(no more than one in each outlet) which run directly from portable
electrical fixtures to outlets and which are not run under floorcovering
materials or extended through doorways, windows or
other similar openings. In no case shall extension cords be used
outdoors unless specifically rated for exterior use.
75.Editor's Note: See Ch. 127, Plumbing.
§ 93-4 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-5
90:259
§ 93-5. Light and ventilation.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any multiple dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit which does not comply with the following:
A. Natural light in habitable rooms. Every habitable room or bathroom
shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the
outdoors. The minimum aggregate area available for unobstructed light
shall not be less than 10% of the floor area of such room.
B. Light in nonhabitable space. Every stair, hall, cellar, basement, laundry,
furnace room and similar nonhabitable work space located in a
structure used for rental for human habitation shall have adequate light
capable of providing at all times not less than 50 footcandles of light at
floor level. Every public hall and stairway in a multiple dwelling shall
also be adequately lighted at all times to provide not less than 50
footcandles of light at floor level.
C. Ventilation in habitable rooms. Every habitable room or bathroom shall
be ventilated either by openable areas directly accessible to the
outdoors and equal to at least 45% of the required window area or by
equivalent mechanical ventilation.
D. Ventilation in bathrooms. The required bathroom in each dwelling unit
shall be ventilated either by an openable area directly accessible to the
outdoors and not less than 1 1/2 square feet or by equivalent
mechanical ventilation.
E. Required space in new or converted dwelling units and sleeping rooms.
Every two-bedroom new or converted dwelling unit shall contain at
least 650 square feet of total space, excluding stairways. Every onebedroom
new or converted dwelling unit shall contain at least 500
square feet of total space, excluding stairways. In every new or
converted dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes shall contain at least 100 square feet of floor space
for one person sleeping therein, and 120 square feet of floor space for
two persons sleeping therein. [Amended 12-28-2004 by Ord. No.
2029, approved 12-28-2004]
F. Required access to bathrooms or sleeping rooms. No new or converted
dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms shall have room
arrangements such that access to a bathroom or water closet
compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one sleeping
room can be had only by going through another sleeping room, nor shall
room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room can be had
only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom or water
closet compartment.
G. Required ceiling height. In every new or converted dwelling unit, the
ceiling height from the floor area of every habitable room shall be seven
feet six inches.
§ 93-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-5
90:260
§ 93-6. Property maintenance.
No person shall let to another for occupancy any multiple dwelling or
dwelling unit for the purpose of living therein, or any premises, which does
not comply with the following requirements. The Housing Officer of the
municipality shall cause periodic inspections to be made of rental multipledwelling
premises to secure compliance with these requirements.
H. Basement dwelling units. No basement space shall be used as a
habitable room or dwelling unit unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The requirements of Subsections A and C hereof relating to natural
light and ventilation in habitable rooms are met.
(3) The required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
A. Grading and drainage.
(1) All premises shall be graded and maintained so as to prevent the
accumulation of stagnant water thereon or within any building or
structure located thereon.
(2) Downspouts and rain leaders shall be so placed on all structures as
to minimize the flow of excess water upon and across any adjacent
properties.
B. Noxious weeds.
(1) All exterior property areas shall be kept free from species of weeds
or plant growth which are noxious or detrimental to the public
health, and grass shall not at any time exceed a height of six inches.
(2) Hedges, briars or any other growth planted for or intended to be
used for ornamental purposes, after the same have lost their
ornamental or useful purposes by reason of having been unkempt
or untrimmed, shall be ordered cut and removed by the Housing
Officer.
C. Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached
garages, toolsheds, storage sheds, fences or any other appurtenances
to the main building, shall be maintained at all times in a neat manner,
in good repair and shall be effectively structurally sound.
D. Junked motor vehicles. No person shall keep or maintain on public or
private property any motor vehicle that is inoperable, that does not
have a current license tag or current inspection sticker and that has
been left unattended for a period of 96 hours. Such vehicle shall be
classed as "junked" and shall be removed in accordance with the
provisions as hereinafter provided; except that antique cars shall be
§ 93-5 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-6
90:261
identified by an antique license plate as issued by the State of
Pennsylvania and that automobiles in the process of being
reconstructed for purposes of qualifying as antiques shall be registered
with the Housing Officer and the Police Department of the Borough of
Glenolden.
E. Structural safety.
(1) Every outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance attached
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the loads to which it is subjected as required by the
Building Code,76 and shall be kept in sound condition and good
repair.
(2) In public or multiple dwellings, every stairwell and every flight of
stairs which is more than three risers high shall have handrails or
railings. Every handrail shall be firmly fastened and must be
maintained in good condition. Properly balustraded railings
capable of bearing normally imposed loads shall be placed on the
open portions of stairs, balconies, landings and stairwells.
[Amended 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029, approved
12-28-2004]
F. Windows and doors.
(1) Every window sash shall be fully supplied with glass windowpanes
or an approved substitute which are without open cracks or holes.
Every window sash shall be in good condition and fit reasonably
tight within its frame. Every window, other than a fixed window,
shall be capable of being easily opened and shall be held in position
by window hardware. Every exterior door, door hinge and door
latch shall be maintained in good condition. Every exterior door,
when closed, shall fit reasonably well within its frame. Every
window, door and frame shall be constructed and maintained in
such relation to the adjacent wall construction as to exclude rain as
completely as possible and to substantially exclude wind from
entering the multiple dwelling or multifamily dwelling.
G. Free from dampness. In every rental multiple dwelling, dwelling unit
and rooming unit, cellars, basements and crawl spaces shall be
maintained reasonably free from dampness to prevent conditions
conducive to decay or deterioration of the structure, as required by the
Building Code.
H. Maintained in good repair. All floors, flooring baseboards and trim shall
be free of wide cracks and loose, warped, protruding and rotted
sections which could constitute a hazardous and unsanitary condition.
Walls and ceilings must be free of holes, large cracks, loose plaster and
other structural material which could collapse and become an accident
76.Editor's Note: See Ch. 54, Building Construction, and Ch. 64, Construction Codes,
Uniform.
§ 93-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-6
90:262
§ 93-7. Safe and sanitary maintenance,
No person shall let to another for occupancy any multiple dwelling, dwelling
unit or rooming unit in a structure which does not comply with the following
minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance:
§ 93-8. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
In addition to any specific contractual agreements between owners and
occupants with respect to responsibilities, the following shall apply:
hazard. Plaster, paint and other surface materials shall be of such
character as to be easily cleanable and reasonably smooth, clean and
tight.
I. Bathroom floors. Every toilet and bathroom floor surface shall be
constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to
water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and
sanitary condition.
A. Structural condition. Every foundation shall be watertight and
rodentproof and shall be kept in good repair.
B. Openings to the exterior. Every window, exterior door, hatchway or
skylight shall be effectively weathertight and watertight and shall be
kept in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Stairways, porches and balconies. Every stairway, porch and balcony as
well as every appurtenance thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe
to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to
be placed thereon and shall be kept in sound condition and repair.
D. Storage rooms. Storage rooms in all multiple dwellings that furnish
tenants with lockers for storage shall have walls and ceilings covered
with either Sheetrock or wire lath with cement plaster having a burn
rating of at least 90 minutes.
A. Maintenance of premises.
(1) Every adult occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be
responsible for maintaining in clean and sanitary condition the
premises which he occupies or controls. Every owner of a building
containing two or more dwelling and/or rooming units shall be
responsible for maintaining in clean and sanitary condition the
shared or public areas within and around such building and
premises.
(2) Every dwelling unit in which animals of any kind are housed must
be kept clean and free from animal droppings and obnoxious odors.
In the event the animals are housed in other accessory structures,
these structures and the surrounding yard shall be clean and free
of animal droppings and obnoxious odors.
§ 93-6 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-8
90:263
B. Maintenance of equipment. Every occupant of a dwelling unit or
rooming unit shall be responsible for the exercise of proper care in the
use and operation of all plumbing fixtures, appliances and equipment
therein. Every owner of a building containing two or more dwelling and/
or rooming units shall be responsible for keeping supplied facilities in
proper operating condition.
C. Waste disposal.
(1) Every occupant of a dwelling unit or rooming unit shall dispose of
rubbish, garbage and other refuse in accordance with the
regulations of the Borough of Glenolden governing such matters.77
In a structure containing two or more dwelling and/or rooming
units, it shall be the responsibility of the owner to assure that
adequate rubbish and garbage containers are provided.
(2) Rubbish stored outdoors shall be stored in one or more rubbish
storage containers which are flytight, rodentproof, nonflammable,
waterproof and weatherproof.
(3) Rubbish stored in the basement or cellar or in an enclosed
structure such as a shed shall be stored in nonflammable
containers.
(4) No loose rubbish shall be placed upon or strewn about on the floor
of any basement or cellar or other part of any dwelling or on the
ground surrounding any multiple dwelling.
(5) Garbage is to be wrapped and stored in one or more flytight and
watertight metal garbage storage containers equipped with tightly
fitting metal covers.
(6) Every outside or inside garbage or rubbish storage container shall
be so maintained and so located on the premises that no odors will
permeate any dwelling or dwelling units.
(7) No loose garbage shall be placed upon or strewn about on the floor
of any basement or cellar or any other part of any dwelling or on
the ground surrounding any multiple dwelling.
(8) Waste storage facilities shall be so located and designed that
access can be had at all times by waste collectors. Parking in front
of such facilities shall be prohibited, and such prohibition shall be
enforced by the owner.
D. Extermination. In a structure containing two or more dwelling and/or
rooming units, the owner and the operator shall be responsible for such
extermination.
E. Discontinuance of utilities or facilities. No owner, operator or occupant
shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required to
77.Editor's Note: See Ch. 86, Garbage, Rubbish and Refuse.
§ 93-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-8
90:264
§ 93-9. Administration and enforcement.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Glenolden shall appoint a Housing
Officer and such deputies and assistants as are necessary to enforce the
provisions of this chapter. Such positions may be combined with another
position or positions established in the Borough. In order to determine
be supplied under the provisions of this chapter to be removed from,
shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling unit or rooming
unit, except for necessary repairs, alterations or emergencies, but not
to exceed 12 hours per day; except that the owner shall not be
responsible for such public utility where said owner has no control over
the same.
F. Occupancy of vacant units. No person shall occupy or permit to be
occupied by another any vacant rental dwelling unit or rooming unit
unless or until it is in good repair, clean, sanitary, in habitable condition
and in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter. No new or
converted rental dwelling unit or rooming unit shall be occupied and no
rental dwelling unit or rooming unit which has been vacated shall be
occupied until the annual certificate of occupancy is first obtained from
the Housing Officer. Units shall first be inspected by the Housing
Officer before issuing the annual certificate of occupancy, to determine
whether all of the requirements of this chapter have been met. If a
rental dwelling unit or rooming unit is vacated after the issuance of the
annual certificate of occupancy, a new application for a certificate of
occupancy and resultant inspection is not required, whether the said
unit is left vacant or is subsequently occupied, until the next year’s
application period for the annual certificate of occupancy. [Amended
12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029, approved 12-28-2004]
G. Screening. Every owner of a building containing two or more dwelling
and/or rooming units shall be responsible for providing every operable
window, door or other opening to the exterior with effective screening
protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects.
H. Sidewalks.
(1) Sidewalks, together with any portion of a property that is paved
and used as a sidewalk or public walk, shall be kept in good repair,
free from large cracks, raised blocks, depressions or any condition
which could render the sidewalk hazardous to pedestrian travel.
(2) Sidewalks shall at all times be kept free and clear of all
obstructions to safe and convenient passage.
(3) Tree branches, bushes or any other growth shall not project over
any sidewalk lower than a height of nine feet, nor shall they
protrude in such a manner as to restrict safe and convenient
passage.
§ 93-8 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-9
90:265
compliance with and enforce the provisions of this chapter, the following
shall apply:
A. Issuance of certificates of occupancy. [Amended 12-28-1978 by Ord.
No. 823, approved 12-28-1978; 5-12-1988 by Ord. No. 931,
approved 5-12-1988; 12-14-1991 by Ord. No. 964, approved
12-14-1991; 9-8-1994 by Ord. No. 1007, approved 9-8-1994]
(1) Every person, firm, corporation, or any other type of entity owning,
managing, conducting or operating a dwelling unit and/or rooming
unit, shall not rent, lease, let out, or permit the same to be occupied
without first applying for and securing the following: [Amended
12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029, approved 12-28-2004]
(a) An annual certificate of occupancy for each occupied and
vacant dwelling unit(s) issued pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter and other applicable ordinances, rules and regulations
enacted by the Borough Council.
(b) The above requirement shall not apply to a residential, owneroccupied
individual dwelling unit.
(c) A certificate of occupancy shall be required whenever there is
a change in ownership in any residential owner-occupied
structure.
(2) The Housing Officer and/or his agent or agents are hereby
authorized and directed to process all applications for certificates
of occupancy and, prior to the issuance of same, to determine, by
inspection if necessary, that all the requirements of this chapter
and/or any other applicable ordinances and rules and regulations
enacted by the Borough Council have been met. The fee for the
application and issuance of any certificate of occupancy (as well as
any fee for reinspection(s) of properties) shall be set from time to
time at the discretion of Borough Council by resolution. [Amended
2-17-2004 by Ord. No. 2016, approved 2-17-2004;
12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029, approved 12-28-2004]
(3) The fee for inspection shall be filed with the application for a
certificate of occupancy.
B. The owner and the operator of any dwelling unit which has been rented,
leased or let out or rerented during any calendar year shall, on or
before May 15 of the following year, file a list with the Housing Officer
setting forth the number of units occupied as of December 31 of the
reporting year and the names of the tenants thereof. [Amended
10-20-1998 by Ord. No. 1057, approved 10-20-1998]
C. Inspection and access to dwellings. The Housing Officer or his agents
are hereby authorized and directed to make inspections of the
conditions of rental dwellings, multiple dwelling units, rooming units
and other structures located in the Borough of Glenolden. Upon display
§ 93-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-9
90:266
of proper identification, the inspector is authorized to enter, examine
and survey such units and premises on weekdays between 9:00 a.m.
and 4:00 p.m. or at such other time as may be necessary in an
emergency or as mutually agreed upon by the occupant and the
Housing Officer or one of his agents.
(1) In the event a mutually agreeable date and time cannot be agreed
to, the Housing Officer and/or his agent or agents are authorized to
select the date and time for the inspection. The inspection date and
time shall be confirmed by a certified notice of inspection letter,
return receipt requested, sent via U.S. mail and addressed to the
last known mailing address of the property owner or manager. The
inspection date and time shall also be confirmed by a notice of
inspection letter sent via regular U. S. mail and addressed to the
last known mailing address of the property owner or manager. In
no event shall an inspection be scheduled any sooner than 14 days
from the date upon which the notice letter was mailed. [Added
12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029, approved 12-28-2004]
(2) If the subject property is not made available for inspection on the
inspection date confirmed in accordance with either of the
foregoing provisions and in the event the property owner or
manager and the Housing Officer (or his agent or agents) have not
rescheduled the inspection within 10 days of the confirmed
inspection date, any previously issued certificate of occupancy for
the subject dwelling unit shall be revoked by the Housing Officer
and/or his agent(s). [Added 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029,
approved 12-28-2004]
(3) In the event any person, firm, corporation, or any other type of
entity owning, managing, conducting or operating a dwelling unit
and/or rooming unit fails to apply for and obtain an annual
certificate of occupancy as required by this chapter, in addition to
any other remedies provided for by this chapter, the Housing
Officer and/or his agent(s) are hereby empowered and authorized
to issue a citation to any and/or each of the aforementioned person,
firm, corporation, or any other type of entity owning, managing,
conducting or operating a dwelling unit and/or rooming unit, and
upon conviction before a District Justice, pay a penalty of not less
than $200 nor more than $300 plus court costs and reasonable
attorney’s fees, for each violation, and in default of payment of such
penalty and costs be imprisoned for not less than one day nor more
than 30 days. Each day there exists a violation of this section shall
constitute a separate violation of this chapter, and the Housing
Officer and/or his agent(s) may at their discretion issue a separate
citation for each such individual violation. [Added 12-28-2004 by
Ord. No. 2029, approved 12-28-2004]
D. Access for repairs. Every occupant of a rental dwelling unit or rooming
unit shall grant to the owner or his agents or employees free access to it
§ 93-9 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-9
90:267
at reasonable times for the purpose of making repairs or alterations to
effect compliance with this chapter.
E. Notice of violation.
(1) When the Housing Officer determines that there exists a violation
of any provision of this chapter, he shall serve written notice of
such violation on the person or persons responsible therefor, as
hereinafter provided:
(2) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent or upon the occupant,
as the case may require, provided that such notice shall be
deemed to be properly served upon such person if a copy
thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to his last known
address or if he is served by any other method authorized or
required under the laws of this state.
(3) Such notice may contain an outline of remedial action which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter and
with rules and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
F. Appeals from notice of violation. Any person affected by any notice
which has been issued in connection with the enforcement of any
provisions of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto may request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter
before the Borough Council of Glenolden or a committee appointed by
the Borough Council, provided that such person shall file in the office of
the Housing Officer a written petition requesting such hearing and
setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor within seven
days after the day the notice was served. Upon receipt of such petition,
the Borough Council or its appointed committee shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give petitioner written notice thereof.
At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to be heard
and to show why such notice should be modified or withdrawn. The
hearing shall be commenced not later than seven days after the day on
which the petition was filed. After the hearing, the Borough Council or
its appointed committee may sustain, modify or withdraw the notice of
the violation on the basis of the findings at the hearing and shall give
petitioner written notice thereof. Such proceedings shall be
summarized in writing and shall become a matter of public record in
the office of the Housing Officer. Such record shall also include a copy
of every notice or order issued in connection with the matter. If the
appointed committee hears the petitioner and makes a decision which
§ 93-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-9
90:268
the petitioner rejects, the petitioner shall have the right to appeal to
the entire Borough Council within seven days of receiving the notice,
asking the entire Borough Council to hear the case and make the ruling.
Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Borough Council may seek
relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
the laws of this state.
G. Effective date of notice of violation. Any notice served pursuant to
Subsection E shall automatically become an order if a written petition is
not filed in the office of the Housing Officer within seven days after such
notice is filed.
H. Emergency action. Whenever the Housing Officer finds that there exists
any violation of this chapter which creates an emergency requiring
immediate correction to protect the health or safety of any occupant of
a rental dwelling or the public, he may issue an order reciting the
existence of such an emergency and requiring that such action be taken
as he deems necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the
other provisions of this chapter, such order shall be effective
immediately. Any person to whom such order is directed shall comply
therewith immediately but, upon petition to the Borough Council ,shall
be afforded a hearing as soon as possible. After such hearing,
depending upon the findings of the Council as to whether the provisions
of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted pursuant
thereto have been complied with, the Housing Officer shall continue
such order in effect, or modify it, or revoke it.
I. Dwelling units unfit for human habitation. Whenever the Housing
Officer finds that a rental dwelling unit constitutes a serious hazard to
the health or safety of the occupants or to the public because it is
dilapidated, unsanitary, vermin-infested, rodent-infested or lacking in
basic facilities and equipment required by this chapter, he shall
designate such dwelling unit as unfit for human habitation. Such
designation shall be posted on the dwelling and shall specify the reason
for such a finding. A notice of violation shall also be served in
accordance with the provisions of Subsection E. Any dwelling unit so
designated shall be vacated within a reasonable time as specified by the
Housing Officer and shall not again be used for human habitation until
the hazard or violation has been eliminated or corrected and the
Housing Officer has removed the designation and given written
approval for occupancy. A report of any such closings must immediately
be filed with the Borough Council.
J. Adoption of rules and regulations. The Borough Council is authorized to
make and adopt such procedural rules as it may deem necessary for the
proper enforcement of this chapter, provided that such procedural rules
and regulations shall not be in conflict with the substantive provisions
of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall have the same force
and effect as the provisions of this chapter, and the penalty for violation
thereof shall be the same as the penalty for violation of the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 93-9 HEALTH, PUBLIC § 93-9
90:269
K. Abatement of violations. If a violation has not been corrected within the
time designated for such compliance and the Borough Council finds
that the continuation of such violation constitutes a public nuisance or
hazard, it may order the correction of such violation, using Borough
funds or Borough personnel to accomplish such corrections, and may
charge the cost thereof to the violator. It may collect such cost by lien
and/or otherwise as may be authorized by the laws of this state.
L. Penalty for violations. Any person, firm, corporation, or any other type
of entity who violates any provision of this chapter or any provision of
any resolution, rule or regulation adopted by the Borough Council
pursuant to authority granted by this chapter or fails to correct within a
reasonable time (the determination of a reasonable time is in the sole
discretion of the Housing Officer and/or his agent(s), but in no event
shall be less than 20 days) the defects for which the dwelling or
dwellings have been cited, shall, upon conviction before a District
Justice, pay a penalty of not less than $200 nor more than $300 plus
court costs and reasonable attorney’s fees for each violation and, in
default of payment of such penalty and costs, be imprisoned for not less
than one day nor more than 30 days. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord.
No. 867, approved 12-9-1982; 12-28-2004 by Ord. No. 2029,
approved 12-28-2004]
M. Revocation of certificates of occupancy; eviction of tenants.
Notwithstanding anything set forth in this chapter to the contrary, this
§ 93-9 shall be applicable to all single-family rental dwelling units,
multiple dwelling units and commercial establishments. [Amended
8-16-2011 by Ord. No. 2081, approved 8-16-2011]
(1) Any single-family rental dwelling unit owner whose tenant has six
police nuisance complaints against the tenant or property in any
consecutive twenty-four-month period following the
commencement of the then-current lease term shall have said
property's certificate of occupancy revoked. After three complaints
in the aforementioned time period, the owner will be notified, via
certified mail, that there have been three complaints, against its
tenant or property and, after an additional three complaints the
certificate of occupancy shall be revoked for one year in
accordance with Subsection M(4) below.
(2) Any owner of a multiple dwelling unit building that has six police
nuisance complaints on a single dwelling unit in any consecutive
twenty-four-month period following the commencement of the
then-current lease term shall have the certificate of occupancy for
that unit revoked. After three complaints in the aforementioned
time period, the owner will be notified, via certified mail, that there
have been three complaints, against its tenant or property and,
after an additional three complaints, the certificate of occupancy
shall be revoked for one year in accordance with Subsection M(4)
below.
§ 93-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § 93-9
90:270
Chapter 95
INSPECTIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54. Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
(3) Any commercial establishment rental property owner whose tenant
has six police nuisance complaints against the tenant or property in
any consecutive twenty-four-month period following the
commencement of the then-current lease term shall have the
property's certificate of occupancy revoked. After three complaints
in the aforementioned time period, the owner will be notified, via
certified mail, that there have been three complaints against its
tenant or property and, after an additional three complaints, the
certificate of occupancy shall be revoked for one year in
accordance with Subsection A(4) below.
(4) The owner shall be notified that there have been six police nuisance
complaints and that his/her certificate of occupancy has been
revoked. Once notified of the six complaints, the owner shall have
seven calendar days to start eviction proceedings and show proof of
court date to the Borough's Housing Officer (or duly appointed
assistant). If proof is not shown in seven calendar days, a citation
shall be issued on a weekly basis until proof is shown of eviction
proceedings. The one-year revocation period shall commence the
date notice was issued pursuant to this subsection.
§ 93-9 INSPECTIONS § 93-9
95:271

ARTICLE I
Call-Back Inspections
[Adopted 5-12-1988 by Res. No. 3-88]
§ 95-1. Fee.
In all cases where the Building Inspector is requested by the builder/
developer to make return or call-back inspections and in all cases where
there must be additional inspections occasioned by the builder's
noncompliance with the notice requirements of the BOCA Building Code,
the builder/developer shall pay the sum of $15 for each such inspection.
§ 95-1 INSPECTIONS § 95-1
95:273
Chapter 96
INSURANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Unsafe buildings — See Ch. 56.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
Fire Prevention Code — See Ch. 81.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Smoke and heat detectors — See Ch. 141.
§ 95-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 95-1
96:274
ARTICLE I
Fire Insurance Claims
[Adopted 3-11-1993 by Ord. No. 992, approved 3-11-1993; amended
in its entirety 2-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1040, approved 2-13-1997]
§ 96-1. Purpose.
This article is intended to comply with the Act of July 9, 1992, P.L. 678 N.
98, Section 1, as amended.78
§ 96-2. Restriction on payment; delinquent taxes.
A. Municipal certificate required prior to payment of fire loss claims. No
insurance company, association or exchange doing business in this
commonwealth shall pay a claim of a named insured for fire damage to
a structure located within a municipality where the amount recoverable
for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds $7,500 unless
the insurance company, association or exchange is furnished with a
certificate pursuant to Subsection B of this section and unless there is
compliance with the procedures set forth in § 96-2B and C of this
article.
B. The Municipal Treasurer shall, upon the written request of the named
insured specifying the tax description of the property, name and
address of the insurance company, association or exchange and the
date agreed upon by the insurance company, association or exchange
and the named insured as the date of the receipt or a loss report of the
claim, furnish the insurance company, association or exchange either of
the following within 14 working days of the request:
(1) A certificate or, at the discretion of the municipality, a verbal
notification which shall be confirmed in writing by the insurer to
the effect that, as of the date specified in the request, there are no
delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges against
the property and that, as of the date of the Treasurer's certificates
or verbal notification, no municipality has certified any amount as
total costs incurred by the municipality for the removal, repair or
securing of a building or other structure on the property; or
(2) A certificate and bill showing the amount of delinquent taxes,
assessments, penalties and user charges against the property as of
the date specified in the request that have not been paid as of the
date of the certificate and also showing, as of the date of the
Treasurer's certificate, the amount of the total costs, if any,
certified to the Treasurer that have been incurred by the
municipality for the removal, repair or securing of a building or
other structure on the property. For the purposes of this
subsection, the municipality shall certify to the Treasurer the total
78.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 96-1 INSURANCE § 96-2
96:275
§ 96-3. Payment of claims.
amount, if any, of such costs. A tax, assessment, penalty or user
charge becomes delinquent at the time and on the date a lien could
otherwise have been filed against the property by the municipality
under applicable law.
A. Receipt of certificate.
(1) Upon the receipt of a certificate pursuant to § 96-2B(1) of this
article, the insurance company, association or exchange shall pay
the claim of the named insured in accordance with the policy terms,
unless the loss agreed to between the named insured and the
company, association or exchange equals or exceeds 60% of the
aggregate limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building
or other structure. In the case of such a loss, the insurance
company, association or exchange, the insured property owner and
the municipality shall follow the procedures set forth in
Subsections B and C of this section.
(2) Upon the receipt of a certificate and bill pursuant to § 96-2B(2) of
this article, the insurance company, association or exchange shall
return the bill to the Treasurer and transfer to the Treasurer an
amount from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes,
assessments, penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill. The
municipality shall receive the amount and apply or credit it to
payment of the items shown in the bill.
B. When the loss agreed to between the named insured and the company,
association or exchange equals 60% of the aggregate limits of liability
on all fire policies covering the building or other structure, the
insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds to the designated officer of the municipality in the
aggregate $2,000 for each $15,000 and each fraction of that amount of
a claim, or, if at the time of a loss report the named insured has
submitted a contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing,
repairing or securing the building or other structure in an amount less
than the amount calculated under the foreseeing transfer formula, the
insurance company, association or exchange shall transfer from the
insurance proceeds the amount specified in the estimate. The transfer
of proceeds shall be on a pro rata basis by all companies, associations
or exchanges insuring the building or other structure. Policy proceeds
remaining after the transfer to the municipality shall be disbursed in
accordance with the policy terms. The named insured may submit a
contractor's signed estimate of the costs of removing, repairing or
securing the building or other structure after the transfer, and the
designated officer shall return the amount of the fund in excess of the
estimate to the named insured if the municipality has not commenced to
remove, repair or secure the building or other structure. This
subsection only applies to municipalities that have adopted an
ordinance authorizing the procedure described in Subsections B and C
§ 96-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 96-3
96:276
of this section and applies only to fire losses that occur after the
adoption of the ordinance. The ordinance shall designate the officer
authorized to carry out the duties of this section.
C. Upon receipt of proceeds by the municipality as authorized by this
section, the designated officer shall place the proceeds in a separate
fund to be used solely as security against the total cost of removing,
repairing or securing incurred by the municipality. When transferring
the funds as required in Subsection B of this section, an insurance
company, association or exchange shall provide the municipality with
the name and address of the named insured, whereupon the
municipality shall contact the named insured, certify that the proceeds
have been received by the municipality and notify the named insured
that the procedures under this subsection shall be followed. The fund
shall be returned to the named insured when repairs, removal or
securing of the building or other structure have been completed and the
required proof received by the designated officer, if the municipality
has not incurred any costs for repairs, removal or securing. If the
municipality has incurred costs for repairs, removal or securing of the
building or other structure, the costs shall be paid from the fund, and, if
excess funds remain, the municipality shall transfer the remaining
funds to the named insured. Nothing in this section shall be construed
to limit the ability of a municipality to recover any deficiency. Further,
nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit the
municipality and the named insured from entering into an agreement
that permits the transfer of funds to the named insured if some other
reasonable disposition of the damaged property has been negotiated.
D. Proof of payment by the insurance company, association or exchange of
proceeds under a policy in accordance with Subsection B of this section
is conclusive evidence of the discharge of its obligation to the insured
under the policy to the extent of the payment and of compliance by the
company, association or exchange with Subsection B of this section.
E. Nothing in this section shall be construed to make an insurance
company, association or exchange liable for any amount in excess of
proceeds payable under its insurance policy or for any other act
performed pursuant to this section or to make a municipality or public
official an insured under a policy of insurance or to create an obligation
to pay delinquent property taxes or unpaid removal liens or expenses
other than as provided in this section.
F. An insurance company, association or exchange making payments of
policy proceeds under this section for delinquent taxes or structure
removal liens or removal expenses incurred by a municipality shall have
the full benefit of such payment, including all rights of subrogation and
assignment.
§ 96-3 INSURANCE § 96-4
96:277
§ 96-4. Copy on file; compliance authority.
An exact copy of this article shall be filed with the Department of
Community Affairs, together with the name, position and phone number of
the municipal official responsible for compliance with this section.
§ 96-5. Definitions.
The term "municipality," as used in this article, shall mean any city, borough,
town, township or home rule municipality. The term "treasurer," as used in
this article, shall mean an elected treasurer or other appropriate municipal
officer authorized to collect real property taxes.
§ 96-6. Construal of provisions.
This article shall be liberally construed to accomplish its purpose to deter
the commission of arson and related crimes, to discourage the
abandonment of property and to prevent urban blight and deterioration.
§ 96-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 96-6
96:278
Chapter 97
JUNK DEALERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
§ 97-1. License required; fee.
No person, firm or corporation shall engage in or carry on the business or
occupation of gathering, collecting, buying or selling junk or old rags within
the Borough without first making application for and obtaining from the
Borough Secretary or other appointee, at an annual charge therefor of $1,
a license to engage in or carry on said business within the Borough, which
license shall be valid for the period of one year from the time of its issuance.
§ 97-2. Application for license.
Such application shall set forth the name or names and places of residence
or business of the applicant, and such other information as may be deemed
necessary, and shall also state whether a wagon, pushcart or other vehicle
is to be used in carrying on the said business or occupation.
§ 97-3. Lettering on vehicle.
Every person, firm or corporation so licensed and using a wagon, pushcart
or other vehicle in carrying on the said business or occupation within
the Borough shall have such vehicle conspicuously marked on both sides
thereof, in plain English letters not less than three inches high, with the
name and address of such person, firm or corporation.
§ 97-4. Possession of license; exhibition.
Every person so engaged in carrying on said business or occupation within
the Borough shall be required to have his said license with him at all times
and shall be required to exhibit the same upon demand of any police officer
or other official of the Borough.
§ 97-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, be punishable by a fine of not more
than $50 and costs and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, by
imprisonment for not more than five days.
Chapter 101
§ 96-6 JUNK DEALERS § 97-5
97:279
LANDFILLS
§ 101-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to regulate the filling of the natural terrain,
the alteration of drainage and the maintenance of artificial surfaces within
the Borough of Glenolden so as to assure and safeguard health, safety,
terrain, ecology and general welfare in the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 101-2. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to fill any land within
the Borough of Glenolden without first securing a permit as hereunder
provided.
§ 101-3. Application for permit.
Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in any filling of land
within the Borough of Glenolden shall apply for a permit in writing to
the Secretary of the said Borough. The application for a permit shall be
accompanied by a plan of the property showing the location of all present
and proposed utilities, ditches, easements, streams, pipes and proposed
levels of fill, together with present elevations and dimensions. The
application shall describe the work to be performed, the materials to be
used and the manner or method of performance.
§ 101-4. Regulations.
The standards for issuance of permit shall be subject to the following
regulations:
A. The fill shall be clean fill from which all roots, vegetation and debris
shall have been removed. Stones larger than six inches in diameter
shall be removed or broken. In no case shall any kind of trash, garbage,
building materials or other debris be used as fill or dumped upon any
property within the Borough of Glenolden.
B. No fill shall be placed in any low area adjoining a watercourse or other
body of water which is subjected to periodic flooding. No fill shall be
placed so as to adversely affect the drainage or flow of any stream or
stormwater within the Borough.
C. Adequate provisions shall be made for erosion and sediment control
and for the proper compaction of all fill, and each layer of fill shall be
inspected by the Borough Engineer prior to compaction. The
compaction of the fill should be done with a sheep's foot roller, rubbertired
roller or a vibratory roller. Other compaction equipment should be
used only after it has been demonstrated that satisfactory results can
be obtained with it. Each layer of compacted fill should be tested to
determine its dry density as per ASTM D1556. The density of each layer
should not be less than 95% of maximum dry density as determined by
§ 97-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 101-4
101:280
§ 101-5. Approval of application; bond.
The application, together with the plan and accompanying data, shall then
be submitted to the Borough Engineer to determine whether all the
provisions hereof shall have been met. Upon approval by the Engineer,
the applicant shall then be directed to post a bond with the Borough of
Glenolden in the amount of at least $5,000, with corporate surety to be
approved by the Borough Solicitor, the conditions of which shall be a full
and complete compliance with this chapter and all terms of the permit,
including the payment of all fees provided for herein.
§ 101-6. Fees.
Upon submission of the application, applicant shall pay to the Borough
an application fee in the sum of $100. In addition, applicant shall be
responsible for all charges of the Borough Engineer in reviewing said
application, plan and accompanying data and in making inspections to
ensure compliance herewith.
§ 101-7. Violations and penalties.79 [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord.
No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this chapter
shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be punishable by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 and costs of prosecution, and
in default of payment of the fine and costs, the violator may be sentenced to
the county jail for a term of not more than 30 days.
Chapter 104
LITTERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 86.
§ 104-1. Sweeping litter into streets.
No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public
place within the Borough of Glenolden the accumulation of litter, debris or
refuse from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or
driveway.
ASTM D1557. The moisture content of the compacted layer should be
not more than 4% less or 2% greater than the optimum moisture as
determined by ASTM D1557.
79.Editor's Note: Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982.
§ 101-4 LITTERING § 104-2
104:281
§ 104-2. Throwing litter from vehicles.
No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit
litter, debris or refuse upon any gutter, street, public place, creek or body of
water within the Borough of Glenolden or upon private property, except in
public or private receptacles.
§ 104-3. Throwing litter into creeks or bodies of water.
No person shall throw, deposit or abandon any litter, debris or refuse in
any creek or body of water within the Borough of Glenolden, except that
this provision shall not prohibit authorized treatment to control or regulate
water purity or aquatic vegetation by such persons having jurisdiction over
such treatment.
§ 104-4. Throwing litter on property; accumulations prohibited.
No person shall throw, deposit or abandon litter on any property within the
Borough of Glenolden, whether public or private, nor shall any property
owner use his land for the dumping of litter or accumulation of litter on his
property.
§ 104-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall be convicted of a violation of any of the provisions of
this chapter before any District Justice shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300, together with costs of prosecution, or to be imprisoned
in the county jail for a term not to exceed 30 days, or both.
Chapter 106
LOITERING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Noise — See Ch. 109.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
§ 106-1. Definitions.
The following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
LOITERING — Any or all of the following: remaining idle essentially in one
location; lingering; spending time idly; loafing or walking about aimlessly in
a vicinity or neighborhood; or "hanging out."
PUBLIC ACCESS PROPERTY — Any public street, alley, sidewalk, park,
playground, ball field, recreation areas, commons, or parking lots; or any
§ 104-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 106-1
104:282
private parking lots open to public use (regardless of the private parking lot
establishment is open or closed for business).
§ 106-2. Certain types of loitering prohibited.
No person shall loiter in any public access property in such manner as to do
any or all of the following:
§ 106-3. Orders by police officer.
Whenever the presence of any person in any public access property is
causing or is likely to cause any of the conditions enumerated in § 106-2 of
this chapter, any police officer may order that person to leave that place. If
that person shall refuse to leave after being ordered to do so by any police
officer or if that person returns and continues to violate the conditions
enumerated in § 106-2 of this chapter after being ordered to leave that place
by any police officer (regardless of the time elapsed from the initial order),
that person shall be in violation of this section.
§ 106-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter, shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of up to $500 and costs of
prosecution or, in default of payment of same, imprisonment for a term not
to exceed 90 days.
§ 106-5. Police officers to act on behalf of Borough.
Any police officer is hereby authorized to act on behalf of the Borough.
Chapter 109
NOISE
A. Create or cause to be created a danger of a breach of the peace;
B. Create or cause to be created any annoyance to any person or persons;
C. Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; and
D. Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in any public
access property as defined in § 106-1 of this chapter. This shall include
the making of unsolicited remarks of any offensive, disgusting, or
insulting nature or which are calculated to annoy or disturb the person
to or in whose hearing they are made.
§ 106-1 LITTERING § 106-5
104:283

ARTICLE I
General Noise
§ 109-1. Definitions and usage.
§ 109-2. Use of sound trucks prohibited.
No person shall operate or cause to be operated any sound truck on the
streets or highways of the Borough for any purpose with sound-amplifying
equipment in operation.
§ 109-3. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person who shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof for each and every violation, be sentenced to pay a fine
not in excess of $300 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
of any such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days,
provided, each day's violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 109-4. through § 109-8. (Reserved)
A. Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
PERSON — Any natural person, firm, corporation, association, club,
partnership, society or any other form of association or organization.
SOUND-AMPLIFYING EQUIPMENT — Any machine or device for the
amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Soundamplifying
equipment" as used herein shall not be construed as
including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by
occupants of the vehicle in which installed, or warning devices on
authorized emergency vehicles, or horns or other warning devices on
other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes.
SOUND TRUCK — Any motor vehicle or horse-drawn vehicle having
mounted thereon or attached thereto any sound-amplifying equipment.
B. Usage. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, and the
masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 109-1 LITTERING § 109-4
104:285

ARTICLE II
Excessive Noise
§ 109-9. Enumeration of unnecessary or excessive noises.
Prohibited noise, within the meaning of this article, is hereby defined to
include the following:
§ 109-10. Exceptions.
None of the terms or prohibitions hereof shall apply to or be enforced
against:
A. For any person at any time to use a horn or other warning device
otherwise than as a reasonable warning or to make any unnecessary or
unreasonable, loud or harsh sound by means of a horn or other warning
device.
B. The playing of any radio, phonograph or any musical instrument in such
a manner or with such volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort
or repose of persons in any office, hospital or any dwelling, hotel or
other type of residence or of any persons in the vicinity thereof.
C. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets so
as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in any
hospital, dwelling, hotel or other type of residence or of any persons in
the vicinity thereof.
D. Permitting any animal, bird or fowl in one's possession or under one's
control to make any frequent or long continued noise of such character
or intensity as to disturb the comfort or repose of any person.
E. The blowing of any steam whistle attached to any stationery boiler,
except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of
fire or danger.
F. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school,
institution of learning, church or court, while the same are in session,
which unreasonably interferes with the workings of sessions thereof
and the making of any other noise so as to annoy the users and/or
occupants of such places or buildings as are herein defined.
G. The use of any drum, loud speaker or other instrument or device for the
purpose of attracting attention to the sale or display of merchandise of
a commercial character.
H. Refuse compacting vehicles. Operating of or permitting to be operated
the compact cycle of the motor vehicle which can compact refuse
between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following day in
residential areas.
A. Any vehicle or personnel of the Borough of Glenolden while engaged
upon necessary public business.
§ 109-9 LITTERING § 109-10
104:287
§ 109-11. Restrctions.
No person shall perform construction, repair, alteration or demolition work
on or make deliveries or cause deliveries to be made to buildings,
structures, streets, alleys, or land, for which work a building permit was or
should have been obtained within any residential district, or within 1,000
feet of any residential district, Mondays through Fridays before 7:00 a.m.
and after 8:00 p.m. and Saturdays, Sundays and federal legal holidays
before 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. Emergency work performed for the
purpose of preventing or alleviating circumstances involving actual or
imminent physical danger and/or property damage, is permitted upon prior
approval of the Borough Manager or the Manager's delegate.
B. Excavations or repairs of bridges, streets or highways by or on behalf of
the Borough of Glenolden during the nighttime, when the public
welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work
during the daytime.
C. Parades with band music on holidays or by civic organizations or by the
public schools or divisions of the public schools.
D. School sports events which may or may not be accompanied by
cheering and/or music.
E. The reasonable use of amplifiers or loud speakers in the course of
public addresses which are noncommercial in character.
F. Fireworks exhibits held under permit by the Borough of Glenolden.
A. No person shall operate or cause to operated any power tools or
equipment (including, but not limited to, a saw, sander, drill, grinder,
garden equipment or tools of like nature) outdoors in any residential
area, or within 1,000 feet of any residential area, from 1/2 hour after
sunset to 7:00 a.m. prevailing time when the following day falls on a
Monday through Friday and to 8:00 a.m. prevailing time when the
following day falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or federal legal holiday.
B. No person shall perform cleaning of grease traps, equipment, or
grounds by way of vacuums, pressure washers or any other equipment,
including any equipment operated by a generator within any residential
district, or within 1,000 feet of any residential district, Mondays
through Fridays before 7:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m. and Saturdays,
Sundays and federal legal holidays before 8:00 a.m. and after 8:00 p.m.
Emergency work performed for the purpose of preventing or alleviating
circumstances involving actual or imminent physical danger and/or
property damage, is permitted upon prior approval of the Borough
Manager or the Manager's delegate.
§ 109-10 GLENOLDEN CODE § 109-12
104:288
§ 109-12. Unnecessary or excessive noise to be considered
disorderly conduct.
The creation, within the Borough of Glenolden, of any unnecessary or
excessive noise or of any noise of such character, intensity or duration as to
be detrimental to the health or life of any individual or in the disturbance
of the public peace and welfare or the aiding and abetting in the creation
of any such noise to continue is hereby prohibited and shall constitute
disorderly conduct under § 121-6.
§ 109-13. Severability.
Should any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, laws or phrase of this
article shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of this article which shall remain in
full force and effect and for this purpose, the provisions of this article are
hereby declared to be severable.
§ 109-14. Repealer.
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
article are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. The Borough
reserves the right at any time by ordinance to amend or otherwise modify
or repeal this article.
§ 109-12 LITTERING § 109-14
104:289
Chapter 112
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Brush, grass and weeds — See Ch. 51.
Burials and interments — See Ch. 59.
Garbage, rubbish and refuse — See Ch. 86
Public health — See Ch. 90.
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Noise — See Ch. 109.
§ 109-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 109-14
112:290
ARTICLE I
Debris From Dwelling Fires
[Adopted 7-26-1906 by Ord. No. 95]
§ 112-1. Removal by lot owner.
It shall not be lawful for any lot owner within the Borough to permit to
remain upon his property debris caused by the destruction by fire of any
dwelling or other building, or such offensive matter as usually accumulates
subsequent thereto, in prejudice to health and cleanliness.
§ 112-2. Removal by Borough; costs and penalty.
If the said owner shall fail to remove such nuisance within a reasonable
time, the time in each case to be fixed by resolution of Council (of which
the owner shall have due notice), the Mayor shall cause the removal of
the nuisance, and the cost of such removal, with a penalty of 20% added
thereto, shall be collected from the owner of the lot in the manner provided
by law.
§ 112-1 NUISANCES § 112-2
112:291

ARTICLE II
Nuisances on Property
[Adopted 10-24-1932 by Ord. No. 299, approved 11-1-1932]
§ 112-3. Noxious or offensive uses. [Added 10-13-1938 by Ord. No.
365, approved 10-31-193880]
No land or structure whatsoever within the Borough shall be occupied or
used for any purpose or in any manner which may be noxious or offensive
to the inhabitants of the Borough or detrimental to the health, cleanliness,
beauty, convenience, comfort or safety of the Borough or of the public.
Any such uses or occupations are hereby declared public and common
nuisances.
§ 112-4. Abatement of nuisances.
Any nuisance as aforesaid existing within the Borough on public or private
property may be summarily abated or removed in any manner deemed
by Borough Council or its representatives to be efficacious by the police
officers or other authorized agents of the Borough Council upon instruction
of the said Council or, upon notice or knowledge of any such nuisance as
aforesaid, the said Council or the Police Committee thereof may require the
removal or abatement of such nuisance by the owner or occupier of any
grounds whereon the same is located or maintained within 48 hours after
service of notice as herein provided. Such notice shall be in writing and
shall specify the nuisance existing and indicate the abatement or removal
required and shall state that, in default of removal or abatement by such
owner or occupier, the Borough may cause the same to be done and collect
the cost thereof, together with a penalty as herein provided. If personal
service cannot be had upon such owner or occupier, service may be made
upon the agent or any adult member of the family of said owner or occupant
or upon his representative or the one for the time being in charge of the said
property or in charge of any place of business of said owner or occupier and,
in default thereof, by posting said notice upon the premises affected for not
less than 72 hours before such abatement or removal. After the expiration of
the aforesaid 48 hours or, if the said property is posted as herein provided,
of the aforesaid 72 hours, the Borough, through its police officers or such
other representatives as Council may designate, may forthwith abate or
remove any such nuisance as aforesaid and thereafter collect the cost of
such abatement or removal, together with a penalty of 20% of such cost,
from the said owner or occupant in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims or by action in assumpsit.
80.Editor's Note: Original Sections 1 and 2 of Ord. No. 299, dealing with junkyards and
slaughterhouses, are now covered by zoning provisions and have been excluded. See Ch.
162, Zoning.
§ 112-3 NUISANCES § 112-5
112:293
§ 112-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
In addition to any other remedy herein provided, any person, firm or
corporation maintaining or assisting in the maintenance of any nuisance as
herein defined and prohibited shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary
proceeding before a District Justice, be punishable by a fine of not less
than $200 nor more than $500 or, in default thereof, by imprisonment for
not over 30 days, for each offense, and thereafter, during any continuance
of said nuisance, by a fine not exceeding $50 for each 24 hours of said
continuance.
§ 112-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § 112-5
112:294
Chapter 114
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
§ 114-1. Designation of base streets.
For the purpose of obtaining a uniform system of numbering, it is assumed
that Chester Avenue runs north and south and that Ashland Avenue runs
east and west. Chester Avenue shall be the dividing line north and south
and Ashland Avenue the dividing line east and west.
§ 114-2. Numbering system.
The numbering will be by blocks or squares, each succeeding block or
square advancing 100 in numbers without regard to the numbers in the
preceding block. The even numbers will be placed on the south and west
sides of the streets and the uneven numbers on the north and east sides.
Numbers will be based on a frontage of 25 feet for each number, unless it
shall be found necessary to vary this on account of circumstances.
§ 114-3. Numbering by owners.
All dwellings and other buildings throughout the Borough must be
numbered by the owners thereof in accordance with the above provisions.
The numbers must be put up securely and maintained in such position as to
be plainly visible from the sidewalk in front of the building.
§ 114-4. Violations and penalties; cost of numbering. [Amended
12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
All buildings must be numbered as above provided, and any person or
persons neglecting or refusing to place the proper numbers on his or her
property within 10 days after the delivery of written notice to the premises
or the posting of written notice thereon will be subject to a fine of not
less than $5 nor more than $25, provided that, upon the owner's neglect
or refusal to place the proper numbers on a building as herein provided,
the Borough shall provide for the numbering of the building, and the owner
shall be liable for the expense thereof, in addition to being subject to the
fine herein provided.
Chapter 117
PARKING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Payment of fines — See Ch. 74. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
§ 112-5 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 114-4
114:295

ARTICLE I
Short Title; Legislative Intent
§ 117-1. Title.
This chapter may be referred to as the "Glenolden Borough Parking
Ordinance."
§ 117-2. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to maintain the aesthetic character of the
Borough and to avoid the secondary effects associated with unregulated
parking. It is further the purpose of this chapter to promote the health,
safety and welfare of the residents of the Borough by effective and
reasonable parking regulation.
§ 117-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-2
114:297

ARTICLE II
Off-Street Parking Regulations
§ 117-3. General requirement.
As a general requirement, each use in the Borough shall provide sufficient
off-street parking area to serve its users.
§ 117-4. Minimum standards.
A. Subject to the general requirement for off-street parking, off-street
parking space with proper and safe access from a street shall be
provided in all districts in the amounts indicated below. Such parking
space shall be provided on any lot on which a dwelling is hereafter
erected or converted or, in the case of any other use, on the lot on which
any main building is hereafter erected or converted. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent the collective provision of offstreet
parking facilities for two or more buildings or uses on the same
lot, provided that the total of such off-street parking facilities provided
collectively shall not be less than the sum of the requirements of the
individual buildings or uses computed separately. In no case shall the
number of parking spaces provided or the area devoted to parking be
less than the minimum requirements of this section. A parking space for
the purpose of this section shall be 9 1/2 feet by 18 feet. For
nonresidential buildings and uses, parking lots shall be lined to show
access lanes and parking spaces. No part of this section shall be
construed as to permit any use or building otherwise not permissible.
B. Number of spaces.
Use Number of Spaces
Dwellings (other than
apartments)
3 spaces per dwelling unit
Apartment dwellings 1 1/2 spaces per one-bedroom or
studio apartment dwelling unit and
2 for each other type of apartment
dwelling units. In addition to these
requirements, there shall be 1
space per 2 employees on the shift
of the greatest employment
Tourist, rooming or
boardinghouses
1 space for each short-term rental
unit, plus the normal requirements
for dwelling units. In addition to
these requirements, there shall be
1 space per 2 employees on the
shift of the greatest employment
§ 117-3 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-4
114:299
Use Number of Spaces
Hotel, motel or inn 1 space per guest room, plus 1
space per 2 employees on the shift
of the greatest employment. The
parking requirements for other
facilities, such as restaurants, shall
be in addition
Theater, auditorium, stadium,
assembly hall, gymnasium or
recreation building
1 space per 4 seats, or 1 space per
150 square feet of floor area,
whichever is applicable to the
facility
Indoor or outdoor commercial
recreation
1 space for each 150 square feet of
building floor area and/or ground
area devoted to such use or 1
space per 4 seats, whichever is
applicable to the facility
Churches 1 space per 5 seats
Eating and drinking places 1 space per 3 seating
accommodations, plus 1 space per
2 employees on the shift of the
greatest employment
Retail stores 1 space per 200 square feet of
sales area, plus 1 space per 2
employees on the shift of the
greatest employment
Offices, clinics and financial
institutions
1 space per 300 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space per 2
employees on the shift of the
greatest employment. Drive-in
banking facilities must allow for
the safe and convenient stacking of
8 cars
Wholesale sales and storage 1 space per 400 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space per 2
employees on the shift of the
greatest employment
Industry 1 space per employee on the shift
of the greatest employment
Schools 1 space per 20 seats in an
elementary school; 1 space per 10
seats in all other schools
Private kindergarten, child
institutional, or day-care facility
1 space per 500 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space per
employee on the shift of the
greatest employment
§ 117-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 117-4
114:300
§ 117-5. Driveways and parking areas; construction standards and
requirements.
All driveways and parking areas shall be constructed of an approved surface
(concrete, bituminous concrete or interlocking paving blocks), as per
Borough specifications, in a workmanlike and reasonably skilled manner. All
driveways and parking areas shall be maintained in good condition and shall
be of a dustless, all-weather and all-season quality.
Use Number of Spaces
Motor vehicle service station or
public garage
1 space per 150 square feet of
floor or ground area devoted to
repair, sales or service facilities
Car wash establishment A waiting or stacking area on the
lot for incoming automobiles,
accessible to the entrance end of
the washing equipment, to
accommodate at least 20
automobiles for each lane provided
in the washing area, plus an area
on the lot beyond the exit end of
the washing equipment for at least
8 automobiles for each lane
provided in the washing area; also,
1 space per 3 employees based on
the maximum number of
employees at any one time, but in
no case less than 3 spaces
Hospital, sanatorium, or nursing
home
1 space per 3 beds intended for
patients (except bassinets or beds
in student nurses' quarters), plus 1
space per medical staff member,
plus 1 space for each 2 employees
on the shift of the greatest
employment
Bowling alley 5 spaces per alley
Social, fraternal, social service,
union, and civil organization
buildings
1 space per 100 square feet of
assembly area
Funeral home 1 space per 60 square feet of floor
area available for seating or public
assembly, plus 1 space per
employee
All other uses 1 space per 200 square feet of
floor area, plus 1 space per 2
employees on the shift of the
greatest employment
§ 117-4 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-6
114:301
§ 117-6. Driveways and parking areas; width restriction in the Low
Density District R-1.
No driveway or parking areas shall be more than 10 feet in width in front
of the front building line nor more than 20 feet in width behind the front
building line. A driveway in front of the front building line may, however,
be up to 20 feet in width with the approval of the Parking Permits Review
Committee. A driveway may exceed this width limitation only insofar as it
is required for access to a multivehicle garage. Each residential building
(excluding accessory buildings) shall have no more than one driveway, and
all parking spaces must be a part of the driveway. Common driveways
for the use of two residential buildings detached from one another are
prohibited.
§ 117-7. Driveways and parking areas; width restriction in the
Medium Density District R-2.
No driveway or parking areas shall be more than 10 feet in width in front
of the front building line nor more than 20 feet in width behind the front
building line. A driveway in front of the front building line may, however,
be up to 20 feet in width with the approval of the Parking Permits Review
Committee. A driveway may exceed this width limitation only insofar as it
is required for access to a multivehicle garage. Each residential building
(excluding accessory buildings) shall have no more than one driveway, and
all parking spaces must be a part of the driveway.
§ 117-8. Parking prohibited on certain surfaces.
In no case shall a person park a motor vehicle on a walkway, sidewalk or an
unapproved surface, including but not limited to grass or a lawn or lawns.
§ 117-9. Parking prohibited in places where it would obstruct a
means of ingress or egress.
Parking of a motor vehicle is prohibited in those places where such parking
would obstruct a means of ingress or egress to a building.
§ 117-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 117-9
114:302
ARTICLE III
Special On-Street Parking Permits
§ 117-10. Parking prohibited during certain hours.
In addition to all other parking requirements, parking on the streets,
highways and roads in the Borough shall be prohibited between the hours
of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m., unless the owner of the vehicle has obtained a
valid special on-street parking permit, as provided in this article.
§ 117-11. Posting of signs.
Signs indicating the general prohibition on parking on the streets, highways
and roads of the Borough between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. shall
be posted in a reasonable manner. The absence of a sign or signs indicating
such a prohibition on a street, highway or road of the Borough shall not
excuse a violation of this chapter.
§ 117-12. Parking Permits Review Committee.
A. The Council shall appoint a committee to be known as the "Parking
Permits Review Committee" (hereinafter "Committee"), which shall
consider applications from owners or lessees of motor vehicles for
special on-street parking permits.
B. The Parking Permits Review Committee shall consist of three members
of Council: the Chairman of the Police and Fire Committee, the
Chairman of the Building and Zoning Committee and the Chairman of
the Highways and Lights Committee. The Council shall also appoint an
alternate, who shall be the President of Council. Whenever a member or
members of the Committee are not present at a meeting of the
Committee, the alternate, if he is present at that meeting, shall have the
power to vote on any matter arising before the Committee and shall
continue to enjoy such power so long as there is such an absence.
C. The Committee shall have the power to appoint from its membership a
Chairman and any other officers which it may from time to time deem
necessary and proper. The Committee shall have the power to adopt
rules of procedure; provided, however, that in any case, a quorum shall
consist of two members, each member having one vote on matters
before the Committee, and that parking permits shall only be issued
upon a majority vote. For the purposes of this section, the alternate,
when there is an absence as described in this section, counts toward
the calculation of a quorum and the required majority.
D. Meetings of the Committee shall take place at those times and places
that are designated for the meetings of the Police and Fire Committee,
the Building and Zoning Committee and the Highways and Lights
Committee.
§ 117-10 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-12
114:303
§ 117-13. Permit applications.
A permit application may not be considered by the Parking Permits Review
Committee unless the applicant:
§ 117-14. Considerations.
E. The Committee shall consider applications appropriately filed in the
Borough Office within one month of their receipt. Decisions of the
Committee shall be in writing and shall be transmitted to the Borough
Secretary in a timely fashion. The Borough Secretary, in a timely
fashion, shall notify the applicant of the decision rendered by the
Committee.
A. Completes and signs a special on-street parking permit form;
B. Provides proof of the number of drivers and the number of motor
vehicles licensed or registered, respectively, at the address; and
C. Pays the appropriate application fee.
A. Before issuing a special on-street parking permit, the Parking Permits
Review Committee shall determine that:
(1) The owner or lessee of the subject motor vehicle has demonstrated
a hardship; and
(2) The issuance of the permit would be feasible given the
circumstances.
B. Hardship shall not be demonstrated unless the applicant is able to
prove an inability to reasonably provide or to reasonably create suitable
off-street parking to suit his and his household's needs. In addition to
the general rule for hardship provided in this section, the Parking
Permits Review Committee shall apply the following principles to the
subject address or property:
(1) If there would not be a hardship but for the existence of a motor
vehicle or motor vehicles in excess of the number of licensed
drivers at the address, then there is no hardship.
(2) If there would not be a hardship but for the existence of a boat,
recreational vehicle or all-terrain vehicle at the address, then there
is no hardship.
(3) If there would be no hardship if a garage not available for parking
at the address was available for the parking of an automobile or
automobiles, then there is no hardship.
(4) If there would be no hardship but for the existence of any brokendown
or otherwise nonfunctional vehicle at the address, then there
is no hardship.
§ 117-12 GLENOLDEN CODE § 117-14
114:304
§ 117-15. Multiple special on-street parking permits.
The Parking Permits Review Committee shall have the power to grant
no more than one parking permit per household. Permits in excess of
one per household must be approved by both the Parking Permits Review
Committee and Council. The requirements of hardship and feasibility as
provided for in the preceding section shall be applied by both the Parking
Permits Review Committee and Council in cases of multiple permits.
§ 117-16. Duration of permit; fee; occasional use permits.
Each special on-street parking permit shall be issued for a single calendar
year or calendar quarter. The fee for each special on-street parking permit
shall be $60 per annum or $15 per quarter. Persons desiring to use permits
only for occasional use may apply for an occasional use on-street parking
permit. The yearly fee for an occasional use on-street parking permit shall
be $30. Occasional use on-street parking permits may only be used for 150
days of the subject calendar year. In all cases, a nonrefundable application
fee of $5 shall be made at the time of the filing of the permit application,
in order to cover processing costs associated with such permit applications.
Senior citizens shall receive a discount of 50% on all rates in this section,
except for the nonrefundable application fee.
§ 117-17. Permit rules.
The special on-street parking permit shall designate the name of the person
to whom and the vehicle to which the permit is used. The permit may be
transferred to another vehicle owned or leased by the original permittee,
upon written notification to the Borough Secretary and upon the approval
of the Borough Secretary. Permits are not transferable between persons.
The permit shall be prominently displayed on the vehicle in an area as to
be designated by Council. The permit is the property of the Borough of
Glenolden and shall be surrendered upon demand.
§ 117-18. Restrictions on issuance and use of permits.
The following restrictions on the issuance and use of special on-street
parking permits shall in all cases apply:
(5) If there would be no hardship but for the existence of a basketball
hoop or basketball court or other outdoor recreational facility at
the address, then there is no hardship.
C. In determining whether an off-street parking permit would be feasible
given the circumstances, the Committee shall consider any factor
affecting the health, safety and welfare of the Borough.
A. During a snow or other emergency or during a snow removal operation,
all permits shall become temporarily invalid. The Borough is authorized
to tow any car parked in violation of this rule. The violator shall be
responsible for all towing, storage and service charges.
§ 117-14 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-18
114:305
§ 117-19. Revocation of permits.
Upon a violation of the rules of this chapter or upon a showing of changed
circumstances going to issues of hardship or feasibility, the Parking Permits
Review Committee may, after a hearing, revoke such permit or permits as
is necessary and proper. After such a hearing and in the case of a rules
violation, Council may direct the commencement of legal action against the
permit holder.
§ 117-20. Violation and penalties. [Amended 1-15-2019 by Ord. No.
2128, approved 1-15-2014]
In addition to any other penalties or legal actions provided by this chapter,
violators of this chapter shall be subject to a fine of not less than $15 nor
more than $1,000. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 117-21. Enforcement.
Enforcement of this chapter shall be by the Police Department in the
Borough and/or the Code Enforcement Officer.
§ 117-22. Outdoor recreational vehicles. [Added 3-19-2013 by Ord.
No. 2095, approved 3-19-2013]
Off-street parking regulations for outdoor recreational vehicles shall be as
follows:
B. No commercial vehicles shall be eligible for a permit.
C. No motor homes or all-terrain vehicles shall be eligible for a permit.
D. No motorcycles or motorbikes shall be eligible for a permit.
E. Since landlords are to be responsible for providing adequate parking
space for their tenants, no permit shall be issued for any tenant of any
dwelling or apartment in the Borough.
A. No parking or parking space shall be provided in the front yard of any
residential use.
B. The outdoor parking of recreational vehicles (including campers, popup
tents, motor homes, snowmobiles, boats and their trailers) shall be
permitted in the R-1 and R-2 District only if:
(1) It occurs on an all-weather surface such as asphalt or crushed
stone.
(2) It is located off street and in the rearmost 50% of the lot.
(3) It is located at least five feet from any side or rear property line.
(4) It is not inhabited.
§ 117-18 GLENOLDEN CODE § 117-22
114:306
(5) Each vehicle/boat boat trailer must have current registration and
insurance.
(6) Each must be kept in immediately usable condition.
§ 117-22 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 117-22
114:307
Chapter 118
PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Animals — See Ch. 43.
Curfew — See Ch. 66.
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Peace and good order — See Ch. 121.
§ 117-22 GLENOLDEN CODE § 117-22
114:308
ARTICLE I
Regulations
[Adopted 6-12-1986 by Ord. No. 909, approved 6-12-1986.81]
§ 118-1. Description of park properties.
The parks of the Borough of Glenolden shall consist of the real property
acquired by the Borough by deed dated September 1, 1933, recorded in
Deed Book No. 975 at Page 24, and the real property similarly acquired by
deed dated May 7, 1934, recorded in Deed Book No. 987 at Page 350, all
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Delaware County and
known generally as "Glenolden Park."
§ 118-2. General rules and regulations.
The parks of the Borough of Glenolden and all park property, equipment
and facilities may be used only in accordance with the following rules and
regulations:
A. Park hours. The park is open for use only between the hours of 9:00
a.m. and 9:00 p.m.
B. Fireplaces and grills. Fireplaces and grills in the park may be used only
by those individuals holding a valid permit issued by the Borough of
Glenolden and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:30 p.m.
C. Tennis courts. Play at Borough tennis courts is limited to one hour per
group, weather permitting.
D. Ball fields. Ball fields may be used only by those holding a valid permit
issued by the Borough of Glenolden.
E. Park areas. No motorized vehicles, bicycles, scooters, skates or other
similar vehicles or devices are permitted in any park areas.
F. Ballplaying. No ballplaying is permitted in any park areas other than on
designated ball fields.
G. Littering. Littering anywhere in the park is prohibited.
H. Alcoholic beverages. The use, consumption or possession of alcoholic
beverages anywhere in the park is prohibited.
I. Animals. No animals are permitted in the park.
J. Vandalism. Vandalism to park land. trees, property or facilities is
prohibited.
81.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Ch. 118, Parks, adopted 7-23-1940 as
Ord. No. 358, approved 7-23-1940, as amended.
§ 118-1 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 118-3
114:309
§ 118-3. Posting of rules and regulations.
The Property and Park Committee may post copies of the rules and
regulations set forth in § 118-2 or summaries of the same at such places in
the park as said Committee shall designate. The failure to post said signs
shall not constitute a defense in any prosecution under this article.
§ 118-4. Violations and penalties.
Violation of any of the rules or regulations set forth in § 118-2 shall be
punishable, upon conviction before a District Justice, by a fine of not less
than $25 nor more than $100, and costs of prosecution, and restitution
in the case of damage to Borough parks or park property, equipment or
facilities and, upon default in payment of the same, by imprisonment for not
more than 30 days.
§ 118-5. Guiding standards and purpose.
The rules and regulations adopted in this article are deemed reasonable and
proper police measures in the opinion of the Property and Park Committee
and the Borough Council and are intended to promote peace and order
and to protect property, trees and shrubbery and to regulate all uses and
activities in the park.
§ 118-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 118-5
114:310
ARTICLE II
Use and Fees
[Adopted 5-20-2008 by Ord. No. 2057, approved 5-20-2008]
§ 118-6. Intent.
The regulations and prohibitions of this article shall govern, regulate and
restrict the conduct of all persons in the public parks and playgrounds of
the Borough, including but not limited to all parks (including the gazebo).
§ 118-7. Park use and fee regulations.
§ 118-8. Permits.
Permits for the use of parks shall be issued by the Borough Secretary (or
other Borough designee as established by Resolution by Borough Council)
A. The gazebo may not be used by groups of any size without a permit that
has been obtained in advance.
B. No groups of 10 or more shall be allowed in any park, except the
gazebo, unless a permit has been obtained in advance.
C. In addition to permit application fees which may be set from time to
time by Borough Council by Resolution, there shall be a two-hundredfifty-
dollar cleanup deposit for residents of Glenolden Borough and a
five-hundred-dollar deposit for nonresident applicants paid to the
Borough in advance of the issuance of any permit for any park including
the gazebo. (The cleanup deposit may, from time to time, be set by
Borough Council upon resolution.)
D. If by 9:00 a.m. the day after the permitted use of any park there
remains any trash or debris not cleaned up to the sole satisfaction of the
Borough duly designated park inspector, said cleanup deposit shall be
forfeited in full.
E. In addition to the above fees, deposits and the like, if any group consists
of 10 or more persons, there shall be an additional park guard fee of
$15 per hour for the duration of the permitted event. (The park guard
fee may, from time to time, be set by Borough Council upon resolution.)
F. Any damage caused to the Borough's parks, including the gazebo, shall
be the responsibility of the permit applicant and/or the attendees jointly
and severally. The Borough is authorized to seek reimbursement from
said person(s) plus costs of collection, legal fees and interest from the
date of damage.
G. All other rules and regulations pertaining to any of the Borough's parks,
including the gazebo, shall apply to any permitted events.
H. All permit applicants shall provide proof of sufficient insurance
coverage as may be required by the Park Committee.
§ 118-6 NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS § 118-8
114:311
upon written application. A permit shall be issued by the Secretary after an
applicant meets the requirements of the Park Committee and provides proof
of sufficient liability insurance as determined by the Park Committee.
§ 118-9. Enforcement.
The Police Department or any authorized agent of the Borough of Glenolden
is authorized to enforce this article.
§ 118-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article, upon conviction
thereof before a District Justice, shall be sentenced to pay a fine not in
excess of the amount of $600, to be paid for the use of the Borough of
Glenolden, with costs of prosecution, or to undergo imprisonment in the
county jail for a period of not more than 30 days, or both.
§ 118-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § 118-10
114:312
Chapter 121
PEACE AND GOOD ORDER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Curfew — See Ch. 66.
Firearms — See Ch. 77.
Fireworks — See Ch. 82.
Noise — See Ch. 109.
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
Parks — See Ch. 118.
§ 118-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 118-10
121:313

ARTICLE I
Protection of Property
[Adopted 6-11-1959 by Ord. No. 574, approved 6-11-1959]
§ 121-1. Tampering with or defacing public property.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever, or
tamper with or deface, any public property of the Borough of Glenolden, or
any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work, building, streetlight, fire hydrant
or water or gas stop box on any of the streets, alleys, parks or other public
grounds in the Borough.
§ 121-2. Interfering with survey stakes or monuments.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Glenolden, made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or
set, or caused to be done by the authorities of said Borough in any survey
of or in any street, alley or public ground in the Borough, to evidence the
elevation, line, grade, location, corner or angle of any public street, alley,
sidewalk, curb, gutter, sewer or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 121-3. Disturbing warning signs or barricades.
No person shall willfully or maliciously destroy or move, remove, deface,
obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade erected by the
authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or corporation doing work
by permission of the authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys,
sidewalks or bridges in the Borough as a warning of danger.
§ 121-4. Removing materials from streets.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone or other material from any
of the streets, alleys, parks or other public grounds in the Borough.
§ 121-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 nor more
than $500 and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days, provided that the fact
that a violator has been penalized, after hearing as herein provided, shall
not preclude the Borough or other injured party from taking proper legal
action to recover damages resulting from such violation.
§ 121-1 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 121-5
121:315

ARTICLE II
Disorderly Conduct
[Adopted 3-13-1969 by Ord. No. 688, approved 3-13-1969]
§ 121-6. Prohibited conduct.
Disorderly conduct is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Glenolden.
"Disorderly conduct within the boundaries of the Borough of Glenolden" is
hereby defined to be any action, word or conduct which causes or tends
to cause a breach of the peace or good order of the Borough, or which
causes or tends to cause any danger, discomfort or annoyance to the public
or to any individual or group of individuals, including the inhabitants of the
Borough and persons in or upon the Borough thoroughfares or elsewhere
within the boundaries of the Borough, and such action, word or conduct
shall include quarreling, fighting, begging, intoxication, lewd or indecent
language or action, all loud, boisterous or riotous conduct and the making
of unnecessary noises to the disturbance of the public.
§ 121-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person or persons violating the provisions of this article, upon
conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine of not less than $50 nor exceeding $300 and costs of prosecution and, in
default of payment thereof, the defendant may be sentenced and committed
to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30 days for each and every
offense.
§ 121-6 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 121-7
121:317

ARTICLE III
Alcoholic Beverages
[Adopted 11-9-1978 by Ord. No. 813, approved 11-9-1978]
§ 121-8. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ALCOHOL — Ethyl alcohol of any degree or proof originally produced by
the distillation of any fermented liquid, whether rectified or diluted with
or without water, whatever may be the origin thereof, and shall include
synthetic ethyl alcohol but shall not mean or include ethyl alcohol, whether
or not diluted, that has been denatured or otherwise rendered unfit for
beverage purposes.
PERSON — Any individual, whether a resident or nonresident of the
Borough of Glenolden, and whether male or female.
PUBLIC WAY OR PLACE — Every way or place of whatever nature located
within the Borough of Glenolden open to the use of the public.
§ 121-9. Consumption in public way or place.
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any beverage containing any
percentage of alcohol in or upon any public way or place within the Borough
of Glenolden.
§ 121-10. Open containers as prima facie evidence.
The possession of an open container containing a beverage with any
percentage of alcohol, in or upon any public way or place in the Borough of
Glenolden, shall be prima facie evidence of consumption of such beverage
in violation of this article.
§ 121-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person found guilty, after hearing before a District Justice having
jurisdiction within the Borough of Glenolden, of violating any of the
provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a
fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 for the first offense and not less
than $50 nor more than $300 for the second and each subsequent offense
in any three-hundred-sixty-five-day period and/or a term of imprisonment in
the Delaware County Prison not to exceed 30 days.
§ 121-8 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 121-11
121:319

ARTICLE IV
Graffiti
[Adopted 3-16-1999 by Ord. No. 1066, approved 3-16-1999]
§ 121-12. Legislative intent.
It is the purpose of this article to maintain the aesthetic character of the
Borough and alleviate certain secondary effects of unremoved graffiti.
§ 121-13. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, "graffiti" shall be any inscription, slogan or
drawing crudely scratched or scribbled on property.
§ 121-14. Required graffiti removal.
§ 121-15. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
A. The owner of any property shall remove any graffiti from such property
within 96 hours of graffiti's appearance.
B. For the purposes of this section, "property" shall include, but not be
limited to, structures encroaching on any public right-of-way, including
but not limited to newsboxes, newsstands, utility poles, public
telephone, tree planters and other items of street furniture.
A. Upon discovery of graffiti on any property, the Code Enforcement
Officer may issue a notice to the owner of such property, or to a
responsible agent of such owner, that the graffiti must be removed
within 96 hours. After 96 hours have elapsed from the issuance of such
notice, the Code Enforcement Officer may issue a notice of violation to
any person in violation of this article, or to a responsible agent of such
person.
B. The penalty for a violation of any provision of this article shall be a fine
of not less than $100 nor more than $500 or imprisonment for not less
than 30 days nor more than 90 days, or both.
C. If a property owner fails to remove graffiti within seven calendar days
after a notice of violation has been issued pursuant to Subsection B, the
Borough may proceed to remove the graffiti itself or by contract, and
the property owner shall be responsible for the costs of removal plus all
related administrative costs plus 10% of the total of all costs. Notice of
that fact shall be provided the property owner at the same time and in
the same manner as the notice of violation is issued pursuant to
Subsection B. A bill for such costs of removal shall be delivered to the
property owner, proprietor or other responsible agent, and the Borough
may file a lien against the property in the amount of such costs. Liability
for costs of removal under this Subsection C shall be in addition to
liability for any fine imposed under Subsection B.
§ 121-12 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 121-15
121:321
D. A property owner who fails to remove graffiti from multiple structures
or properties shall be considered to have committed separate offenses
and shall be subject to separate notices, notices of violations, fines,
removal costs and other enforcement actions.
§ 121-15 GLENOLDEN CODE § 121-15
121:322
Chapter 124
PEDDLING AND SOLICITING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Circuses and carnivals — See Ch. 63.
Junk dealers — See Ch. 97.
Noise — See Ch. 109.
§ 124-1. License required.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, partnerships or corporations,
either as principal or agent, to sell or offer for sale within the Borough
of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, as hawker, peddler, transient
merchant or agent, any fruits, groceries, teas, garden, farm or dairy
products or any other form of domestic goods, wares or merchandise
without having first obtained a license from the Borough Secretary so to do
and paying a fee as set forth in § 124-2.
§ 124-2. Waiting period; investigation; fees. [Amended 4-8-1976 by
Ord. No. 791, approved 4-8-1976; 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2067,
approved 11-17-2009]
Prior to the issuance of any license, a thirty-day waiting period is hereby
established, during which time the applicant and the application shall be
investigated by the Borough of Glenolden Police Department, and at the end
of said thirty-day period, the Borough shall grant or deny the issuance of
a license. The license fee as required by § 124-1 of this chapter shall be
set forth by resolution of Borough Council from time to time. In addition,
each applicant shall pay an additional license fee of $150 for each employee,
helper or partner of the applicant who will be peddling or soliciting within
the Borough of Glenolden. NOTE: The Borough is free to change the fee as
indicated as it is simply an example.
§ 124-3. Application for license; issuance; display.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary to obtain from each applicant
for license his or her name, age, occupation, address, an accurate personal
description of the applicant and a sample or a full description of the article
to be sold, which must be submitted for inspection, and if a license is
granted, the Borough Secretary shall issue to the licensee a card setting
forth the name, age, occupation, address and description of the licensee.
Said license shall be nontransferable and personal, and the license card
shall be carried by a licensee when offering goods, wares or merchandise
for sale in the Borough and must be shown upon request to any police
officer or other official of the Borough.
§ 121-15 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 124-4
121:323
§ 124-4. Refusal of license.
The Borough Secretary may refuse a license for the sale of any goods, wares
or merchandise which it would not be lawful to sell in a store in the Borough
or which in the Secretary's judgment would be injurious to the health or
morals of the residents of the Borough.
§ 124-5. Disposition of fees.
All moneys derived from the issuance of such licenses shall be forthwith
paid to the Borough Treasurer for the use of the Borough.
§ 124-6. Licenses to veterans and charitable organizations.
Licenses shall be issued without cost to any honorably discharged soldier,
sailor or marine of the military or naval services of the United States of
America or any legal charitable organization, upon compliance by such
applicant with the provisions of the Acts of April 8, 1867, P.L. 50, and May
17, 1921, P.L. 895.82
§ 124-7. Hours of operation; fingerprinting.
Any license granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall
be effective only during the hours of 9:00 a.m. to 7:00 p.m., prevailing time.
The Chief of Police is hereby ordered to require applicants to give him their
fingerprints, which the Chief of Police shall check for criminal records of the
applicants.
§ 124-8. Licensing of farmers.
All farmers vending exclusively the produce of their own farms shall be
required to appear in person before the Borough Secretary and satisfy
the Secretary under oath or affirmation that they are farmers and sell
exclusively the produce of their own farms. If and when the Secretary is so
satisfied, a license shall be issued to said applicant without charge therefor.
§ 124-9. Cancellation of license.
The Secretary may cancel without notice or refuse to issue any license
when, in the Secretary's judgment, the quality or price of the goods offered
for sale or the practice or methods employed or the terms thereof are such
that fraud and deception may be practiced on, or injury or loss may be
suffered by, residents, and in the event of such cancellation or refusal of
license, the amount paid or unused portion thereof shall be refunded by the
Treasurer, who is hereby authorized so to do.
82.Editor's Note: Said provisions were repealed: 1992, Nov. 24, P.L. 717, No. 108, § 3.
§ 124-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 124-10
121:324
§ 124-10. Change of address of licensee.
It shall be the duty of each and every licensee under this chapter who
shall have changed his place of residence to appear in person before the
Secretary within a period of not more than 10 days from the date of such
change of residence and to give notice of his new address. Such change of
address shall thereupon be forthwith recorded upon the original application
for the license and upon the licensee's identification card.
§ 124-11. Annoying sounds or loudspeakers.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall hawk or cry his
wares upon any of the streets or sidewalks of the Borough, nor shall he use
any loudspeaker or horn or any other device for announcing his presence by
which the public is annoyed.
§ 124-12. Parking on streets.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall park any vehicle
upon any of the streets or alleys of the Borough in order to sort, rearrange
or clean any of his goods, wares or merchandise; nor may any such person
place or deposit any refuse upon any of such streets or alleys; nor may any
such person maintain or keep a street or curbstone market by parking any
vehicle upon any street or alley in the Borough for longer than necessary in
order to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity.
§ 124-13. Use of fixed locations.
No person licensed as a peddler under this chapter shall occupy any fixed
location upon any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the Borough for the
purpose of peddling with or without any stand or counter.
§ 124-14. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-8-1976 by Ord. No.
791, approved 4-8-1976; 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867,
approved 12-9-1982]
Any person or persons who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof before any District Justice of Delaware County,
Pennsylvania, be subject to a fine of not less than $200 nor more than $300
and costs of prosecution for such offense and, upon default in payment of
the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30
days.
§ 124-15. Expiration of license. [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No.
2067, approved 11-17-2009]
Any license issued pursuant to this chapter shall expire on December 31
of the calendar year during which the license was issued regardless of the
license’s commencement date.
§ 124-10 PEACE AND GOOD ORDER § 124-16
121:325
§ 124-16. Additional rules of conduct. [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord.
No. 2067, approved 11-17-2009]
In addition to the foregoing, all licensees offering for sale any ice cream
or food product, water ices, candy, etc., shall observe the following specific
requirements:
Chapter 127
PLUMBING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch 54.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Sewers — See Ch. 135.
§ 127-1. Adoption of standards.
The Building Officials and Code Administrators Basic/National Plumbing
Code of 1984, Sixth Edition, and all future editions as well as all
supplements to and revisions of any edition, is hereby adopted as the
Plumbing Code of the Borough of Glenolden, and all of the terms and
provisions of the BOCA Basic/National Plumbing Code, 1984, and all future
A. No bells, whistles, horns or other noise-making devices shall be used for
vending purposes.
B. No vending shall be permitted from vehicles located on state highways.
C. No product shall be sold or dispensed to any child who must cross any
street or highway to the vehicle from which products are sold or
dispensed unless such child is accompanied by and under the
immediate supervision and protection of an adult and such child is
returned across such street or highway in the same manner before such
vehicle shall leave the immediate location from which products are sold
or dispensed. The driver of such vehicle shall not leave any area in
which he has sold or dispensed any product until all empty cartons,
paper containers or other waste materials originating from said vehicle
have been removed and placed in a container inside said vehicle.
D. No vending shall be conducted in any area zoned commercial or within
100 yards thereof or within 100 yards of any school, church or public
building or park.
E. No vending shall be conducted within a distance of 75 feet of the radius
curve of any street or highway intersection or from any other location
which may obstruct the normal flow of traffic.
F. All vending trucks/vehicles shall be occupied by two attendants at all
times during hours of operation.
§ 124-16 GLENOLDEN CODE § 127-1
127:326
editions as well as all supplements to and revisions of an edition, are hereby
incorporated herein and adopted and made a part hereof, as if fully set
out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions, deletions and changes
prescribed in § 127-2 of this chapter.
§ 127-2. Additions, insertions and changes.
The following sections of the BOCA Basic/National Plumbing Code of 1984,
Sixth Edition, and all future editions as well as all supplements to and
revisions of any edition are hereby revised to read as follows:
100.1 Title: These regulations shall be known as the "Plumbing Code of
the Borough of Glenolden," hereafter referred to as "this code."
104.1 Continuation: The legal use and occupancy of any structure
existing on January 10, 1985, or for which it had been heretofore approved,
may be continued without change except as may be specifically covered
in this code or deemed necessary by the Plumbing Official for the general
safety and welfare of the occupants and the public.
114.2 Fee Schedule: The permit fees for all plumbing work shall be as
indicated in the following schedule. [Amended 5-12-1988 by Ord. No.
930, approved 5-12-1988]
Plumbing permits Fee
Registration (per year) $50
Additional permits required for the following:
Water service $25
Gas or electric domestic hot-water heaters (new,
replacement or change of service)
$15
Oil burners (new, replacement or change of service) $25
Garbage disposal $10
Existing residential properties:
Replacement of 3 fixtures or fewer $25
Each additional fixture replaced in excess of 3 fixtures $5
Curb trap or replacement or repair of four-inch sewer line
or tie-in (street opening fees set forth hereinafter are
additional):
To curbline $25
To main sewer line $50
Installation of new sewer line (street opening fees set forth
hereinafter are additional)
$50
New residential properties:
Installation of 5 fixtures or fewer $25
Each additional fixture installed in excess of 5 fixtures $5
§ 127-1 PLUMBING § 127-2
127:327
Plumbing permits Fee
Installation of new sewer line (street opening fees set forth
hereinafter are additional)
$50
New and/or existing buildings or portions thereof not
previously covered, including but not limited to duplexes,
multifamily, commercial, institutional and/or industrial:
For each living unit and/or each building use unit, flat fee
(following fees are additional)
$50
For each fixture and/or fixture waste inlet in each living
unit and/or each building use unit
$5
Water service and distribution (hot- and cold-water piping)
for each living unit and/or each building use unit
$10
Installation of new or replacement sewer line or tie-in
(street opening fees set forth hereinafter are additional):
To curbline $25
To main sewer line $50
Street openings (following fees include the cost of restoration
pursuant to Borough regulations by contractor selected by
Borough), not in excess of 2 feet in width by the following
lengths:
Up to 3 feet $300
From 3 feet up to 5 feet $400
From 5 feet up to 10 feet $500
From 10 feet up to 15 feet $600
From 15 feet up to 20 feet $700
From 20 feet up to 25 feet $800
From 25 feet up to 30 feet $900
From 30 feet up to 40 feet $1,050
From 40 feet up to 50 feet $1,250
In excess of 50 feet, for each additional foot $25
Public or semipublic swimming pools [license is due each
year (prior to opening)]:
Inspection fee and license $100
§ 127-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 127-2
127:328
117.4 Penalties: Any person who shall violate a provision of this code
or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements thereof or who shall
install plumbing work in violation of an approved plan or directive of the
Plumbing Official or of a permit or certificate issued under the provisions
of this code shall be guilty of a summary offense, punishable by a fine of not
more than $300 or by imprisonment not exceeding 30 days, or both such
fine and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues shall be deemed
a separate offense.
118.2 Unlawful continuance: Any person who shall continue any
plumbing work in or about the structure after having been served with a
stop-work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to
remove a violation or unsafe conditions, shall be liable to a fine of not less
than $100 or more than $300.
303.2 Public systems available: A public water supply system or public
sewer system shall be deemed available to premises used for human
occupancy if such premises are within 300 feet, measured along a street,
alley or easement, of the public water supply or sewer system, and a
connection conforming with the standards set forth in this code may be
made thereto.
308.3 Freezing: Water service piping and sewers shall be installed below
recorded frost penetration but not less than three feet below grade for
water piping and four feet below grade for sewers. In climates with
freezing temperatures, plumbing piping in exterior buildings walls or areas
subjected to freezing temperatures shall be adequately protected against
freezing by insulation or heat, or both.
§ 127-3. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the BOCA Basic/National Plumbing Code of
1984 or any future editions, revisions or supplements hereby adopted shall
be construed to affect any suit or proceeding pending in any court, or
any rights acquired or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing under any act or ordinances hereby repealed as cited
in § 127-4 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 127-4. Repealer.
Ordinance Nos. 860 and 876,83 and all other ordinances or parts of
ordinances inconsistent herewith, are hereby repealed to the extent of such
inconsistency.
Chapter 130
POLES
83.Editor's Note: Ord. No. 860 comprised former Ch. 127, Plumbing, adopted 4-8-1982,
approved 4-8-1982. Ord No. 876, adopted 6-9-1983, was an amendment to that chapter.
§ 127-2 POLES § 127-4
130:329

ARTICLE I
Advertisements on Poles
[Adopted 1-6-1897 by Ord. No. 19]
§ 130-1. Posting of advertising matter prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any firm, corporation or individual to post, paste,
affix or fasten any printed, painted or written show bill, placard, sign,
circular or any other advertising matter upon any telegraph, telephone or
electric light pole, fence or tree in the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 130-2. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be punishable, upon
conviction thereof, by a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 and
costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, by
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 130-1 POLES § 130-2
130:331

ARTICLE II
Licensing of Poles
[Adopted 4-4-1900 by Ord. No. 46, approved 4-16-1900]
§ 130-3. Inspection of poles; replacement; penalty. [Amended
12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
It shall be the duty of the Police Committee to cause a thorough inspection
to be made at least once in every year of all telegraph, telephone, electric
light and trolley poles erected within the Borough limits, and if any poles
shall be found defective or dangerous from any cause, said Committee shall
notify the owner of such, who shall forthwith replace the same with a sound
pole, and if the said owner neglects or refuses to replace such defective pole
within 48 hours after receiving such notification, he or they shall be liable
to a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $50 and costs of prosecution
and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 130-4. Numbering of poles; owners' names; license.
§ 130-5. Licensing required. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867,
approved 12-9-1982]
No telegraph pole or other similar pole shall be hereafter erected within the
limits of this Borough unless a license shall be first taken out as aforesaid.
Poles shall be erected at such points and of such character only as shall be
approved by the Police Committee.
A. All telegraph poles and all other similar poles now erected or hereafter
to be erected in the Borough of Glenolden shall be designated by the
names or initials of the owners of such poles and each of such poles
shall be legibly marked in oil paint with a distinctive number, together
with the name or initials of such owner.
B. It shall be the duty of every such owner or owners on or before the first
Monday of June 1900 and annually thereafter on the first Monday of
January in each year to make application to the Secretary of Council for
a license for the ensuing year to maintain the poles theretofore erected,
specifying the poles so to be maintained by their designation as
provided for in this section, and the Secretary of Council shall issue a
license to such applicant which shall authorize the maintenance of the
poles designated in the application only for the period of one year from
the first Monday of January of the year for which said application is
made and no longer. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867,
approved 12-9-1982]
§ 130-3 POLES § 130-6
130:333
§ 130-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
No telegraph pole or other similar pole shall be erected or maintained
within the corporate limits of the Borough of Glenolden unless an annual
license for the maintenance thereof shall have been previously granted for
the same in accordance with the provisions of §§ 130-4 and 130-5. Any
persons violating the provisions of this section shall be liable to a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $50 and costs of prosecution and, upon default
in payment of the fine and costs, to imprisonment in the county jail for not
more than 30 days.
§ 130-7. Use of poles by Borough.
In case the Borough of Glenolden shall desire to use any pole erected or
maintained under this article for any municipal purpose, it shall have the
right to the exclusive use free of charge of one arm of one crossbar upon
such poles, with the right to string wires therefrom.
§ 130-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 130-7
130:334
Chapter 132
RETAIL SALES
§ 130-7 RETAIL SALES § 130-7
132:335

ARTICLE I
Hours of Operation
[Adopted 3-12-1998 by Ord. No. 1052, approved 3-12-1998]
§ 132-1. Hours restricted; special exceptions.
No person shall sell at retail nor shall any place of business engaged in
the retail sale of any article or commodity be open for the transaction of
business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless authorized by
way of a special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board for the Borough of
Glenolden.
§ 132-2. Continuation of existing uses.
Any establishment in operation as referred to in § 132-1 at the time of the
adoption of this article shall be allowed to continue to so operate.
§ 132-3. Violations and penalties.
Violations of this article shall be subject to a fine of $300 for each violation.
In case of a continuing violation, every calendar day upon which an
establishment shall remain open shall be deemed a separate offense.
§ 132-1 RETAIL SALES § 132-3
132:337
Chapter 134
SECURITY GATES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
§ 134-1. Legislative intent.
The Council of the Borough of Glenolden declares and finds it to be in the
public interest to provide for the regulation of the installation, maintenance
and use of security gates within the Borough of Glenolden in accordance
with the aesthetic character of the area and to preserve safety and property
values throughout the Borough.
§ 134-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
SECURITY GATE — A barrier, screen or cover located behind a door,
window or other opening used for the purposes of securing premises by
preventing access or blocking passage to the interior of the premises but
which enables substantial visibility of the interior of the premises from the
outside of the premises.
§ 134-3. Applicability; compliance.
§ 134-4. Restrictions.
A. The provisions of this chapter shall apply only to persons or entities
operating in a commercial, industrial or other nonresidential capacity.
B. All implements in existence prior to the date of the adoption of this
chapter which do not comply with the provisions of said chapter shall
be made to comply within three months of the date of adoption of this
chapter or shall be removed.
C. Any implement which does not comply with the provisions of this
chapter shall not be repaired or altered in any substantial manner
unless such repair or alteration is undertaken in order to comply with
the provisions of this chapter.
A. No solid metal barrier, screen or cover shall be erected or maintained in
front of or behind doors, windows or other openings visible from a
public road, highway or right-of-way. All metal barriers, screens or
§ 132-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 134-4
134:338
§ 134-5. Permit required.
§ 134-6. Fee.
The fee for a permit for the erection, alteration or maintenance of a security
gate shall be at the level fixed from time to time by resolution of the
Borough Council. Said fee shall be submitted at the time the application is
submitted to the Building Inspector.
§ 134-7. Violations and penalties.
For each and every violation of the provisions of this chapter, the owner,
general agent or contractor of a building or premises where such violation
has been committed or shall exist, and the lessee or tenant of an entire
building or entire premises where such violation has been committed or
shall exist, and the owner, general agent, contractor, lessee or tenant of
any part of a building or premises in which part such violation has been
committed or shall exist, and the general agent, architect, builder,
contractor or any person who knowingly commits, takes part in, allows
or assists in any violation or who maintains any building or premises in
which any such violation shall exist shall be guilty of a violation against this
covers shall be installed only behind doors, windows or other openings
which are visible from a public road, highway or right-of-way.
B. All security gates shall be of such a type as will not restrict substantial
visibility of the interior of the premises from outside the premises.
C. When a security gate is not in use, it shall be removed or stored in such
a manner so as not to be visible from the exterior of the premises.
D. No security gate shall be placed in such a manner that it blocks any
active emergency exit at any time in which the business is open to the
public or to any employees.
E. All installations of any security gate must be in accordance with
standards set forth by applicable local, state and federal laws, statutes,
ordinances, rules and regulations.
F. No security gate may be installed or existing noncomplying implement
be altered as to bring about a complying security gate except when
authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception in
accordance with the standards set forth in § 162-61.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work on the erection or
alteration of or to erect, alter or maintain any security gate until a
permit has been duly issued upon application therefor.
B. The Building Inspector shall require that the application for a permit
shall be accompanied by a set of plans indicating the proposed location
and dimensions of said security gate and a description of the type of
said security gate.
§ 134-4 SECURITY GATES § 134-7
134:339
chapter, which violation shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed $300 or
imprisonment for a period not to exceed 90 days, or both. For each day that
a violation exists or continues, separate citations may be issued, and it shall
be considered that separate offenses have been committed.
§ 134-8. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Code Enforcement Officer.
Chapter 135
SEWERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bathing places — See Ch. 47.
Nuisances — See Ch. 112.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
§ 134-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 134-8
134:340
ARTICLE I
Sewer Connections
[Adopted 4-4-1916 by Ord. No. 159]
§ 135-1. Connections to available sewers required.
Owners of property abutting on or adjoining any street or alley in the
Borough in which a sewer is now or hereafter may be constructed shall
make connections with said sewer in such manner as the Council of the
Borough shall by resolution order and direct for the purpose of discharging
all drainage, sewage and waste matter from the buildings upon the said
property into said sewer.
§ 135-2. Supervision of connections.
Said connections shall be made under the direction of and subject to the
inspection and approval of the Sewer Committee of said Council or an
inspector duly appointed by said Council.
§ 135-3. Permit for connection; fee.
The owner of any property shall, before making connections with any sewer,
procure a permit from the proper officer of the Borough and shall pay
therefor the sum of $12 where the street is macadamized, otherwise $6, for
the use of the Borough treasury.
§ 135-4. Guarding of connection sites.
The owner shall, during the making of any connection, place proper lights
and guards to warn and protect travelers and others, and shall restore the
street in which said connection is made to the same condition and repair as
it was before said connection was made.
§ 135-5. Connections by Borough; costs.
If any owner shall fail to make any sewer connection within three months
after notice, in writing, to do so, then the Sewer Committee of Council
shall have the connection made, and the cost thereof shall be collected by a
municipal claim filed or by an action in assumpsit as prescribed by law.
§ 135-6. Notice to make connection.
Notice to make such sewer connection shall be in writing and signed by the
Secretary of Council of the Borough and shall be served in person if the
owner is a resident of the Borough or by leaving said notice at the residence
of said owner with an adult member of the family, and, if the owner is not a
resident of the Borough, then said notice shall be served upon an occupant
of said property, in person, or by a registered letter addressed to the last
known address of the owner, and, if there has been no known address of
said owner, then by posting a copy of said notice on the property.
§ 135-1 SECURITY GATES § 135-7
134:341
§ 135-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person or persons violating any provision of this article or failing to
comply with any notice served in pursuance hereof shall, upon conviction,
be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more than $100 and, upon
default in payment of the fine and costs of prosecution, by imprisonment in
the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 135-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-7
134:342
ARTICLE II
Sewer Laterals
[Adopted 1-18-1927 by Ord. No. 236, approved 1-20-1927]
§ 135-8. Laterals for sewers under construction.
§ 135-9. Marking of laterals.
These laterals must be designated by the placing of an upright two-by-four
in the ground to come up within about one foot of the surface of the street
in order that the laterals can be easily located when the house drain is to be
connected with the same.
A. The Council of the Borough of Glenolden ordains that property owners
shall have laterals made on sewers under construction. Permit for same
must be secured from the Secretary of the Board of Health before such
lateral connections are made. These laterals shall only be made by a
plumber and must be inspected by the Sewer Inspector.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to, directly or
indirectly, cause, deposit, place or cause to be placed any grease,
garbage, refuse or any other material which may block or tend to cause
a blockage in any lateral or sewer line. In addition to the civil remedies,
penalties for violation hereof shall be the same as those in § 135-13.
[Added 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 1069, approved 10-19-1999]
§ 135-8 SECURITY GATES § 135-9
134:343

ARTICLE III
Prohibited Connections
[Adopted 5-11-1933 by Ord. No. 307, approved 5-29-1933]
§ 135-10. Prohibited connections enumerated.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect, directly
or indirectly, or to cause or authorize to be connected, to any Borough sewer
now or hereafter existing, any surface-water drain of any description, or
any rainspouts or rainwater drains of any description, or any branches or
extensions of such surface-water drains, rainspouts or rainwater drains.
§ 135-11. Removal of connections by owners of premises.
All existing surface-water drains of whatsoever description and all
rainspouts and rainwater drains of whatsoever description, and all branches
or extensions thereof, which are now either directly or indirectly connected
with any Borough sewer or extension thereof, shall, within 60 days from
notice as herein provided, be removed by the owners or occupants of the
premises upon which such drains or spouts, or branches or extensions
thereof, exist, or which such drains or spouts, or branches or extensions
thereof, serve.
§ 135-12. Abatement of nuisances.
The maintenance of any surface-water drain, rainspout or rainwater drain,
or branch or extension thereof, is hereby declared a public and common
nuisance, noxious and offensive to the inhabitants of the Borough, inimical
to the health of the Borough, and is prohibited, and further may be
summarily abated or removed after notice served upon the owner or
occupier of any premises whereon the same shall be located or maintained,
requiring the abatement of the said nuisance within 60 days of the day of
said notice, and upon failure of the said owner or occupier so to remove
or abate the said condition within the aforesaid 60 days. Such notice shall
be in writing and signed by the Borough Secretary or President of the
Borough Council and shall specify the nuisance existing and indicate the
abatement or removal required and shall state that, in default of removal
or abatement, the Borough may cause the same to be done and collect
the cost thereof from the said owner or occupier. Said notice shall be
served in the same manner as notices are prescribed to be served under
Section 3 of Ordinance No. 299 approved November 1, 1932.84 After the
expiration of the said 60 days, the Borough Council, by such agents as
it may designate, may proceed, at its discretion, to abate or remove any
such nuisance and thereafter collect the cost of such abatement or removal,
together with a penalty of 20% of said cost, from the owner or occupant,
in the manner provided by law for the collection of municipal claims or by
action in assumpsit.
84.Editor's Note: See Ch. 112, Nuisances, § 112-4.
§ 135-10 SECURITY GATES § 135-13
134:345
§ 135-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
In addition to any other remedy herein provided, any person, firm or
corporation maintaining, erecting, constructing or assisting in or causing
the maintenance, erection or construction of any connection hereinbefore
prohibited shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding before
a District Justice, be punishable by a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $100 and costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment of the fine
and costs, by imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days;
provided, however, that no person, firm or corporation now maintaining
or assisting in or causing the maintenance of any such connection as
hereinbefore prohibited shall be liable to the penalties provided under this
section unless and until, at the expiration of 60 days from the date of
notice served upon such owner or occupier under the terms hereof, the said
owner or occupier shall fail or neglect to remove the aforesaid prohibited
connection.
§ 135-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-13
134:346
ARTICLE IV
Rents and Charges
[Adopted 12-30-1948 by Ord. No. 466, approved 12-30-1948; last
amended 12-30-2003 by Ord. No. 2013, approved 12-30-2003;
2-9-1950 by Ord. No. 478, approved 2-9-1950; 12-30-1981 by Ord.
No. 858, approved 12-30-1981]
§ 135-14. Annual rents and charges. [Last amended 12-17-2019 by
Ord. No. 2135, approved 12-17-2019]
From and after January 1, 2020, and every year thereafter, the owner or
owners of any property served by the sewer or sewer system of the Borough
of Glenolden shall pay to the Borough of Glenolden, as hereinafter provided,
an annual rental or charge for the use of said sewer or sewer system. The
rental or charge for the year 2020 shall be in accordance with the following
rates:
A. Residential rates.
(1) Each dwelling unit or apartment unit: $335.
(2) Apartment buildings and other buildings containing more than one
unit shall be assessed for each unit, and the total of such
assessments shall be the aggregate rate for such building.
B. Commercial rates.
(1) The minimum commercial rate shall not be less than the
established rate for a dwelling unit.
(2) The commercial rate shall be applicable to all commercial
establishments, of any kind whatsoever, including but not limited to
tourist houses, offices, stores, shops, automobile washes, garages,
restaurants and automobile or gasoline service stations.
Fixture Rate
Washbasins $32.31
Wash sinks $64.66
Toilets (flush) $84.02
Bathtubs $66.22
Shower baths (separate) $66.22
Urinals $42.67
Drinking fountains $32.31
Automobile wash racks $242.42
Self-service laundries, per washing
unit
$80.83
Floor drains $32.31
§ 135-14 SECURITY GATES § 135-14
134:347
§ 135-15. Basis for determination of rents.
The annual sewer rental or charge shall be fixed by Borough Council by
ordinance as soon as possible after January 1 of each year for said year and
shall be such sum as shall be sufficient for the Borough to pay therefrom the
annual expense of maintenance, repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation
or other expenses in relation to the sewer or sewer system, including
the payment of interest and amortization of principal on any indebtedness
incurred by the Borough in the construction of any sewer or sewer system,
or any amount necessary for the Borough to pay under any contract with
any municipal authority with a margin of safety of 10%.
§ 135-16. Collection procedure.
§ 135-17. Compensation of Tax Collector and Treasurer.
(3) The minimum rate for tourist homes shall not be less than the
established rate for a dwelling unit.
(4) In all cases in which the above rates are not exactly applicable, the
Sewer Committee of the Borough Council shall fix an applicable
rate, with the same force and effect as if set forth herein.
C. Swimming pools: $120.82, applicable to all swimming pools which
empty into the sewer.
A. The Borough Treasurer of the Borough of Glenolden shall keep an
accurate record of the sewer rental or charge due by the owner or
owners of any property served by the sewer or sewer system, and on or
before June 1 of each year, the Borough Council shall execute a warrant
or warrants authorizing the Tax Collector of the Borough of Glenolden
to collect the same.
B. The Tax Collector shall give notice of such rentals or charges to the
respective owners on the regular Borough tax bill. All payments shall be
due without discount on November 1 of each year. A penalty of 5% is
imposed on any bill not paid on the due date.
C. The Tax Collector shall make a monthly report of all amounts collected
by him to Borough Council and shall remit such funds to the Borough
Treasurer.
D. The Tax Collector shall file with the Borough Council a complete list of
all unpaid sewer rentals or charges on or before the first Monday of
May of each year, which will be turned over to the Borough Solicitor for
collection.
E. The annual sewer rentals or charges shall be a lien on the properties
charged with the payment thereof and, if not paid on the due date, may
be collected by any appropriate action or by a lien filed in the
Prothonotary's office in the nature of a municipal lien.
§ 135-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-17
134:348
§ 135-18. Sewer Rental Fund.
There is hereby established a Sewer Rental Fund into which the Borough
Treasurer shall pay all moneys received by him from sewer rentals or
charges, which said fund shall be used exclusively for the maintenance,
repair, alteration, inspection, depreciation or other expense in relation to
the sewer or sewer system and which shall include any interest and/or
amortization of principal on any indebtedness incurred by the Borough in
the construction of the sewer or sewer system or any amount necessary for
the Borough to pay under any contract with any municipal authority and the
cost of collection of sewer rentals or charges.
§ 135-19. Reports by owners of changed conditions.
The owner of any property making any addition or removal of fixtures which
would affect the amount of sewer rental or charge assessed against such
property shall immediately report the same to the Borough Treasurer.
A. The Tax Collector shall receive a commission of 2% on all sewer rentals
or charges collected by him.
B. The Treasurer shall be paid $350 annually for his services in keeping
the necessary records concerning sewer rentals or charges, which sum
shall be in addition to his regular salary as Borough Treasurer.
§ 135-17 SECURITY GATES § 135-19
134:349

ARTICLE V
Disposal of Fats, Oils and Grease
[Adopted 1-18-2005 by Ord. No. 2022, approved 1-18-2005]
§ 135-20. Scope and purpose.
To aid in the prevention of sanitary sewer blockages and obstructions from
contributions and accumulation of fats, oils, and grease into the sanitary
sewer system from industrial or commercial establishments, particularly
food preparation and serving facilities.
§ 135-21. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated or necessarily implied, the following
words and phrases shall be construed throughout this article to have the
meaning indicated in this section. The present tense includes the future; the
singular number includes the plural, and the plural the singular.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania,
or its assigned representative including the Borough Engineer or Borough
Solicitor.
FATS, OILS, AND GREASE — Organic polar compounds derived from animal
and/or plant sources that contain multiple carbon chain tricycleride
molecules. These substances are detectable and measurable using
analytical test procedures established in the United States Code of Federal
Regulations 40 CFR 136, as may be amended from time to time. All are
sometimes referred to herein as "grease."
FOOD SERVICE ESTABLISHMENTS — Those establishments primarily
engaged in activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making available
for consumption, such as a restaurant, commercial kitchen, caterer, hotel,
school, hospital, prison, correctional facility, or care institution. These
establishments use one or more of the following preparation activities:
cooking by frying (all methods); baking (all methods); grilling; sauteing;
rotisserie cooking; broiling (all methods); boiling; blanching; roasting;
toasting; or poaching. Also included are infrared heating, searing,
barbequing, and any other food preparation activity that produces a hot,
nondrinkable food product in a receptacle that requires washing.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample that is taken from a waste stream without
regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to
exceed 15 minutes.
GREASE INTERCEPTOR — A structure or passive device designed for the
purpose of removing and preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering
the sanitary sewer collection system. These devices are often below-ground
units located outside the building and are built as two- or three-chamber
baffled tanks having a rated flow exceeding 50 gpm (189 L/m).
GREASE-LADEN WASTEWATER — Effluent discharge that is produced from
food processing, food preparation or other sources where grease, fats,
§ 135-20 SECURITY GATES § 135-21
134:351
and oils enter automatic dishwasher pre-rinse stations, sinks, or other
appurtenances.
GREASE TRAP — A passive interceptor having a rated flow 50 gpm (189L/
m) or less for separating and retaining waterborne grease and grease
complexes prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering the
sanitary sewer collection and treatment system. Such traps are typically
compact under-the-sink units that are near food preparation areas and are
located inside the building.
MINIMUM DESIGN CAPABILITY — The design features of a grease
interceptor and its ability or volume required to effectively intercept and
retain grease from grease-laden wastewaters discharged into the public
sanitary sewer.
SAMPLING PORT — A location in the collection system that will allow a
standardized wastewater sample to be collected.
USER — Any person or corporation, including those located outside the
corporate limits of Glenolden Borough, who contributes, causes or permits
the contribution of discharge of wastewater into sewers within the
Borough's boundaries, including persons who contribute such wastewater
from mobile sources, such as those who discharge hauled wastewater.
§ 135-22. General requirements for wastewater discharges.
A. No user shall discharge any wastewater whose total content of oils,
waxes, and grease of mineral, petroleum, or unknown origin exceeds
100 ppm at any time as shown by grab sample, or undergoes any form
of phase separation due to temperature differentials which involve solid
or viscous substances which could impair the sewer systems of
Glenolden Borough. The Borough may reduce the above concentration
where it is demonstrated that the concentration is causing chronic or
adverse effects to the collections system.
B. No user shall discharge or allow any discharges which settle or adhere
to a collector pipe, causing a reduction of normal collector hydraulic
capacity; obstruct flow; cause premature failure and/or loss of integrity
of any component of collection and conveyance systems of the Borough;
or prevent various equipment from functioning as intended. Such
materials include but are not limited to: grease; garbage; or other bulk
solids with particles greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension; guts or
tissues; paunch; manure; bones; hair; hides or fleshing; entrails; whole
blood; blood products; feathers; ashes; cinders; sand; spent lime; paint;
stone or marble dust; metal; glass; straw; shavings; grass clippings;
rags; spent grains; spent hops; waste paper; wood; rubber; plastics;
gas; tar; asphalt residues; residues from refining or processing of fuel
or lubrication oil; mud; glass or metal filing; polishing wastes; or any
material which can be disposed of as solid waste.
C. No grease-laden sources are allowed to be connected to sewer lines
intended for grease interceptor service and under no circumstances
§ 135-21 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-22
134:352
§ 135-23. Food service establishment permit requirements.
shall water be added to any wastewater to dilute the wastewater
concentration to acceptable levels.
D. No user shall contribute any wastewater which causes a hazard to
human life or creates a public nuisance to the wastewater system.
A. All permitted food service establishments are required to install,
operate, and maintain an approved type and adequately sized grease
interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with the objectives of this
article, as described in Subsections B, C, and D below. All grease
interceptors must meet the requirements of the International Plumbing
Code.
B. All new food service establishment facilities are subject to grease
interceptor requirements. All facilities must obtain approval from the
Borough for grease interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a
building permit. All grease interceptors shall be readily and easily
accessible for user cleaning and Borough inspection.
C. All existing facilities with planned plumbing improvements or
modifications in plumbing with a building permit evaluation of $20,000
or more will be required to include plans to comply with the grease
interceptor requirements. These facilities must obtain prior approval
from the Borough for grease interceptor sizing before submitting plans
for a building permit.
D. All existing food service establishments determined by the Borough to
have a reasonable potential to adversely impact the Borough's sewer
system will be notified of their obligation to install a grease interceptor
within the specified period set forth in the notification letter.
E. Grease interceptors required under this article shall be installed unless
the Borough authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap or
other alternative pretreatment technology and determines that the
installation of a grease interceptor would not be feasible. The food
service establishment bears the burden of demonstrating that the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible. The Borough may
authorize the installation of an indoor grease trap where the
installation of a grease interceptor is not feasible due to space
constraints or other considerations. If an establishment believes the
installation of a grease interceptor in unfeasible because of
documented space constraints, the request for an alternate grease
removal device shall contain the following information at a minimum:
(1) Location of sewer main and easement in relation to available
exterior space outside of the building.
(2) Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses common plumbing for all
services at that site.
§ 135-22 SECURITY GATES § 135-23
134:353
§ 135-24. Wastewater discharge limitations.
No user shall allow wastewater discharge concentrations from subject
grease interceptor, grease trap or alternative pretreatment technology to
exceed 325 mg/L, as defined by EPA Test Method 1664, or 275 mg/L, as
identified by EPA Test Method 413.
§ 135-25. Grease interceptor requirements.
F. Alternate pretreatment technology includes, but is not limited to,
devices that are used to trap, separate and hold grease from
wastewater and prevent it from being discharged into the sanitary
sewer collection system. All alternative pretreatment technology must
be appropriately sized and approved by the Borough.
A. All grease interceptors must be approved by the Borough prior to
installation to ensure that the interceptor meets appropriate sizing
requirements, construction standards, and conforms to the
International Plumbing Code.
B. Grease interceptors shall be constructed in accordance with a design
approved by the Borough and shall have a minimum of two
compartments with a baffle system which adequately diverts and slows
wastewater to avoid short-circuiting. Fittings shall also be designed for
grease retention.
C. Grease interceptors shall be installed at a location easily accessible for
inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted grease. The grease
interceptor may not be installed in any part of the building where food
is handled. Location of the grease interceptor must meet the prior
approval of the Borough.
D. Grease interceptors shall be serviced and emptied of accumulated
waste content as required in order to maintain minimum design
capability or effective volume. These devices should be inspected at
least monthly and cleaned at a minimum of every three months, with
cleaning frequency best established at any given installation from
experience and observation. Users who are required to maintain a
grease interceptor shall:
(1) Provide a minimum hydraulic retention time of 30 minutes at actual
peak wastewater flow in accordance with the International
Plumbing Code.
(2) Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge pocket as
required, but at intervals of not longer than 30 days, at the user's
expense. Grease interceptors shall be kept free of inorganic solid
materials such as grit, rocks, gravel, sand, eating utensils,
cigarettes, shells, towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this
pocket and thereby reduce the effective volume of the device and
lead to short-circuiting.
§ 135-23 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-25
134:354
§ 135-26. Grease trap requirements.
§ 135-27. Cost; violations; fines.
E. The user shall maintain a written record of inspection and maintenance
for five years. All such records shall be available for on-site inspection
by a representative of the Borough during all operating hours.
F. Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of 24 inches, shall be
provided over each grease interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The
access manholes shall be designed and maintained to prevent water
inflow or infiltration. The manholes shall also have removable covers to
facilitate inspection, grease removal, and wastewater sampling
activities.
A. Upon approval by the Borough, a grease trap complying with the
provisions of this section must be installed in the waste line leading
from sinks, drains, and other fixtures or equipment in food service
establishments where grease may be introduced into the drainage or
sewage system in quantities that can affect line stoppage or hinder
sewage treatment or private sewage disposal.
B. Grease trap sizing and installation shall conform to the International
Plumbing Code.
C. No grease trap shall be installed which has a stated rate flow-through of
more than 50 gallons per minute or less than four gallons per minute,
except when specifically approved by the Borough.
D. Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient operating conditions by
periodic removal of the accumulated grease. Accumulated grease can
be disposed of by recycling, rendering, or land application. Under no
circumstances should collected grease be introduced into any drainage
piping or public or private sewers.
E. No food waste disposal unit or dishwasher shall be connected to or
discharge into any grease trap.
F. Wastewater in excess of 140° F./60° C. shall be discharged into a grease
trap.
A. The cost of fats, oils and grease removal shall be at the expense of the
user, not the Borough.
B. All nonresidential users shall provide sampling ports readily accessible
to the Borough.
C. The user is responsible for the cost of cleaning, disposal, and
monitoring of any substance collected in the process of pretreatment.
D. Each owner that is required to install a grease trap or interceptor shall
provide the Borough with a sketch plan showing the location of the
§ 135-25 SECURITY GATES § 135-27
134:355
interceptor and clean-out inspection-port type and manufacturer of the
interceptor.
E. The Borough shall have the ability to issue fines and impose other
sanctions, including but not limited to all costs to remedy a situation or
termination of service, if the requirements of this article are not met
after one notice has been issued.
§ 135-27 GLENOLDEN CODE § 135-27
134:356
Chapter 136
SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS
§ 136-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHILD-CARE FACILITY — A licensed day-care center, child-care facility or
any other child-care services facility exempt from licensing pursuant to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
COMMON OPEN SPACE — The area of land and/or water restricted from
future development for the purpose of protecting natural features or for
providing recreational opportunities for residents of Glenolden Borough,
which said open space is regulated, maintained and/or owned by the
Borough of Glenolden
COMMUNITY CENTER — A building and related facilities used for
educational, social, cultural or recreational activities.
PERMANENT RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for 14 or more consecutive days.
PUBLIC PARK or RECREATIONAL FACILITY — Any recreational facility,
playground or park, owned or operated by the Borough or any other
governmental agency, including, but not limited to, the Interboro School
District, the County of Delaware or the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
SCHOOL — Any public or private school which provides education services
to a minor.
SEX OFFENDERS — Any person, over the age of 18 years of age who
has been convicted of any crime against a minor identified in § 9795.185
which includes, but is not limited to, kidnapping, luring a child into a motor
vehicle, institutional sexual assault, indecent assault, incest, prostitution,
receiving sexual materials, sexual abuse of children, unlawful contacts with
minors, sexual exploitation of children, rape, involuntary deviate sexual
intercourse, sexual assault, and aggravated indecent assault, and
individuals convicted of any attempt to commit any of the offenses
enumerated therein.
TEMPORARY RESIDENCE — A place where a person lives, abides, lodges,
or resides for a period of less than 14 days in the aggregate during any
calendar year, which is not the person's permanent address or place where
the person routinely lives, abides, lodges, or resides and which is not the
person's permanent residence.
§ 136-2. Residency restrictions; determination of distance.
85.Editor's Note: See 42 Pa. C.S.A. § 9795.1.
§ 135-27 SEX OFFENDER RESIDENCY RESTRICTIONS § 136-2
136:357
§ 136-3. Notice to move.
Any sex offender who resides on a permanent or temporary basis within
1,000 feet of any school, child-care facility, common open space, community
center, public park or recreational facility shall, within 45 days of receipt
of written notice of the sex offender's noncompliance with this chapter,
move from said location to a new location, but said location may not be
within 1,000 feet of any school, child-care facility, common open space,
community center, public park or recreational facility within the Borough.
It shall constitute a continuing violation for each day beyond the 45 days
the sex offender continues to reside within 1,000 feet of a school, child-care
facility, common open space, community center, park or recreational facility.
Furthermore, it shall be a violation each day that a sex offender shall move
from one location in the Borough to another that is within 1,000 feet of any
school, child-care facility, common open space, community center, public
park or recreational facility.
§ 136-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any person who has established residence
prior to March 2006, and it shall not apply if the school, child-care facility,
common open space, community center, public park or recreational facility
within 1,000 feet of the sex offender's permanent residence was established
subsequent to the establishment of the sex offender's permanent residence.
§ 136-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
conviction, before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to a term of
imprisonment up to 90 days and shall be fined not more than $1,000 for
each violation, plus the costs of prosecution and reasonable attorney's fees.
§ 136-6. Enforcement.
The Borough of Glenolden's Police Department shall be charged with the
enforcement of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any sex offender to establish a permanent or
temporary residence within 1,000 feet of any school, child-care facility,
common open space, community center, public park or recreational
facility.
B. For the purpose of determining the minimum distance separation, the
requirement shall be measured by following a straight line from the
outer property line of the permanent residence or temporary residence
of the sex offender to the nearest outer property line of a school, childcare
facility, common open space, community center, public park or
recreational facility.
§ 136-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 136-7
136:358
§ 136-7. Publication of map.
The Borough Engineer is herein directed to have prepared a map of the
Borough depicting the areas where sex offenders are restricted from
residing on a permanent or temporary basis.
Chapter 138
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Advertisements on poles — See Ch. 130, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 162.
Overhead signs and banners — See Ch. A168.
§ 136-7 SIGNS § 136-7
138:359

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
[Adopted 11-11-1948 by Ord. No. 465]
§ 138-1. Conformity required.
No sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device shall hereafter be
erected, altered, enlarged or maintained by any individual, copartnership or
corporation within the corporate limits of the Borough of Glenolden except
in conformity with the provisions of this article.
§ 138-2. Indecent wording prohibited.
No sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device shall be erected or
maintained which contains any immoral or indecent wording thereon.
§ 138-3. Permit or license required.
It shall be unlawful for any individual, copartnership or corporation to
proceed with the erection, alteration, enlargement or maintenance of any
sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device in the Borough of
Glenolden unless application for a permit or license shall have been made
by the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the same is maintained
or intended to be erected, or his duly authorized agent, to the Building
Inspector and a permit or license shall have been properly obtained, upon
approval by him, from the Secretary of Council.
§ 138-4. Application for permit.
Application for a permit to erect, alter, enlarge or maintain any sign,
billboard, signboard or other advertising device shall be made on forms
to be furnished by the Building Inspector and shall be accompanied by
plans and specifications setting forth the dimensions, material and details
of construction of the sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device
and its location on the premises, distance from the street line and the height
above the ground or roof.
§ 138-5. Approval or disapproval by Building Inspector.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to examine the application
and all plans and specifications submitted therewith, and he shall approve
or reject same within 15 days. If same meets with the requirements of
this chapter, he shall cause a permit to be issued upon payment of the fee
hereinafter prescribed. If the application is not approved, he shall return
same to the applicant, giving his reasons for disapproval.
§ 138-6. Appeal to Borough Council.
An appeal from the action of the Building Inspector may be taken to
Borough Council within 15 days from the date of the action of the Building
Inspector. The appeal must be in writing and shall be accompanied by
§ 138-1 SIGNS § 138-6
138:361
all plans, specifications and other information submitted to the Building
Inspector and shall specify wherein the appellant claims the Building
Inspector was in error. Borough Council shall sustain or dismiss the appeal,
and the Building Inspector shall be notified as to the action of Borough
Council and be governed accordingly.
§ 138-7. Commencement of work; inspection.
Any proposed work for which a permit has been granted must be
commenced within 60 days from the date of the issuance of the permit. The
Building Inspector shall make an inspection of the work upon completion
thereof to ascertain if it conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
§ 138-8. Permit fee. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved
12-9-1982]
The fee for a permit to erect, alter, enlarge or replace any sign, billboard,
signboard or other advertising device shall be as provided in the fee
schedule in Ord. No. 850, which is included herein as Chapter 54, Building
Construction.
§ 138-9. Excepted signs.
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applicable to signs erected
and maintained by the United States Government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any political subdivision thereof.
§ 138-10. Signs not requiring permits. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord.
No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
Signs of the following types may be erected and maintained in Residential
Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3 and Business District B-1, as described in the
Zoning Ordinance,86 without a permit:
A. A sign may be erected and maintained by schools, colleges, churches,
hospitals and similar organizations, provided the same does not exceed
25 square feet in area and is placed not less than eight feet inside the
street line.
B. A sign may be erected and maintained on a residence advertising the
business or profession of the occupants, provided same does not exceed
two square feet in area and is placed not less than eight feet inside the
street line.
C. A sign may be erected and maintained designating "no trespassing,"
"private road," "no admittance" and similar warning signs, provided the
same does not exceed two square feet in area and is placed not less
than eight feet inside the street line.
86.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning.
§ 138-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 138-10
138:362
§ 138-11. Sign restrictions. [Amended 2-12-1953 by Ord. No. 509,
approved 2-12-1953; 9-13-1956 by Ord. No. 544, approved
9-13-1956; 4-11-1957 by Ord. No. 555, approved 4-22-1957]
No sign placed on or attached to a single standard or the exterior of a
building, other than the roof thereof, shall exceed 50 square feet in area
nor extend more than eight feet from such standard or building exterior
nor within 32 feet of the center line of Chester Pike or the center line of
MacDade Boulevard, nor beyond the street line of any other street in the
Borough, nor within 10 feet of the ground surface.
§ 138-12. Sign height and placement. [Amended 2-12-1953 by Ord.
No. 509, approved 2-12-1953]
No sign, billboard or similar device, other than those attached to a single
standard or a building, shall extend more than 15 feet above or closer
than two feet to the ground level nor closer to any street than the building
setback line.
§ 138-13. Rooftop signs.
No sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device placed upon or
supported upon the top of any building shall exceed 15 feet above that part
of the roof on which it rests. An open space of not less than two feet shall
be maintained between the roof and the bottom of the sign.
§ 138-14. Signs interfering with doorways.
No sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device shall be erected or
maintained so as to obstruct or interfere with a doorway or other means of
ingress and egress.
§ 138-15. Resistance to wind pressure.
Any sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device erected or
maintained under the provisions of this chapter must be so constructed
that the same will withstand a wind pressure of not less than 30 pounds
per square foot of surface and shall be so constructed that it will remain
securely fastened, suspended or supported.
D. A sign advertising the sale or rental of the premises may be erected and
maintained, provided the same does not exceed six square feet in area
and is placed not less than eight feet inside the street line,
E. Temporary signs of mechanics and artisans may be erected during the
period such persons are performing work on the premises on which
such signs are erected and maintained, provided the same do not
exceed six square feet in area and are placed not less than eight feet
from the street line.
§ 138-10 SIGNS § 138-16
138:363
§ 138-16. Swinging signs prohibited.
No sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising device shall be erected or
maintained in such a way that any part thereof will be free to move, sway or
swing.
§ 138-17. Electric signs.
Electric signs, billboards or other advertising devices may be erected or
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; provided,
however, that they shall not be flashing signs.
§ 138-18. Signs between sidewalk and curb.
No signs, billboards, signboards or other advertising device shall be erected
or maintained between the curb and sidewalk of any premises nor in such
a position as to interfere with the public travel in the streets, highways and
sidewalks of the Borough.
§ 138-19. Removal of unauthorized signs.
If a license or permit is not applied for and issued in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter, the sign, billboard, signboard or other advertising
device shall be removed upon notice received from the Building Inspector,
and if the same is not removed within 10 days from the date of such
notice, the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to have same removed
at the expense of the individual, copartnership or corporation erecting and
maintaining the same.
§ 138-20. Inspection of signs; remedying of defects.
It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to examine and inspect all
signs, billboards, signboards and other advertising devices, and if the same
are found in violation of this article or in a condition which is dangerous to
the public safety, the individual, copartnership or corporation maintaining
the same shall be notified to remedy the condition. If the same be not
remedied within 10 days, it shall be deemed a violation of this chapter
and the Building Inspector is hereby authorized to have same removed at
the expense of the individual, copartnership or corporation maintaining the
same.
§ 138-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any individual, copartnership or corporation violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof before a District Justice, be
subject to a fine of not less than $25, nor more than $300, and costs
of prosecution, and upon default in payment of the fine and costs, to
imprisonment in the county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 138-16 GLENOLDEN CODE § 138-21
138:364
ARTICLE II
Bench Advertising Signs
[Adopted 5-10-1990 by Ord. No. 952, approved 5-10-1990]
§ 138-22. Installation and maintenance permitted.
The Borough of Glenolden hereby permits and allows the installation and
maintenance of bench advertising signs within the Borough of Glenolden
upon the terms and conditions set forth hereinafter solely for the purpose
of providing a convenience to those persons waiting to board public
transportation vehicles.
§ 138-23. Installation permit required. [Amended 2-14-1991 by Ord.
No. 966, approved 2-14-1991]
No person shall install any bench advertising sign within the Borough
of Glenolden unless said person obtains a permit for the installation of
each bench advertising sign from the Building Inspector of the Borough of
Glenolden as provided in § 138-24 of this article and complies with all of the
applicable terms and conditions of this article relative thereto. Any permit
obtained as provided herein shall also include the right to maintain such
bench advertising sign until January 31 of the following calendar year, and
if a bench advertising sign is to be maintained thereafter, an annual permit
for the maintenance of each bench advertising sign shall be obtained as
provided in § 138-24.2 of this article.
§ 138-24. Application for installation permit. [Amended 2-14-1991
by Ord. No. 966, approved 2-14-1991]
In order to obtain a permit for the installation of a bench advertising sign
within the Borough of Glenolden, a person must submit to the Building
Inspector of the Borough of Glenolden, for each bench advertising sign
to be installed, a completed and properly executed application on a form
approved by the Council of the Borough of Glenolden and must also submit
with said application the following:
A. A letter signed by the owner or owners of the property upon which the
bench advertising sign is to be installed and initially maintained
granting permission for the installation and initial maintenance of the
same until January 31 of the following calendar year.
B. A permit fee in the sum of $50 for each bench advertising sign to be
installed and initially maintained.
C. An insurance certificate(s) or policy(ies) for the bench advertising sign
evidencing insurance policy coverage therefor until at least January 31
of the following calendar year for general liability in the minimum
amount of $250,000 and for property damage in the minimum amount
of $25,000. The foregoing insurance policy coverages shall include the
Borough of Glenolden as an additional insured.
§ 138-22 SIGNS § 138-24
138:365
§ 138-24.1. Maintenance permit required. [Added 2-14-1991 by Ord.
No. 966, approved 2-14-1991]
No person, subsequent to January 31 of the year following the installation
of any bench advertising sign, shall maintain any such bench within the
Borough of Glenolden unless said person obtains an annual permit for the
maintenance of such bench advertising sign from the Building Inspector
of the Borough of Glenolden as provided hereinafter and complies with all
of the applicable terms and conditions of this article relative thereto. An
annual permit for the maintenance of a bench advertising sign shall be for
the period beginning February 1 of the current calendar year to January 31
of the following calendar year.
§ 138-24.2. Application for maintenance permit. [Added 2-14-1991
by Ord. No. 966, approved 2-14-1991]
In order to obtain an annual permit for the maintenance of a bench
advertising sign within the Borough of Glenolden, a person must submit
to the Building Inspector of the Borough of Glenolden, in January of each
calendar year, a completed and properly executed application on a form
approved by the Council of the Borough of Glenolden and must also submit
with said application the following:
§ 138-25. Location.
Bench advertising signs shall only be installed and maintained at
established locations where public transportation vehicles stop to discharge
and take on passengers, and no bench advertising sign shall be installed
and maintained more than 25 feet from any established location.
D. A detailed drawing showing all dimensions of the bench, all advertising
to be placed on the bench and the specifications of all materials to be
used in the construction of the bench.
A. A letter signed by the owner or owners of the property upon which the
bench advertising sign is to be maintained granting permission for the
maintenance of the same until January 31 of the following calendar
year.
B. A permit fee in the sum of $50 for each bench advertising sign to be
maintained.
C. An insurance certificate(s) or policy(ies) for the bench advertising sign
evidencing insurance policy coverage therefor until at least January 31
of the following calendar year for general liability in the minimum
amount of $250,000 and for property damage in the minimum amount
of $25,000. The foregoing insurance policy coverages shall include the
Borough of Glenolden as an additional insured.
§ 138-24 GLENOLDEN CODE § 138-26
138:366
§ 138-26. Quantity permitted.
No more than two bench advertising signs shall be installed and maintained
at any established location as aforesaid.
§ 138-27. Permit number to be stenciled on each bench.
All bench advertising signs for which a permit is used shall be stenciled with
a permit number by the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 138-28. Changes of advertisement.
The permittee of any permit for the installation and maintenance of a bench
advertising sign may change that portion of the bench showing the name of
the business or person advertising without being required to obtain another
permit or to pay an additional fee; however, all such changes must be
submitted to the Borough of Glenolden in writing. All such changes shall be
made at the location of said bench.
§ 138-29. Fee for restenciling.
If any bench advertising sign must have the permit number restenciled
thereon for any reason, the permittee shall pay to the Borough of Glenolden
a fee of $10.
§ 138-30. Liability for maintenance.
The permittee of any approved bench advertising sign is solely liable for the
maintenance of said bench.
§ 138-31. Removal by Borough; costs.
§ 138-32. Status upon removal.
If any bench advertising sign is removed from any established location for
any reason, any existing permit shall be revoked and said space shall be
available for any person to apply for a permit to install and maintain another
bench thereon.
A. If any bench advertising sign is installed and maintained in violation of
the provisions of this article or if any bench advertising sign is
maintained in an unclean and/or unsafe condition, the Building
Inspector shall have said bench removed to a location designated by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. Before any permittee of any bench so removed can reclaim said bench,
the permittee must pay to the Borough of Glenolden the sum of $50 to
cover the expenses of removing the bench.
§ 138-26 SIGNS § 138-33
138:367
§ 138-33. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be punished by a fine of not more
than $300 or, in default thereof, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Each day's failure to comply with any provision of this article as aforesaid
shall constitute a separate violation.
§ 138-33 GLENOLDEN CODE § 138-33
138:368
ARTICLE III
Banners.
[Adopted 5-18-2004 by Ord. No. 2019, approved 5-18-2004]
§ 138-34. Definition.
A banner is a flexible substrate on which copy and/or graphics may be
displayed.
§ 138-35. Rules and regulations for use of banners.
A. A banner is a temporary source of signage.
B. Permit fees: $1 per linear foot (minimum fee: $15).
C. Banners are permitted at any one establishment for a maximum of 60
days during any calendar year.
D. Banners for any event must be down within five days following the
event.
E. Banners must be professionally made and be installed in a fashion as to
prevent blowing and tearing.
F. Any banner deemed in poor condition (faded, ripped or unfastened)
must be removed upon notification. After failure to remove within 48
hours, the Building Official may remove or cause such banner to be
removed at the expense of the owner and/or user of the banner.
G. No banner may be installed or erected at the intersection of any street
in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, or at any location
where by its position, shape or color it may interfere with, or obstruct
the view of, or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or
device.
H. The maximum size for any banner shall be no more than four feet
(height) by 25 feet (length)
I. There must be a minimum of 30 consecutive days between the
rehanging of any banner.
J. A banner may be hung for a maximum of 14 consecutive days.
§ 138-34 SIGNS § 138-35
138:369
Chapter 141
SMOKE AND HEAT DETECTORS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54. Fire prevention — See Ch. 80.
§ 141-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DWELLING UNIT — Any structure or part thereof designed to be occupied
as living quarters.
HEAT DETECTOR — The minimal permissible heat detector shall be one
approved by the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., (UL) and installed in
conformity with National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) latest
standards.
SMOKE DETECTOR — The minimal permissible smoke detector shall be
one approved by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., (UL), installed in
conformity with the National Fire Protection Association's (NFPA) latest
standards and shall be powered by ordinary current with battery
backup.[Amended 10-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1021, approved
10-12-1995]
§ 141-2. Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all dwelling units in the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 141-3. Heat or smoke detectors required.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any dwelling unit
constructed, sold or leased or any building in which a dwelling unit is sold
or leased must be equipped, as hereinafter specified, with one or more heator
smoke-detecting devices prior to occupancy thereof by the new owner
and/or lessee.
§ 141-4. Number and placement of detectors.
A. Every single-family dwelling shall have one smoke detector installed on
every living level floor.
B. All multiple-family dwellings shall have smoke detectors in the
following locations:
(1) One in each dwelling unit.
§ 138-35 GLENOLDEN CODE § 141-4
141:370
§ 141-5. Requirements for new construction or change in
occupancy.
The owner or owners of any dwelling unit or multiple dwelling unit building
shall be required to act as follows:
§ 141-6. Inspections.
The Code Enforcement Officer shall make any and all reasonable
inspections of dwelling units and/or buildings containing multiple dwelling
units, ensuring compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
§ 141-7. Violations and penalties.
Any owner who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this chapter shall, after conviction before a District Justice,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 for each day of violation and costs for
each such offense or to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 141-8. Fees. [Added 10-12-1995 by Ord. No. 1021, approved
10-12-1995]
There shall be a permit fee of $20 per unit for installing hard-wired smoke
detectors.
(2) One at the top of any stairwell if such stairwell is open to common
hallways or corridors.
(3) One smoke detector for each 50 linear feet in common hallways
and/or corridors.
(4) One heat or smoke detector in each common storage area.
(5) One smoke or heat detector in each boiler room.
(6) Smoke detectors powered by ordinary current with battery backup
located in all bedrooms and living rooms. [Added 10-12-1995 by
Ord. No. 1021, approved 10-12-1995]
A. In the case of new construction, reconstruction or additions to a
dwelling unit, all smoke detectors or heat detectors shall be properly
recorded on the construction plan prior to issuance of a building
permit.
B. In the case of a change in occupancy or ownership of a single or
multiple dwelling, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the
owner shall notify the Borough of the number and location of all smoke
and/or heat detectors.
§ 141-4 SMOKE AND HEAT DETECTORS § 141-8
141:371
Chapter 143
SPEED-TIMING DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
§ 143-1. Authorization for use.
From and after the passage of this chapter, all qualified police officers of
the Glenolden Borough Police Department shall be authorized to use, in
the Borough of Glenolden, all electrical and/or mechanical speed-timing
devices which are now or shall hereafter be approved by the Department
of Transportation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including but not
limited to the Excessive Speed Preventer (ESP) Model TK100 and VASCAR
Plus.
Chapter 143A
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
Chapter 144
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Littering — See Ch. 104.
Poles — See Ch. 130.
Sewers — See Ch. 135.
§ 141-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § 143-1
143:372
ARTICLE I
Building Materials in Highway
[Adopted 4-3-1895 by Ord. No. 4]
§ 144-1. Permit required; conditions. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060,
approved 5-20-2008]
Whenever any corporation, person or persons shall desire to occupy any
part of a public highway for placing building and other material thereon
or for any other temporary purpose, they, he or it shall make application
to the Highway Committee stating the purpose for which it is desired to
occupy said highway, and thereupon the said Committee may issue a permit
to occupy such part of the highway not exceeding in length the front of the
property owned by the applicant or about to be built upon or repaired and
not exceeding in breadth 10 feet, for such time, not exceeding 30 days, as
said Committee should deem necessary and reasonable.
§ 144-2. Extension of permit. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060,
approved 5-20-2008]
Upon the expiration of the time named in said permit the Committee may,
upon application, extend the said permit for a further period of not more
than 30 days.
§ 144-3. Passageway; safety requirements.
Whenever any highway shall be occupied as hereinabove provided, a
sufficient passageway for vehicles shall be left unencumbered and no
building materials or other obstruction shall be placed within 18 inches of
any crossing or of the curbline of the street. Between sunset and sunrise the
said building materials or other obstruction shall be marked at each end by
a lighted lantern of red glass, and whenever the obstruction shall exceed in
length 20 feet, one such lantern shall be placed every 20 feet.
§ 144-4. Permit fees. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060, approved
5-20-2008]
Upon the issuance or extension of any permit the applicant shall pay into
the Borough treasury the following sums: for 30 days, $25; and $15 for each
additional thirty-day extension thereafter. Borough Council may change the
amount of these fees by resolution.
§ 144-4.1. Requirements; prohibited uses. [Added 5-20-2008 by
2060, approved 5-20-2008]
The area between the curb line or paving line and the nearest public rightof-
way line of any public street in the Borough of Glenolden shall at all times
be kept clear of obstructions other than sidewalks, public utility facilities,
authorized signs, trees, shrubs and other plantings; and no merchandise or
§ 144-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-4.1
143A:373
vehicles may be displayed, parked or stored therein, nor may any fence,
athletic facility or structure be erected therein.
§ 144-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982; 5-20-2008 by 2060, approved 5-20-2008]
If any person shall place any building material or other obstruction upon
any highway or public right-of-way without obtaining a permit therefor or
for a longer time than authorized by such permit or shall violate any of the
provisions of this article, he shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable
by a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $300, and costs of prosecution
and, upon default in payment of the fine and costs, by imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 144-4.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-5
143A:374
ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction
[Adopted 8-19-1926 by Ord. No. 229, approved 8-24-1926]
§ 144-6. Conformance required.
All cement sidewalks and cement concrete curbs and gutters constructed in
the Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, shall conform to
the requirements as set forth in this article.
§ 144-7. Sidewalk specifications.
The cement concrete sidewalk shall be not less than four feet in width and
not less than four inches in thickness.
A. Materials.
(1) Portland cement shall meet the requirements of the current
Standard Specifications and Tests for Portland Cement adopted by
the American Society for Testing Materials.
(2) Fine aggregate shall consist of sand, stone, screenings or other
inert materials with similar characteristics, or a combination
thereof, having hard, strong, durable grains, and shall be free from
injurious amounts of dust, lumps, soft or flaky particles and shale.
(3) Fine aggregate shall be free from alkali and surface coatings and
shall not contain injurious amounts of vegetable or other organic
matter.
(4) Coarse aggregate shall consist of crushed stone, gravel, air-cooled
blast furnace slag or other approved inert materials with similar
particles, free from injurious amounts of soft, friable, thin
elongated or laminated pieces, alkali, organic or other harmful
matter and shall be what is known commercially as 3/4 inch.
B. Water. Water shall be clear and free from oil, acid, alkali, organic matter
or other deleterious substances. Forms shall be of sufficient strength
and rigidity so that they will not deflect under the pressure of wet
concrete or other loads incidental to construction.
C. Joints the full depth of the pavement and three-sixteenth-inch wide shall
be made every four feet in length of the concrete construction, and
every 36 feet a joint 3/8 inch in width shall be provided, and each joint
finished with an edging tool. These joints shall be filled with sand and
must be at right angles to the center line of the pavement.
D. Grade and slope.
(1) The subgrade shall be four inches below and parallel to the finished
grade of the pavement and shall have a transverse slope of 1/4 inch
§ 144-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-7
143A:375
§ 144-8. Curbs. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060, approved 5-20-2008]
to the foot. The subgrade shall be thoroughly wet down and
compacted by tramping or rolling.
(2) The transverse slope across the park or grass plot between the
curb and the sidewalk shall be 1/2 inch per lineal foot.
E. Mixing concrete.
(1) Concrete shall be mixed in the following proportions by volume:
one part Portland cement, two parts fine aggregate and four parts
coarse aggregate.
(2) Machine mixing will be preferred and only enough concrete shall
be mixed that will be placed within 30 minutes.
(3) The materials, when hand mixed, shall be mixed dry on a watertight
platform or in a watertight box until mixture is of a uniform color
and the required amount of water added and the materials then
turned at least six times until the mass is homogenous in
consistency and color. Retempering of concrete, i.e., remixing with
additional water, will not be permitted.
F. Placing.
(1) The concrete shall be deposited in the forms to the full thickness of
the pavement, care being taken to provide the proper joints as
specified. The concrete shall be tamped or rammed and the surface
brought up to the specified contour and floated with a finishing
tool.
(2) When the temperature of the surrounding air is 40° F. or lower,
concrete shall be deposited only by the observance of methods to
keep it from freezing, i.e., protection by covering with salt hay, etc.
In no case shall concrete be laid on a frozen subgrade.
A. Cement-concrete curbs; specifications. These shall be of monolithic
construction with a width of six inches at the top, eight inches at the
bottom and with a height of six inches from the gutter line of the
finished road pavement and a total depth of 18 inches and each section
not to exceed 10 feet in length. The back face shall be vertical. Any
curbing required, crossing the entrance to an alley, driveway or private
entranceway, shall have the top finished two inches above the outside
edge or gutter line of the finished roadway pavement. When indicated
or directed, drainage openings shall be made through the cementconcrete
curb at the elevation and of the size required. The mixture
shall be of Portland cement, clean sharp sand and three-quarter-inch
pebbles or stone and shall be in the proportion of 1: 2: 4, volumetric
measuring. When the temperature of the air falls below 40° F., calcium
chloride must be added to the mix to insure quick setup. Its use shall be
a proportion not exceeding 4% of the cement used. All curb corners
§ 144-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-8
143A:376
§ 144-9. Gutters.
All gutters shall be six inches in thickness and shall be composed of the
same materials and have the same finish as specified above for sidewalks.
On all streets of a width of 24 feet between curbs, the gutter shall be 27
inches in width; on streets of a width of 30 feet between curbs, the gutter
shall be 36 inches in width. A full one-fourth-inch joint must be provided
each 10 feet in length of gutter. All gutters shall have a transverse slope of
1/2 inch per foot.
shall be circular and have a radius not less than equal to the least
width of the sidewalk area of intersecting streets. All curb joints are
to be filled with bar sand upon withdrawal of forms and templates,
excepting that, at every fifth joint and at the beginning and ending of
a return curb, precase bituminous expansion material shall be inserted
instead of sand. [Amended 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2069, approved
11-17-2009]
B. Curb excavation; forms. Excavation for curb subgrade shall be at a
point not less than 18 inches from the top of the finished curb unless
otherwise specified by the Borough Engineer, in which case it may be
required that this excavation be increased a further depth of six inches
and refilled with a tampered layer of stone, gravel, rubble or cinders,
due to unsuitable conditions. Backfilling around all curb construction
shall be hand tamped, and grass plots and other adjacent sidewalk
areas brought to a level not lower than the top of the curb. Forms shall
be of such material and type as will meet with the approval of the
Borough Engineer and shall not be withdrawn within 24 hours from the
pouring of the concrete.
§ 144-8 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-9
143A:377

ARTICLE III
Utility Installations
[Adopted 1-18-1927 by Ord. No. 235, approved 1-20-1927]
§ 144-10. Completion of installations prior to paving.
Any person owning or occupying land abutting upon any of those certain
streets, highways, roads, alleys or other public thoroughfares within the
Borough of Glenolden which, by ordinances of the said Borough duly
passed, enacted and ordained, or which will be duly, passed, enacted and
ordained hereafter, are to be paved, curbed, guttered, graded, repaved
or otherwise improved, is hereby directed to make, at his own expense
and as his sole undertaking and in compliance with all existing Borough
ordinances and regulations, any excavations or openings in, upon or under
said streets or thoroughfares necessary to repair, lay or relay pipes for gas,
water, sewerage, heating or any other purpose which requires opening or
excavating in, upon or under said streets or thoroughfares, and to complete
such work within 21 days after notice so to do. Such work shall be of a
permanent and workmanlike character and subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 144-11. Excavations prohibited for five-year period.
For a period of five years hereafter, it shall be unlawful for any person,
persons, firm or corporation to make any excavation or opening in, upon or
under, or otherwise to repair, disturb, injure or destroy, for any purpose, the
paved, macadamized or finished surface of any street, highway, road, alley
or other public thoroughfare which is to be hereafter paved, macadamized,
improved or repaired in accordance with any ordinance duly enacted or
which may be hereafter duly enacted.
§ 144-12. Exceptions.
The Borough Council duly assembled shall have the right and authority
to make such exceptions to the enforcement of this article as to it shall
seem reasonable, necessary and proper in the promotion of public health
and general welfare, and may, in its discretion, by proper resolution or
ordinance, direct the issuance of a permit by the proper officer under such
terms and conditions as the said Borough Council may direct.
§ 144-13. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, persons, firms or corporations violating any of the provisions
of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not less than $75 nor
more than $100 plus costs of prosecution and, upon default in the payment
of the said fine and costs, the offenders shall be committed to the county jail
for not more than 30 days.
§ 144-10 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-14
143A:379
§ 144-14. Limitation upon effect.
This article is hereby declared to have no operation or effect in any way
contrary to any Act of Assembly providing for emergency repairs to
sidewalks, for the maintenance and regulation of state highways or stateaid
highways or any other purpose.
§ 144-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-14
143A:380
ARTICLE IV
Sidewalk Installation by Property Owners
[Adopted 5-14-1931 by Ord. No. 275, approved 5-29-1931]
§ 144-15. Sidewalks established.
Sidewalks, curbs, gutters and drains are hereby severally ordained, laid out
and established on every public street of the Borough now in existence or
hereafter in any manner constituted, and, further, such sidewalks, curbs,
gutters or drains shall be constructed in or along said streets at such times
as Council may hereafter order or direct by resolution of a majority of its
members.
§ 144-16. Establishment of grades.
The Borough Engineer shall establish a grade or grades for all footways or
sidewalks hereafter laid out, constructed or repaired within the Borough,
which grade or grades may be separate and apart from the grade or grades
established for the cartway or roadway, and which grade or grades shall
be so established as soon as may be after Council's written request to said
Engineer and shall thereafter constitute the official grade or grades of such
footways or sidewalks.
§ 144-17. Adherence to standards. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060,
approved 5-20-2008]
The material, dimensions and construction of all sidewalks, footpaths,
curbs, gutters and drains shall be as provided by existing Borough
ordinances.87
A. Cement-concrete sidewalks; specifications. The ingredients for cementconcrete
for sidewalks shall be of the same proportion as provided for
curbs. The concrete may be job mixed or supplied from a central mixing
plant. Each block of sidewalk shall be jointed not less than every four
feet, with every fourth joint opened to the subgrade and filled with an
approved bituminous material upon withdrawal of forms and templates.
At street corners, the sidewalk tangent shall be extended each way
across grass plots to the curb. All sidewalks shall have a slope of onequarter-
inch per foot toward the curb. All sidewalks shall be of
monolithic construction and finishing to be by screening, floating and
brushing.
B. Driveways at sidewalks. All private driveways constructed across the
sidewalk area shall have the finished grade meet the finished grade of
the sidewalk, with the ramp or approach beginning two inches above
the gutter line of the roadway pavement and terminating at the edge of
the sidewalk, with the ramp or approach beginning two inches above
the gutter line of the roadway pavement and terminating at the edge of
87.Editor's Note: See Art. II, Sidewalk Construction.
§ 144-15 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-17
143A:381
§ 144-18. Grading and paving by owners.
All grading, paving and repairing of sidewalks and all constructing and
repairing of curbs or gutters at the edge of sidewalks shall be done by the
owners of the respective lots fronting thereon, pursuant to the terms of this
article and of existing Borough ordinances, when so required by a resolution
of Borough Council.
§ 144-19. Notice to owners.
All owners of lots fronting upon sidewalks to be graded, paved or repaired,
or upon curbs or gutters to be constructed or repaired, under the provisions
hereof, shall, upon passage of the resolution requiring such work, be
notified in writing by the Secretary of Borough Council to do or cause to be
done such grading, paving, repairing or constructing, as the case may be,
in front of their respective lots, within 30 days after the date of said notice,
and said notice shall contain a statement that upon neglect of the owner
to comply with said notice, the Borough may cause such work to be done
and collect the costs thereof and 10% additional, together with all charges
and expenses, from such owner and may file a municipal claim therefor or
collect the same by action in assumpsit.
§ 144-20. Service of notice.
All such notices shall be served by the Secretary of Borough Council, or by
such person or persons as he may appoint, upon the owner of the premises
to which the notice refers, if such owner is a resident of the Borough; if
such owner is not a resident, then upon the agent or tenant of the owner or
upon the occupant of such premises. If the owner has no agent or tenant or
if there is no occupier of such premises, then service shall be by written or
printed notice posted upon such premises.
§ 144-21. Performance of work by Borough; cost.
Upon neglect of any owner of lots to comply with the provisions hereof, the
Borough Council may, after the notice herein provided, cause such grading,
paving, repairing, curbing or guttering to be done at the cost of such owner
and may collect the costs thereof and 10% additional, together with all
charges and expenses now or hereafter authorized by law, from such owner
and may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the same by action in
assumpsit or by such other procedure as may be authorized by law.
§ 144-22. Agreement for work to be done by Borough.
Any owner of lots may, after notice as aforesaid, agree in writing that the
work therein required shall be done by Borough Council, and in such cases
the sidewalk closest to the curb. Curb returns are not required for this
type of driveway approach. The depth of concrete shall, however, be six
inches.
§ 144-17 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-22
143A:382
the provisions hereinbefore set forth as to collection of the costs thereof
shall continue in force and not be abrogated or waived by such agreement.
§ 144-22 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-22
143A:383

ARTICLE V
Openings in State Highway Extensions
[Adopted 12-28-1931 by Ord. No. 282, approved 12-28-1931]
§ 144-23. Authority of Department of Highways.88
The Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania is
hereby given exclusive authority to grant all permits for the opening or
tearing up of any part of the improved surface of those certain Borough
streets or parts thereof which are continuations of state highway routes in
the Borough and for the maintenance of which the Department of Highways
is by law responsible.
§ 144-24. Fees for permits.
Fees for the granting of such permits may be charged by the Department of
Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania according to the standard
schedule of fees which may from time to time be adopted.
§ 144-25. Violations and penalties. [Amended 5-20-2008 by 2060,
approved 5-20-2008]
Any person, firm or corporation opening or tearing up the improved surface
of any of the aforesaid streets, or causing or allowing the same to be
done for him, them or it, without having first obtained a permit from the
Department of Highways of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of
not more than $300 and, in addition thereto, the costs of prosecution and
the surface restoration costs and, in default thereof, such person or persons
or the executive officer of such corporation shall undergo imprisonment for
not more than five days.
A. Prior permit required; approval by Borough Manager. No sidewalks
shall be constructed or reconstructed or any grading, paving or
repaving done and no curbs shall be constructed by the owner or
owners, or by a person or persons under his or their directions until the
owner or owners or the person having charge of the work shall first
have obtained a permit for the same from the Secretary of the Borough.
The permit shall be placed in the hands of the Borough Engineer, who
shall furnish the said person with the established lines and grades;
provided that if, in the judgment of the Borough Engineer such
construction or reconstruction, grading, paving, repaving or repairing
is inexpedient or dangerous because of the existing grade of the street
or of the contiguous sidewalk, the Engineer shall retain the permit and
return it to the Borough Secretary for cancellation. The permit shall be
valid for a period of 60 days from issue. [Added 5-20-2008 by 2060,
approved 5-20-2008]
88.Editor's Note: See 71 P.S. § 511 et seq. relative to the powers and duties of the Department
of Transportation.
§ 144-23 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-26
143A:385
§ 144-26. Disposition of fines and charges.
All fines and restoration charges collected for the violation of this article
shall be paid into the state treasury as provided by law.
§ 144-26 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-26
143A:386
ARTICLE VI
Removal of Snow From Sidewalks
[Adopted 9-14-1961 by Ord. No. 600, approved 9-14-1961]
§ 144-27. Removal by owner, occupant or tenant.
The owner, occupant or tenant of every property fronting upon or alongside
of any of the streets in the Borough of Glenolden is hereby required to
remove or cause to be removed from all of the sidewalks in front of or
alongside of such property, to a width of three feet, all snow thereon fallen
within 24 hours after the same shall have ceased to fall. The owner of a
property shall be responsible for conforming to the requirements of this
section where such property is occupied by such owner or is unoccupied;
the tenant or occupier thereof where such property is occupied by such
tenant or occupier only; and the owner thereof where the property is a
multiple-business or multiple-dwelling property occupied by more than one
tenant or occupier.
§ 144-28. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any owner, occupant or tenant who shall fail to remove any snow or ice
from any sidewalk as required by § 144-27 shall, upon conviction thereof
before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 nor
more than $100 and costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment of
such fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days; provided,
however, that such fine and costs of prosecution may be in addition to any
expenses and additional amounts authorized by law, imposed as provided in
§ 144-29.
§ 144-29. Removal by Borough; cost.
In any case where the owner, occupant or tenant, as aforesaid, shall fail,
neglect or refuse to comply with any of the provisions of § 144-27 within
48 hours after the snow has ceased falling, the Borough authorities may
proceed immediately to clear all snow from the sidewalk of such delinquent
property owner and to collect the expenses thereof, with any additional
amount allowed by law, from such owner, occupant or tenant, as the case
may be, which may be in addition to any fine or penalty imposed under
§ 144-28. Such expense, costs and fines may be collected by filing a
municipal claim or lien therefor in the manner provided by law for the
collection of municipal claims.
§ 144-27 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-29
143A:387

ARTICLE VII
Excavations in Streets
[Adopted 2-9-1967 by Ord. No. 652, approved 2-9-1967]
§ 144-30. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, firm, association or
corporation to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any of the
public streets in the Borough of Glenolden without first securing a permit
therefor as hereinafter provided.
§ 144-31. Application for permit; insurance.
Application for a permit to open or to make any excavation of any kind
in any of the public streets in the Borough of Glenolden shall be made
in writing to the Borough Secretary. Such application shall be made upon
forms to be furnished by the Borough and shall set forth the name of
the applicant, the exact location of the proposed opening or excavation,
the purpose therefor and the approximate size or depth thereof, and shall
contain an agreement on the part of the applicant that the work shall be
done in full compliance with the ordinances and regulations of the Borough
and of the commonwealth in relation thereto and that the applicant shall
well and truly save, defend and keep harmless the Borough from and
indemnify it against any and all action, suits, demands, payments, costs
and charges for or by reason of the proposed opening or excavation and
all damages to persons or property resulting in any manner therefrom
or occurring in the prosecution of the work connected therewith or from
any other matter, cause or thing relating thereto. The applicant shall also
furnish to the Borough a certificate showing that he is fully and adequately
protected by public liability insurance.
§ 144-32. Issuance of permit; fees. [Amended 12-30-1971 by Ord.
No. 735, approved 12-20-1971; 7-14-1988 by Ord. No. 934,
approved 7-14-1988; 5-20-2008 by 2060, approved 5-20-2008]
A permit to open or to make any excavation of any kind in any of the
public streets in the Borough of Glenolden shall be issued only to a public
utility as defined under the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
or to a licensed master plumber. Before any permit shall be issued, the
applicant shall pay to the Borough Secretary a permit fee to cover the
costs of inspections and other incidental services in connection therewith,
in accordance with the following schedules:
A. Public utility (complete restoration, including permanent paving, by
permittee).
(1) Minimum permit fee: $100.
(2) Additional permit fee. When longitudinal opening or excavation is
in excess of 10 feet, the applicant shall pay, in addition to such
§ 144-30 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-32
143A:389
§ 144-33. Refilling and repaving. [Amended 7-10-1997 by Ord. No.
1042, approved 7-10-1997]
Any permittee who shall open or excavate any public street in the Borough
shall thoroughly and completely refill the opening or excavation, puddling
and ramming so as to prevent any settling thereafter. Where the permittee
is a public utility, it shall restore the surface to the same condition as it
was before the opening or excavation, and such restoration of streets shall
be in accordance with the specifications for trench and backfill restoration
adopted by resolution this date and as amended from time to time; as
restored, the surface shall conform to the proper grade and be of the same
surface covering as the part of the thoroughfare immediately adjoining the
opening. If, within two years after the restoration of the surface as herein
provided, defects shall appear therein resulting from defective backfilling
by the permittee, the permittee shall reimburse the Borough for the cost of
all necessary repairs to the permanent paving.
§ 144-34. Other work; supervision.
All other work in connection with openings in any street, including
excavation, protection, refilling and temporary paving, shall be done by
the permittee at his expense, and all such work shall be subject to the
provisions of this article and to the supervision and approval of the Borough
Plumbing Inspector.
§ 144-35. Manner of performance.
minimum fee, an additional fee at the rate of $50 for each 100 feet
or fraction thereof.
(3) All fees in this, Chapter 144, of the Borough Code may be changed
by Resolution by Borough Council.
B. Licensed master plumber (permanent paving to be completed by
Borough, with permit fee to include amount necessary to reimburse
Borough for cost thereof).
(1) Permit and paving fee: the sum of $120 for the first three square
yards or any part thereof and the sum of $40 for each additional
square yard.
A. No opening or excavation in any street shall extend from the curbline
into the highway a distance greater than one foot beyond the center line
of the street before being refilled and the surface of the highway
restored to a condition safe and convenient for travel.
B. No more than 500 feet longitudinally shall be opened in any street at
any one time.
C. The work of excavation shall be so conducted as not to interfere with
the water mains, sewers or their connections with the houses or any
other subsurface lines or constructions until permission of the proper
§ 144-32 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-35
143A:390
authorities in connection with such subsurface lines or constructions
shall have been obtained.
D. No tunneling shall be allowed without the express approval of the
Borough Plumbing Inspector and permission therefor endorsed upon
the permit. The backfilling of a tunnel excavation shall be made only in
the presence of the Borough Plumbing Inspector or an inspector
designated by him and shall be done only in a method approved by him.
E. On improved streets, a temporary paving of suitable stony materials,
thoroughly bound and compacted, shall be installed flush with the
surface of the adjoining paving. Where the permittee is a public utility,
permanent paving shall be installed 10 days thereafter.
F. During the making of any excavation in any street, every necessary and
reasonable precaution shall be taken by the permittee and the parties
making the same to keep the area in a safe and passable condition both
day and night by guards, barriers, lanterns and other devices, and all
excavating permits are granted under and subject to the express
condition that the person to whom the same is issued shall indemnify,
save and keep harmless the Borough from any loss in damages or
otherwise whatsoever which may or shall be occasioned at any time by
the said excavation or by any leak, explosion or other injury from any
pipe, apparatus, conduit or any other matter placed in the said
excavation.
G. The permittee shall notify the Borough Plumbing Inspector when the
opening or excavation is ready for backfilling before any backfilling is
done. The excavation shall be backfilled immediately after said
Plumbing Inspector has made final inspection or as directed by the
permit.
H. All excavations shall be backfilled with suitable materials and
thoroughly compacted in layers, each of which shall not exceed six
inches in depth. No material shall be used that contains stone in excess
of six inches in any dimension or that is frozen, contains debris or earth
with high void content. Flooding with water for consolidating backfill is
prohibited.
I. In the event that any work performed by or for a permit holder shall, in
the opinion of the Borough Plumbing Inspector, be unsatisfactory and
the same shall not be corrected in accordance with his instructions
within the time fixed by him, or in the event that the work for which the
permit was granted is not completed within the time fixed by the
Borough Secretary, the Borough may proceed to correct such
unsatisfactory work or complete any such work not completed and
charge the cost thereof plus 20% to the permittee.
§ 144-35 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-36
143A:391
§ 144-36. Emergency excavations.
In the case of any leak, explosion or other accident in any subsurface pipe,
line, construction or apparatus, it shall be lawful for the person owning
or responsible for such pipe, line, construction or apparatus to commence
an excavation to remedy such condition before securing a permit, provided
that application for a permit shall be made immediately and not later
than the next business day thereafter and that all other provisions of this
article are fully complied with. If any such emergency condition shall not
be immediately attended to by the owner or person responsible for such
pipe, line, construction or apparatus, the Borough Plumbing Inspector, after
such notice as he shall deem necessary under the circumstances of the
particular case, shall proceed to do the work necessary and required by
such emergency and charge the same on the basis of cost plus 20% to such
owner or person.
§ 144-37. Payment for work done by Borough.
Payment for all work done by the Borough under the provisions hereof shall
be made by the person made liable therefor under the provisions hereof
within 30 days after a bill therefor is sent to such person by the Borough.
Upon failure to pay such charges within such time, the same shall be
collectible by the Borough in the manner provided by law for the collection
of municipal claims.
§ 144-38. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, violating the
provisions of this article or assisting in the violation of the provisions of
this article, shall, upon conviction thereof in a summary proceeding, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 and not exceeding $300
and costs of prosecution and, upon default in payment thereof, shall be
sentenced and committed to the county jail for a period not exceeding 30
days for each and every offense.
§ 144-39. Exclusions.
The provisions of this article shall not apply to laying sidewalks or curbs or
to the planting of poles.
§ 144-36 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-39
143A:392
ARTICLE VIII
Specifications for Proposed Streets
[Adopted 4-11-1940 by Ord. No. 385, approved 4-25-1940]
§ 144-40. Pavement by owners; specifications.
Any street or highway hereafter laid out or constructed or proposed to be
laid out or constructed within the Borough shall, by the owners, builders
or occupants of the land, be paved and improved in a manner satisfactory
to Borough Council and conforming in all respects to certain specifications
heretofore prepared by the Borough Engineer, under date of April 11,
1940, which specifications are hereby adopted as the official Borough
specifications for such paving and filed with the Borough Secretary, to
remain with the Secretary for the purpose of public inspection.
§ 144-41. Approval by Engineer required.
Such paving and improvement shall hereafter in each instance be fully
completed and approved by the Borough Engineer before any dedication of
such proposed street or highway shall be made, and, further, such paving
shall constitute a necessary prerequisite to acceptance by the Borough of
any proposed dedication of such street or highway to the use of the Borough
as a public street or highway.
§ 144-42. Violations and penalties.
Any violation of the provisions hereof shall be punishable by a fine not to
exceed $50 and the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment thereof,
by imprisonment not exceeding 10 days, and, further, each day in which said
violation shall continue shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of
this article, punishable as aforesaid.
§ 144-40 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 144-42
143A:393
Chapter 148
TAXATION
§ 144-42 GLENOLDEN CODE § 144-42
143A:394
ARTICLE I
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 12-30-1986 by Ord. No. 912, approved 12-30-198689; last
reenacted 12-19-2017 by Ord. No. 2119, approved 12-19-2017]
§ 148-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Glenolden."
§ 148-2. Tax imposed; statutory authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Glenolden, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place, as authorized by Article XI-D, "Local Real
Estate Transfer Tax," 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 148-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include
a declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording under
§ 148-8 of this article.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
89.Editor's Note: This ordinance also superseded former Art. I, Realty Transfer, adopted
4-12-1956 by Ord. No. 540, approved 4-12-1956, as reenacted.
§ 148-1 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-3
143A:395
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendents of any of the
foregoing, a spouse of any of the foregoing and the estate of any of the
foregoing. Individuals related by the half blood or legal adoption shall be
treated as if they were related by the whole blood.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both, the term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interests in which is held by 35 or fewer persons and
which:
Recreational activities such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within the Borough of Glenolden,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, including without limitation buildings,
structures, fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with
or without upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements,
immovables or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a
conveyance of land but excluding permanently attached machinery and
equipment in an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
§ 148-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-3
143A:396
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents, or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the "value" thereof shall be determined from the price
set forth in or actual consideration for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration or for consideration less than the actual monetary worth
of the real estate, a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold
or possessory interest, any exchange of properties or the real estate
of an acquired company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate
determined by adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local
real estate tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed
by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty
transfer tax base calculations;
B.
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
D.
§ 148-3 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-3
143A:397
§ 148-4. Payment evidence; limitations; interest.
§ 148-5. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth and any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 148-6. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 148-4 shall not be imposed upon:
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document, or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording, shall be
subject to pay for, and in respect to, the transaction or any part thereof
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the recorder, whereon the date
of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the signature of the
collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., so that if any other political subdivision
shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same person or
transfer, then the tax levied by the Borough of Glenolden under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such 1/2 rate shall become effective without any action on the part of
the Borough of Glenolden; provided, however, that the Borough of
Glenolden and any other political subdivision which imposes such tax
on the same person or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their
respective rates to 1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose
respectively different rates, the total of which shall not exceed the
maximum rate permitted under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
§ 148-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-6
143A:398
A. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation, which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided that said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Borough of Glenolden is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff's sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties takes shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
that the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was
acquired by the husband and wife, or husband or wife, prior to the
granting of the final decree in divorce; between parent and child or the
spouse of such child; between brother and sister, or spouse of a brother
or sister; and between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of
such grandchild; except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee
within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making
such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee to a
beneficiary of an ordinary trust.
§ 148-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-6
143A:399
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this subsection.
L. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
M. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
N. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
O. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if:
(1) The grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary
purpose of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture.
(2) The agency or authority has the full ownership interest in the real
estate transferred.
P. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale in
which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
Q. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
§ 148-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-6
143A:400
§ 148-7. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners or stockholders.
Except as otherwise provided in § 148-6, documents which make, confirm or
evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between associations
or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or stockholders
thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article, corporations
and associations are entities separate from their members, partners,
stockholders or shareholders.
§ 148-8. Acquired companies.
R. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954
[68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary
purpose preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic,
agricultural or open space opportunities.
S. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
T. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation.
U. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
V. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania
realty transfer tax statement of value may be submitted for this
purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement
of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason such document
is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company and, of itself or together
with prior changes, has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this article.
§ 148-6 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-8
143A:401
§ 148-9. Credits against tax.
§ 148-10. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 148-11. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the sheriff or other
C. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
§ 148-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-11
143A:402
officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the first
moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale are
insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 148-12. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 148-12.1. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with, or presented to, the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction, showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 148-12.2. Civil penalties.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983, P.L.
40, No. 21, the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to the Borough
of Glenolden based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax, without compensation from the Borough of Glenolden.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to the
Borough of Glenolden all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2%
for use of the county, together with a report containing the information
as is required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting
collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent
commission shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee has been
tendered.
§ 148-11 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-12.2
143A:403
§ 148-12.3. Liens.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being situated
wholly or in part within the boundaries of the Borough of Glenolden, which
lands, tenements or hereditaments, or interest therein, are described in
or conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and to continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas
of Delaware County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal
Claims and Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. 7101 et seq., its supplements and
amendments.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
§ 148-12.2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-12.3
143A:404
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 3-9-1967 by Ord. No. 655, approved 3-9-1967; amended
12-28-1972 by Ord. No. 749, approved 12-28-1972; 12-27-1973 by
Ord. No. 759; 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982; last
reenacted 12-15-2009 by Ord. No. 2071, approved 12-15-2009]
§ 148-13. Definitions.
§ 148-14. Imposition of tax.
In addition to other taxes imposed by the Borough Council of the Borough
of Glenolden, there is hereby imposed an annual tax of $10 upon every
resident of the Borough who shall have attained the age of 18 years on
or before July 1, 1974, and each year thereafter in which this article is in
effect. The purpose of the tax is to provide revenue for general Borough
purposes.
§ 148-15. Collection of tax.
Such tax shall be collected by the Collector in the same manner and at the
same time as other Borough taxes are collected.
§ 148-16. Compensation of Collector.
The compensation of the Collector shall be as provided from time to time by
resolution of Borough Council.
§ 148-17. Disposition of taxes.
The amount of taxes collected or received shall be divided between the
Borough and the School District as provided by law or as agreed between
them.
§ 148-18. Recovery of taxes.
All taxes levied under this article, together with all penalties, shall be
recoverable by the Collector in the manner authorized by law for the
collection of such taxes.
A. Definitions. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall
have, for the purpose of this article, the meaning herein indicated:
COLLECTOR — The person elected or designated by the Borough
Council to collect or receive the taxes imposed by this article.
PERSON — Any natural person.
RESIDENT — Any person domiciled in the Borough of Glenolden.
B. Usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine the
feminine.
§ 148-13 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-19
143A:405
§ 148-19. Violations and penalties.
Any person convicted before a District Justice of violating this article or of
failing, neglecting or refusing to pay such taxes or penalties shall be liable
to a fine or penalty of not less than $25 nor more than $100 and costs
of prosecution thereof and, in default thereof, to undergo imprisonment in
the county jail for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided that such fine
or penalty shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by any other
section of this article.
§ 148-20. Statutory authority; continuance in effect.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act 511 of the General
Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as approved December
31, 1965, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," as amended, and shall
become effective 30 days after the adoption hereof, subject, however, to the
provisions of Act 511, as aforesaid, as to when this tax is effective, where
another political subdivision has levied a like tax. This tax shall be imposed
for the fiscal year of the Borough 1967 and for each fiscal year thereafter.
§ 148-19 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-20
143A:406
ARTICLE III
Amusement Tax
[Adopted 12-29-1980 by Ord. No. 839]
§ 148-21. Definitions.
A. Definitions. The following words or phrases, when used in this article,
shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where
the context clearly indicates a different meaning:
AMUSEMENT — All manner and forms of entertainment, including,
among others, theatrical or operatic performances; concerts;
vaudeville; circus; carnival and sideshows; all forms of entertainment
at fairgrounds and amusement parks; athletic contests, including
wrestling matches, boxing and sparring exhibitions, football and
baseball games, ice skating, roller skating, golfing, tennis, hockey,
bathing, swimming, archery, shooting, riding, dancing, rowing, bowling,
billiards, pool; and all other forms of diversion, sport, recreation
pastime, shows, exhibitions, contests, displays and games; and all other
methods of obtaining admission charges, donations, contributions or
monetary charges of any character from the general public or a limited
or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly, in return for other
than tangible property or specific personal or professional services.
ASSOCIATION — Any partnership, limited partnership or other forms
of unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County,
Pennsylvania.
ESTABLISHED PRICE — Regular monetary charges of any character
whatsoever, including donations, contributions and dues or
membership fees (periodic or otherwise) fixed and enacted or in any
manner received by producers, as herein defined, from the general
public or a limited or selected number thereof, directly or indirectly,
for the privilege to attend or engage in any amusement, provided that
when such amusement is conducted at any place where the charge
for admission is wholly or in part included in the price paid for
refreshment, service or merchandise, the amounts paid for admission
to such amusement shall be deemed to be 50% of the amount paid for
refreshment, service and merchandise.
PERSON — Every natural person, copartnership, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing or imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to copartnerships or associations
shall mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
PLACE OF AMUSEMENT — Any place, indoors or outdoors, within
the Borough where the general public or a limited or selected number
thereof may, upon payment of an established price, attend or engage in
any amusement as herein defined, including, among others, theaters,
opera houses, amusement parks, studios, arenas, baseball parks, ice-
§ 148-21 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-21
143A:407
§ 148-22. Permit required.
On or after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
producer to continue to conduct or thereafter to begin to conduct any form
of amusement at any permanent or temporary place of amusement, or any
itinerant form of amusement, within the Borough unless an amusement
permit or permits shall have been issued to the producer as hereafter
prescribed and the tax herein imposed paid in accordance with the
provisions herein made.
§ 148-23. Application for permit.
Every producer desiring to continue to conduct or hereafter to begin to
conduct any amusement within the Borough shall file an application for a
permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit or permits, as the
case may be, with the Secretary. Every application for such permit or
permits shall be made upon a form prescribed, prepared and furnished
by the Secretary and shall set forth the name under which the producer
conducts or intends to conduct a permanent, temporary or an itinerant form
of amusement and such other information as the Secretary may require.
§ 148-24. Separate amusement places; itinerants.
If the producer has or intends to have more than one place of amusement
within the Borough, he shall state the location of each such place and, in
the case of an itinerant form of amusement, the date and the length of time
such amusement is to be conducted at each place.
skating rinks, roller-skating rinks, circus or carnival tents or grounds,
fairgrounds, swimming clubs, tennis clubs, any racquet clubs, social
clubs, sporting clubs, athletic clubs, riding clubs, gun clubs, country
clubs, riding academies, golf courses, golf driving ranges, miniature
golf courses, bathing and swimming places, dance halls, tennis courts,
archery, rifle or shotgun ranges, bowling alleys, pool and billiard
parlors, roof gardens, cabarets, nightclubs and other restaurants where
amusements or entertainment is provided and other like places.
PRODUCER — Any person, as herein defined, conducting any place of
amusement, as herein defined, where the general public or a limited or
selected number thereof may, upon the payment of an established price,
attend or engage in any amusement.
SECRETARY — The Secretary of the Borough of Glenolden.
TREASURER — The Treasurer of the Borough of Glenolden.
B. Word usage. The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine
shall include the feminine and the neuter.
§ 148-21 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-25
143A:408
§ 148-25. Temporary places of amusement.
In the case of an application for a permit for a temporary place of
amusement, the producer shall state the name and address of the owner,
lessee or custodian of the premises upon which such amusement is to be
conducted.
§ 148-26. Applications by associations or corporations.
If the producer is an association or a corporation, the application shall state
the names and addresses of partners, principals or the principal officers
thereof, as the case may be, and any other information prescribed by the
Secretary for purposes of identification.
§ 148-27. Signing of application; notarization.
The application for permit shall be signed by the producer, if a natural
person, and in the case of an association, by a partner or principal thereof,
and in the case of a corporation, by a principal officer thereof specifically
authorized by the corporation to sign the application, to which shall be
attached the written evidence of his authority. All applications for a permit
shall be notarized.
§ 148-28. Permit fees.
The applicant, at the time of making the application, shall pay to the
Secretary a permit fee as follows:
§ 148-29. Issuance of permit.
Upon approval of the application and the payment of any permit fee or
fees herein required, the Secretary shall grant and issue to each producer
a permanent, temporary or itinerant amusement permit for each place of
amusement within the Borough set forth in the application.
§ 148-30. Permits nonassignable.
Amusement permits shall not be assignable and shall be valid only for the
person or persons to whom issued and for the conduct of amusements at the
place designated therein and shall at all times be conspicuously displayed
at the place for which issued.
§ 148-31. Expiration of permits for permanent places.
All permits for permanent places of amusement shall expire on the 31st
day of December next succeeding the date upon which they are issued
A. For temporary permit, good for one day only: $1.
B. or permanent place permit, good for one calendar year: $5.
C. For itinerant permit, good for three months: $2.
§ 148-25 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-31
143A:409
unless sooner suspended, surrendered or revoked for cause by the proper
authorities of the Borough.
§ 148-32. Expiration of permits for temporary places.
Permits for temporary places of amusement or for forms of itinerant
amusement shall expire at the time specified therein.
§ 148-33. Change of itinerant places.
The producer of an itinerant form of amusement shall notify the Secretary
promptly of any change in the place of the amusement.
§ 148-34. Duplicate permits.
Whenever any permit issued under the provisions of this article is defaced,
destroyed or lost, the Secretary may issue a duplicate permit to the
producer upon the payment of a fee of $0.50.
§ 148-35. Suspension of permit; hearing.
The Secretary may suspend an amusement permit whenever the producer
has failed to comply with any of the provisions of this article. Upon the
suspension of any amusement permit, the Secretary shall request the
producer to surrender immediately all permits or duplicates thereof which
have been issued to the producer, and the producer shall promptly
surrender all such permits to the Secretary as directed. A producer whose
permit has been suspended, upon request made in writing within 10 days
after such suspension, shall be entitled to a hearing before the Borough
Council on or before the next regular meeting of Borough Council. After
such hearing, the Borough Council shall either rescind the order of
suspension, continue the suspension for a stated time or revoke the permit.
§ 148-36. Tax on admission to amusements; rate.
A tax to provide revenue for general Borough purposes is hereby levied,
assessed and imposed upon the admission or privilege to attend or engage
in any amusement within the Borough at the rate of $0.01 for each $0.20
or fraction thereof of the established price charged the general public or
a limited or selected group thereof by any producer for such admission or
privilege, which shall be paid by the person acquiring such admission or
privilege.
§ 148-37. Collection of tax by producer.
Producers shall collect the tax imposed by this article and shall be liable to
the Borough as agents thereof for the payment of the same to the Treasurer.
§ 148-31 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-38
143A:410
§ 148-38. Payment of tax by owner, lessee or custodian.
Where permits are obtained for conducting amusements by persons who are
not the owners, lessees or custodians of the places where the amusements
are to be conducted, or where the amusement is conducted without a
permit, the tax imposed by this article shall be paid by the owner, lessee or
custodian of such place where such amusement is held or conducted if not
paid by the producer conducting the amusement.
§ 148-39. Reports by producers.
For the purpose of ascertaining the amount of tax payable by the producer
to the Borough:
§ 148-40. Interest on unpaid taxes.
All such taxes shall bear interest at the rate of 1% per month or fractional
part of a month from the date they are due and payable until paid.
§ 148-41. Additional interest.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report or payment as
herein required after written demand by the Secretary, an additional 10%
of the amount of the tax shall be added and collected.
§ 148-42. Recovery of taxes.
All such taxes shall be recoverable as provided by law.
§ 148-43. Determination by Secretary of tax due.
If the Secretary is not satisfied with the report and payment of tax made by
any producer under the provisions of this article, the Secretary is hereby
authorized and empowered to make a determination of the tax due by
such producer, based upon the facts contained in the report or upon any
reliable information obtained, and for this purpose the Secretary and/or the
Treasurer is authorized to examine the books, papers, tickets, ticket stubs
and records of any producer to verify the accuracy of any report or payment
A. Every producer, except as hereinafter provided, conducting an
amusement or place of amusement, shall, on or before the 10th day of
each month, transmit to the Secretary, on forms prescribed and
prepared by the Secretary, a report, under oath or affirmation, of the
amount of tax collected by the producer during the preceding month,
together with the payment of tax due.
B. Every producer conducting a temporary or itinerant form of amusement
shall, within one day after each performance, file with the Secretary, on
forms prescribed by the Secretary, a report, under oath or affirmation,
of the amount of tax collected by the producer for said performance,
together with payment of the tax due.
§ 148-38 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-43
143A:411
made under the provisions hereof or to ascertain whether the taxes imposed
by this article have been paid.
§ 148-44. Estimate of tax due, plus interest and penalties.
If any producer shall neglect or refuse to make any report and payment
of tax required by this article or if as a result of an investigation by the
Secretary and/or Treasurer a report is found to be incorrect, the Secretary
shall estimate the tax due by such producer, together with interest and
penalties thereon.
§ 148-45. Promulgation of rules and regulations.
Borough Council is authorized and empowered to prescribe, adopt and
promulgate rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining
to the administration and enforcement of this article and the collection of
the tax hereby imposed.
§ 148-46. Receipts to be paid into treasury.
All taxes, interest and penalties received, collected or recovered under the
provisions of this article shall be paid into the treasury of the Borough of
Glenolden for the use and benefit of the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 148-47. Exemptions from tax.
The tax imposed by this article shall not apply to or be imposed upon the
privilege to attend any amusement the proceeds of which, after payment of
reasonable expenses, inure:
A. Exclusively to the benefit of religious, educational or charitable
institutions exempt from the payment of real estate taxes under the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. Exclusively to the benefit of organizations or persons in the military or
naval forces of the United States or of National Guard organizations,
reserve officers' associations, or organizations, posts or organizations,
or such posts, or auxiliary units or societies of such posts or
organizations, or such posts, organizations, units or societies organized
in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and if no part of their net
earnings inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or person.
C. Exclusively to the benefit of organizations or associations created and
maintained for the purpose of benefiting employees of any political
subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania or their dependents
or heirs, or for the purpose of benefiting the members or the
dependents or heirs of members of police or paid or volunteer fire
departments of any political subdivision of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 148-43 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-48
143A:412
§ 148-48. Proof of exempt status.
In no event shall exemption be allowed under this article unless the
producer applies for, receives a permit and files a return requesting
exemption and submitting proof of exempt status.
§ 148-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall fail, neglect or refuse to comply with any of the terms
or provisions of this article shall, after conviction before a District Justice,
be subject to a fine not to exceed $100 and costs for each such offense, or
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Such fine and costs
imposed by this section shall be in addition to any other penalty imposed by
any other section of this article.
§ 148-50. Conflict with commonwealth tax.
In the event the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania currently or hereafter
levies a tax on the privilege of attending or engaging in any one or more
of the amusements covered by this article, this article shall, as to such
amusement or amusements, be null and void.
§ 148-48 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-50
143A:413

ARTICLE IV
Discounts and Penalties
[Adopted 1-27-1977 by Ord. No. 802, approved 1-27-1977]
§ 148-51. Entitlement to tax discount.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to the Borough of Glenolden
shall be entitled to a discount of 2% on the amount of such tax upon making
payment of the whole amount thereof within two months after the date of
the tax notice.
§ 148-52. Liability for penalty.
All taxpayers subject to the payment of taxes to the Borough of Glenolden
who shall fail to make payment of any such taxes charged against them for
four months after the date of the tax notice shall be charged a penalty of
10%, which penalty shall be added to the taxes by the Tax Collector and be
collected by him.
§ 148-53. Period of effect.
This article shall be effective for the year 1977 and each year thereafter.
§ 148-51 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-53
143A:415

ARTICLE V
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-20-2007 by Ord. No. 2050,90 approved 11-20-2007]
§ 148-54. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Borough of Glenolden
Local Services Tax Ordinance."
§ 148-55. Authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of the Local Tax Enabling Act, as
amended by Act No. 7 of 2007.
§ 148-56. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide revenue for police, fire and
emergency services; road construction and maintenance; the reduction of
property taxes and for such other purposes as may be specified for such tax
from time to time by the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 148-57. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — "Compensation" as determined under Section 303 of
the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No. 2), known as the "Tax Reform Code
of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V (relating to
personal income tax) not including, however, wages or compensation paid
to individuals on active military service. Employee business expenses are
allowable deductions as determined under Article III of the Tax Reform
Code of 1971. Any housing allowance provided to a member of the clergy
shall not be taxable as earned income.
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited liability
corporation, limited liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
90.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former Art. V, Emergency and Municipal
Services Tax, adopted 2-15-2005 by Ord. No. 2030, approved 2-15-2005. It further
provided an effective date of 1-1-2008.
§ 148-54 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-57
143A:417
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession, or other activity, (except from Corporations), determined under
Section 303 of the Act of March 4, 1971 (P.L. 6, No.2), known as the "Tax
Reform Code of 1971," and regulations in 61 Pa. Code Pt. I Subpt. B Art. V
(relating to personal income tax). The term does not include income which
is not paid for services provided and which is in the nature of earnings from
an investment. For taxpayers engaged in the business, profession or activity
of farming the term shall not include:
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
compensation is charged or received; whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Glenolden.
RESERVE COMPONENT OF THE ARMED FORCES — The United States
Army Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force
Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in § 148-58 of this article.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 148-58. Levy of tax.
The Borough of Glenolden hereby levies and imposes on every individual
engaging in an occupation with the jurisdictional limits of the Borough of
Glenolden a tax in the amount of $52 per annum, beginning the first day
of January 2008 and continuing on a calendar basis annually thereafter,
until modified or repealed by subsequent ordinance. This tax may be used
solely for the following purposes as the same may be allocated by the
Borough of Glenolden from time to time: emergency services, which shall
include emergency medical services, police services and/or fire services;
road construction and/or maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or
property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and farmstead
Any interest generated from monetary accounts or investment
instrument of the farming business;
A.
B. Any gain on the sale of farming machinery;
Any gain on the sale of livestock held 12 months or more for draft,
breeding or dairy purposes; and
C.
D. Any gain on the sale of other capital assets of the farm.
§ 148-57 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-58
143A:418
exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S. Ch. 85, Subch. F (relating to
homestead property exclusion). The political subdivision shall use no less
than 25% of the funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax
is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by
the political subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person
for each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed.
§ 148-59. Exemption and refunds.
A. Exemption. Any person whose total earned income and net profits from
all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for any
calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment of
the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2), the employer shall not withhold the tax from the
person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
§ 148-58 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-59
143A:419
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The exemption certificate form shall be
the uniform form provided by the political subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this clause is subsequently severed in
that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any outstanding
balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may pursue
collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough of Glenolden, in consultation with the Collector
and DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund
claims for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption,
which procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general
municipal law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on
overpayments. Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75
days after the last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the
last quarter of the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject
to interest. No refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a
calendar year that do not exceed $1. The Borough of Glenolden or the
Collector shall determine eligibility for exemption and provide refunds
to exempt persons.
§ 148-59 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-60
143A:420
§ 148-60. Duty of employers to collect.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest 1/100 of a
dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payroll period basis for
each payroll period in which the person is engaging in an occupation,
except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For purposes of this
subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate annual rate of
the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
§ 148-60 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-60
143A:421
§ 148-61. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 148-62. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
Each employer shall use his employment and payroll records from the
first day of January to March 31 each year for determining the number
of employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
collector on or before April 30 of the same calendar year. Supplemental
reports shall be made by each employer on July 30, October 30 and January
31 for new employees as reflected on his employment and payroll records
from April 1 to June 30, July 1 to September 30 and October 1 to December
31, and payments on these supplemental reports shall be made on July 30,
October 30 and January 31, respectively.
§ 148-63. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who has earned income or realizes net profit,
as those terms are defined herein, within the political subdivision shall be
required to comply with this article and pay the tax due to the Collector on
or before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 148-64. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation or
employed in more than one political subdivision.
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 148-59B
of this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
§ 148-60 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-64
143A:422
§ 148-65. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 148-66. Administration of tax.
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home. In
case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that
calendar year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment
constitutes prima facie certification of payment to all other political
subdivisions.
A. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive payments of
this tax and keep a record thereof showing the amount received by him
from each employer or self-employed person, together with the date the
tax was received. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and keep
a record of the information submitted by employers relating to the
number of employees subject to the tax, the number of employees
exempt from the tax, the employee exemption certificates and refunds
of the tax paid to individuals and employers.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to proscribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Delaware County after exhausting any
administrative remedies, as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
§ 148-64 STORMWATER MANAGEMENT § 148-66
143A:423
§ 148-67. Suits for collection.
§ 148-68. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment, or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600 and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 148-69. Interpretation.
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the
tax due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of such
tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery of
this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 148-66 GLENOLDEN CODE § 148-69
143A:424
Chapter 151
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 144.
§ 151-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMIT — A permit, in writing, issued by the Secretary of the Shade Tree
Commission of the Borough of Glenolden or the appropriate designated
agent or representative of the Borough of Glenolden.
PERSON — Includes individuals, corporations, groups of individuals, firms,
associations and the servants, agents or other employees of such
individuals, corporations, groups of individuals, firms and associations.
PUBLIC AREA — Area, including cartways and sidewalks, within public
right-of-way lines for streets, highways, alleys and public ways within the
Borough of Glenolden and all property owned by the Borough of Glenolden.
TREE — Any tree, shrub or other woody plant or any part thereof which is
in or upon or which extends within the lines of any public street, highway,
avenue, park, parkway or other public area of the Borough.
§ 151-2. Shade Tree Commission; power; duties.
A. There shall be created a Commission to be known and designated as
"Shade Tree Commission." The Commission shall consist of three
members, all of whom shall serve without compensation. The initial
terms of office shall be a term of five years for one member, a term of
four years for one member and a term of three years for one member.
Upon the expiration of the initial terms of office, members shall be
appointed to serve terms of five years. If a vacancy occurs or the term of
any Commissioner expires, a successor shall be appointed by Borough
Council to serve the balance of the unexpired term. Ad hoc members
shall serve on the Board as Council may desire.
B. The Commission shall have exclusive custody and control of all shade
trees in the Borough of Glenolden and shall have the authority to adopt
such rules and regulations as may be necessary to carry out the intent
of this chapter. Regulations for the planting, care, trimming and
removal of trees shall be aimed not only at the elimination of economic
waste by reason of damage to the public property and/or the property of
others and the public health, safety and welfare, but also at the
beautification of the streets, highways, avenues, parks, parkways and
other public areas of the Borough. In carrying out the provisions of this
§ 148-69 TREES § 151-2
151:425
§ 151-3. Permit required to prune; exceptions.
chapter, the Commission may be guided by the standards of the
National Shade Tree Conference or any other similar organization
which promulgates standards which would carry out the intent of this
chapter.
C. The activities of the Commission shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Studying the problems and determining the needs of the Borough
of Glenolden in connection with its tree-planting program;
(2) Recommending to the Borough Council the type and kind of trees
to be planted within the Borough;
(3) Assisting the Borough of Glenolden as well as the citizens of the
Borough in disseminating news and information regarding the
selection, planting and maintenance of trees within the Borough
limits, on private or public property:
(4) Making recommendations from time to time to the Borough Council
regarding desirable legislation regarding the tree program
activities of the Borough; and
(5) Providing regular and special meetings at which the subject of
trees insofar as it relates to the Borough of Glenolden may be
discussed by members of the Commission, officers and personnel of
the Borough and all others interested in the tree program.
D. The Commission shall have the authority to prepare and adopt a street
tree plan for all trees in or upon the public streets, highways, avenues,
parks, parkways and other public areas, which street plan shall
effectuate, in the Commission's opinion, the provisions of this chapter.
Such plan shall not became effective until approved by the Borough
Council.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to care for any shade tree or to
perform or cause to have performed major or total pruning of any shade
tree within a public area without first obtaining a permit and
conforming to the requirements of the permit, except that it shall not be
unlawful to do the following without a permit or approval of the
Commission:
(1) Trim shade trees to conform to the clearance requirements of this
chapter;
(2) Trim or prune shrubs and bushes within a public area;
(3) Remove or cut off low-hanging or broken branches of trees which
create or may create a public nuisance or danger;
(4) Carry out normal repair, upkeep, minor pruning and trimming; or
§ 151-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 151-3
151:426
§ 151-4. Permit required to plant or remove.
No shade tree shall be planted in or upon or removed from any public street,
highway, avenue, park, parkway or other public area without a written
permit, which permit shall designate the type of tree and location where the
tree is to be planted or removed. The Commission shall have the authority
to designate the suitable type of tree and may refuse a permit to plant any
type of tree which, in the opinion of the Commission, is not suitable to the
location.
§ 151-5. Prohibited acts.
§ 151-6. Minimum clearance; failure to trim trees.
(5) Prune, trim or cut for the maintenance of public utility facilities.
B. All work specified in this section shall be done to the satisfaction of the
Commission.
A. No tree in or upon the public streets, highways, avenues, parks,
parkways and other public areas of the Borough shall be planted within
five feet of any driveway, and no tree on private property shall be
planted within three feet of a sidewalk.
B. No tree shall be planted nearer to the intersection of any two or more
streets than 25 feet from the point of intersection of any two public
right-of-way lines.
A. All trees shall be kept trimmed so that the minimum clearance where
they overhang a public walk is nine feet, and the minimum clearance
where they overhang a public street or highway is 11 feet. However, the
Commission reserves the right to designate a higher clearance on
certain highways where heavy traffic or other conditions make it
expedient.
B. All trees on private property which have branches projecting over a
public highway shall be kept trimmed by the owner of such private
property so that the lowest branches shall have the minimum clearance
specified above or such other clearance as may be specified by the
Commission.
C. In case the owner of such property shall neglect or refuse to trim the
trees upon being notified to do so in writing by the Commission or the
Borough's designated agent, the Borough may, 30 days after mailing
notification, cause such trimming to be done at the expense of the
owner, and the entire cost thereof shall be a lien upon said premises
and shall be filed and collected by the Borough in the same manner as
municipal claims are filed and collected and/or as hereinafter provided
by this chapter.
§ 151-3 TREES § 151-7
151:427
§ 151-7. Diseased trees.
The Commission, or its designated representative or appropriate Borough
official, may require the removal of diseased trees. Upon the failure of the
owner to do so within 30 days after the notice was mailed, the Commission
may remove such trees and collect the costs thereof as herein provided.
§ 151-8. Costs of removal.
Whenever it is necessary for the Commission or the Borough to trim or
remove trees by reason of the failure of the property owner to do so after
30 days' notice, the Borough may levy and collect the costs thereof from the
owner of the property.
§ 151-9. Council authorized to appropriate funds; liens and claims.
For the purpose of defraying the cost of the planting, trimming,
maintenance and removal of trees and similar expenses of the Borough,
the Council may appropriate necessary funds or designate Borough workers
to do the required services. The Commission may not hire employees or
have the work done without first obtaining the approval of the Council
of the Borough of Glenolden. The cost of such work shall be a lien upon
the premises from the time of the commencement of the work, which date
shall be fixed by the Borough Engineer and shall be filed with the Borough
Secretary. Any such lien may be collected by an action in assumpsit or by
lien filed in the manner provided by law for filing and collection of municipal
claims. The Borough Secretary shall cause 30 days' written notice to be
given the persons against whose property an assessment has been made,
which notice shall contain the amount of the assessment, the time and
place of payment and certificates from the Commission and the Engineer
concerning the work performed. If payment is not made within 30 days after
notice of assessment, collection may be made as herein provided.
§ 151-10. Application procedure.
A. An application for permit shall be made in writing to the Borough
Secretary on a form provided by him or her. The application shall
specify:
(1) The particular kind of work or operation the applicant desires to
perform:
(2) The exact location and the species of any shade tree affected:
(3) The owner of the property; and
(4) The person who will do the work.
B. It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary to submit every such
application promptly to the Commission for approval or disapproval.
The Commission, in its discretion, may, as a condition precedent to the
issuance of the permit, require the applicant to file a bond or deposit
§ 151-7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 151-10
151:428
§ 151-11. Review of application; adherence to standards; work by
Borough.
§ 151-12. Removal of dead trees.
It shall be the responsibility of the Shade Tree Commission to order the
removal of any dead tree after it has been determined by the Commission
that the removal is necessary for the safety of the community.
§ 151-13. Abuse of shade trees.
Except in case of immediate necessity for the protection of life or property,
no person without having first obtained a permit shall cut, break, climb with
spurs, injure in any manner or remove any shade tree; cut down or interfere
in any way with the main roots of any shade tree; spray any shade tree with
any chemical or insecticide; place any rope, guy wire, cable, sign, poster or
any other fixture on any shade tree or guard for any shade tree; or injure,
misuse or remove any device placed to protect any shade tree.
security not more than double the estimated cost of the work,
satisfactory to the Commission, to guarantee the compliance by the
applicant with the terms and conditions upon which such permit is
issued.
C. The applicant for any permit shall, at the time of his application, pay to
the Borough Treasurer for the use of the Borough, a fee of $1. For major
work, the Commission shall require a certification of insurance against
any personal injury or property damage. The permit shall be valid for a
term of 60 days, but may be removed at any time upon proof
satisfactory to the Commission that any of the terms or conditions upon
which such permit was issued have been violated.
A. The Commission shall review each application for a permit and shall
grant or deny said application. If the application is granted, the
Commission shall specify in the permit the type or species of shade tree
to be planted or removed, cut, trimmed or pruned and may set forth
specifications for doing the same. It shall then be unlawful to plant,
remove, cut, trim or prune any shade tree contrary to specifications set
forth in the permit.
B. The Commission in carrying out its duties hereunder shall adhere to the
standards adopted by the National Shade Tree Conference or any other
similar recognized organization or body which promulgates standards
which carry out the intent of the regulations herein.
C. It shall not be necessary for the Borough of Glenolden to obtain a
permit to do any work on public areas owned by the Borough in fee
simple or rented by it, but no such work shall be done without
consultation with the Commission, except as is provided by exceptions
of § 151-3.
§ 151-10 TREES § 151-14
151:429
§ 151-14. Open space around trees.
Every owner or occupier of property shall maintain an area of open space
not less than four square feet around the base of every shade tree, which
space shall be so maintained as to permit the free passage of air and water
to the roots of such tree.
§ 151-15. Salt water, oil or other injurious materials.
No person shall pour salt water, oil or any other material at any place in
such manner that injury might result to any shade tree.
§ 151-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with the terms and provisions
of this chapter or with any of the regulations and rules promulgated by
the Shade Tree Commission of the Borough of Glenolden shall be liable,
on conviction thereof, to a fine or penalty not exceeding $300 for each
and every offense, and whenever such person shall have been notified by
the Shade Tree Commission or by service or summons in prosecution or
in any other way, that he is committing such violation, each day in which
he continues such violation after any such notification shall constitute a
separate offense punishable by like fine or penalty. Such fines or penalties
shall be collected as prescribed by law. Any person who commits a second or
repeated offense shall be liable to conviction, fine or penalty up to $500 for
each and every second or repeated offense, and whenever such person shall
have been notified by the Shade Tree Commission or by service or summons
in prosecution or in any other way that he is committing such violation, each
day in which he continues such violation after any such notification shall
constitute a separate offense punishable by like fine or penalty. Such fines
or penalties shall be collected as prescribed by law.
Chapter 153
TRUSS STRUCTURE EMBLEMS
§ 153-1. Display of identifying emblems required.
The affixing and display of an emblem identifying property as truss
construction is required by the owner of any multifamily apartment,
townhouses, commercial or industrial buildings on the front of said
structures.
§ 153-2. Shape, size and content of emblem.
The emblem shall be a bright and reflective color or made of reflective
material. The color(s) or reflective material shall be such that it presents
some visible contrast to the building face to which it is attached, so that
such emblem is reasonably visible in the event of fire. The shape of the
emblem shall be an isosceles triangle and the size shall be 12 inches
§ 151-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 153-2
153:430
horizontally by six inches vertically. The following letters, of a size and color
to make them conspicuous, shall be printed on the emblem: "F" to signify a
floor with truss construction; "R" to signify a roof with truss construction;
or a "F/R" to signify both a floor and roof with truss construction.
§ 153-3. Placement of emblem.
Owners of properties presently in existence at the time of this chapter shall
have 90 days within which to affix said emblems. Owners of properties
presently being constructed shall have emblems affixed immediately. The
emblem shall be permanently affixed to the left of the main entrance door at
a height between four to six feet above the ground and shall be installed and
maintained by the owner of the building. Individual structures and dwelling
units with truss construction which are part of a cluster development shall
not be required to have an identifying emblem if there is one affixed at each
entranceway to the development.
§ 153-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any provision of the chapter, shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to a fine of not more than
$1,000 plus costs of prosecution for each and every offense and, in default
of payment of such fines and costs, be imprisoned for not more than 90 days.
Each day during which any person violates any provisions of the chapter
shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 155
VEHICLES, ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 157.
§ 155-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall be defined as
follows:
ABANDONED MOTOR VEHICLE — A vehicle which is found unattended
without the current year's registration or identification markers as required
by law and has been continuously parked or stored on private property for
a period of 10 days and is so disabled as to be incapable of being operated
under its own power or is without one or more of its tires.
JUNKED, STRIPPED OR WRECKED MOTOR VEHICLE — Any motor vehicle
which is no longer in actual use as a motor vehicle or which is wholly unfit
to be operated or has been discarded for use.
§ 153-2 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 155-2
155:431
§ 155-2. Purpose.
The purpose of the chapter is to protect the health, safety, morals and
welfare of the citizens of the Borough by causing the removal of abandoned,
illegally parked, stored, wrecked, junked or stripped motor vehicles from
private property and to abate public nuisances caused by the storage or
parking of an accumulation of such motor vehicles which are detrimental to
the health, safety, morals and welfare of the citizens of the Borough.
§ 155-3. Abandonment prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to park, store or leave any motor vehicle of any kind
in a wrecked, junked, stripped or abandoned condition in a place where its
presence constitutes a hazard on private property, or for the owner of such
motor vehicle or the owner or occupant of any property to allow, permit
or suffer the same to be left upon any privately owned property unless
the same is authorized in connection with a business properly operated
pursuant to the zoning laws91 and other laws of the Borough.
§ 155-4. Notice to remove vehicle.
If the Police Department or the Borough Secretary or any of their authorized
agents find that a violation of this chapter exists, the Police Department or
the Borough Secretary shall notify the owner of the property on which the
motor vehicle is stored or parked or the owner of the vehicle, or both, of
the violation and request either or both of said owners to remove said motor
vehicle or vehicles within five days thereof or any other reasonable time as
the conditions warrant.
§ 155-5. Service of notice.
Notice shall he given by personal service or registered mail to the last
known address of the violator. In the event that, upon diligent search,
the address of either the property owner or the vehicle owner cannot
be ascertained, the posting of the said notice or copies thereof on the
real property, vehicle, structure or area immediately adjacent thereto shall
constitute sufficient notice.
§ 155-6. Request for hearing; issue.
Within five days after notice, the party or parties affected may request a
hearing by filing a written request with the Borough Secretary. Said hearing
shall be conducted before the District Justice. The issue at said hearing
shall be whether or not the activity complained of in the case constitutes a
nuisance.
91.Editor's Note: See Ch. 162, Zoning.
§ 155-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 155-7
155:432
§ 155-7. Change of notice to order.
If a hearing is not requested within the five-day period, the said notice shall
become an order and the parties affected shall proceed to remove or have
removed the motor vehicle or vehicles in question from the property in
question in accordance with the notice and order.
§ 155-8. Hearing before District Justice.
On proper request, a hearing on the matter shall be given forthwith before
the aforesaid District Justice, and where more than one party is involved,
it shall be the duty of the party requesting the said hearing to notify all
other parties affected or interested of the time and place of the impending
hearing.
§ 155-9. Remedying of condition by Borough; costs and penalties.
If the violation complained of shall not have been remedied within the
period as required by the order, the Borough of Glenolden shall, through
its own agents, contractors and/or employees, remedy the violation and
charge the costs thereof to the real property owner on whose property the
motor vehicle or vehicles are located. In addition to said costs, the Borough
shall be entitled to collect a penalty sum of 10% of such costs. Said costs
and penalty shall, after a proper demand and refusal to pay after 30 days,
constitute a lien on the said realty, which shall be filed by the Solicitor upon
receipt of all information.
§ 155-10. Emergency removals of vehicles.
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent duly authorized police officials from
removing from private property, without notice, any attended or unattended
motor vehicles, the presence of which constitutes a hazard or threat to the
life, health, safety or welfare and morals of the citizens of the Borough of
Glenolden and which is imminently dangerous and, in the opinion of the
authorized police officials, constitutes a nuisance which gives rise to the
existence of emergency conditions.
§ 155-11. Place of removal.
Removal by the Police Department of a motor vehicle as called for herein
shall be to the nearest garage or lot or other place of safety or to a
garage designated or maintained by the Police Department or otherwise
maintained by the Borough.
§ 155-12. Designation of storage garages.
The Borough Council shall designate one or more storage garages or lots as
approved storage garages or lots for the storage of impounded vehicles.
§ 155-7 VEHICLES, ABANDONED § 155-13
155:433
§ 155-13. Bond of garage.
Every such approved storage garage shall post a bond in the amount of
$2,000, to be filed with the Borough Secretary, for the indemnification of
the owner of any such impounded vehicle against the loss thereof or injury
or damage thereto while in the custody of said garage keeper.
§ 155-14. Towing and storage fees. [Amended 10-14-1976 by Ord.
No. 794, approved 10-14-1976; 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 963, approved
2-14-1991]
The Council of the Borough of Glenolden, by resolution or motion, shall from
time to time establish the fair and reasonable charges for the towing and
storage of any vehicle removed and impounded under the authority of this
chapter.
§ 155-15. Notice to owner of removal.
Within 12 hours of the time of removal of any motor vehicle under authority
granted in this chapter, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Police Department to the owner of record of
such vehicle and the real property owner from whose land said vehicle was
removed. Such notice shall designate the place from which said vehicle was
removed, the reason for its removal and the garage or lot in which it shall
have been impounded.
§ 155-16. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this chapter
shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest, be final and
conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money
so paid.
§ 155-17. Payment under protest.
In the event that any towing or storage charges so imposed shall be paid
under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a District
Justice or court of record having jurisdiction.
§ 155-18. Record of impounded vehicles.
The Police Department shall keep a record of all motor vehicles impounded
and shall be able at all times to furnish the owners or agents of the owners
thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 155-19. Liability for violations.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not operate to relieve
the owner of any motor vehicle or owner of any real property on which
said vehicle was parked, stored or abandoned from liability for any fine or
§ 155-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 155-19
155:434
penalty for the violation of any law or ordinance on account of which the
said motor vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 155-20. Removal of vehicle by owner.
No motor vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this chapter if, at
the time of the intended removal thereof, the owner or the landowner on
whose property said motor vehicle is standing is present and expresses a
willingness and intention to remove such motor vehicle immediately.
§ 155-21. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-9-1982 by Ord. No.
867, approved 12-9-1982]
Any person who shall violate any section of the chapter shall, upon
conviction before a District Justice, pay a fine of not less than $25 nor more
than $100 or, in default thereof, be imprisoned in the county jail for a period
not exceeding 30 days.
Chapter 157
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 155.
§ 155-19 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 155-21
157:435

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 157-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 157-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of the
Borough of Glenolden.
§ 157-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning.
B. The term "legal holidays" as used in this chapter shall mean and
include: New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas, or days celebrated as such.
C. The terms "curbline" and "curb" as used in this chapter shall mean the
side boundary of a highway, including but not limited to a raised
boundary of a highway side line.
D. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. The Borough Council, Mayor and Police Department shall have the
following powers to regulate traffic and parking temporarily and in time
of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature.
§ 157-1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-4
157:437
§ 157-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 157-5. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the police officers of the Borough of
Glenolden, who are hereby given authority to direct traffic on the highways
and intersections of the Borough in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter and the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. The Borough Council, Mayor and Police Department may, from time to
time, designate places upon and along the highways in the Borough
where, for a period of not more than 90 days, specific traffic and/or
parking regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be in force and
effect, and shall designate such locations by proper signs and markings.
Such regulations, prohibitions and restrictions shall be effective just as
if they had been specified in this chapter. No person shall operate or
park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any such regulation, prohibition
or restriction, and no person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any
sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this section.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 157-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-5
157:438
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 157-6. Use of sidewalks by motor vehicles.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in the
Borough; nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across any
sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway or alley
at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall have been
properly cut down for the purpose.
§ 157-7. Speed limits established.
The speed limit for both directions of traffic along the highways or parts
thereof described below is hereby established at the rate of speed indicated:
Name of Highway
Speed Limit
(mph) Location
North Ridgeway Avenue
[Added 8-13-1987 by
Ord. No. 921, approved
8-13-1987]
25 From Ashland Avenue to
Primos Avenue
§ 157-8. Traffic control signals.
Traffic control signals shall be installed and operated at the intersection of
those highways described below:
Intersection
(Reserved)
§ 157-8.1. "Stop here on red" intersection on Glenolden Avenue.
[Added 4-11-1985 by Ord. No. 900, approved 4-11-1985]
A. A "stop here on red" sign shall be erected on Glenolden Avenue, 35 feet
back from the southeast corner of the intersection of Glenolden Avenue
and Chester Pike in such a position to face traffic proceeding west on
Glenolden Avenue approaching its intersection with Chester Pike.
B. A white line shall be drawn on Glenolden Avenue 35 feet back from the
southeast corner of the intersection of Glenolden Avenue and Chester
Pike, which line shall extend from the curbside of the westbound lane of
Glenolden Avenue to the center of Glenolden Avenue.
C. All motor vehicles traveling west on Glenolden Avenue having a red
light shall come to a full stop for the red light 35 feet back from the
intersection of Glenolden Avenue and Chester Pike.
§ 157-6 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-8.1
157:439
§ 157-9. One-way highways established.
The highways or parts of highways described below are hereby designated
as one-way streets in the direction indicated:
Name of Street
Direction
of Travel Limits
Custer Avenue West From Wells Avenue to MacDade
Boulevard
Grays Avenue West From Bonsall Avenue to MacDade
Boulevard
Llanwellyn Avenue South From Cooke Avenue to Oak Lane
Richfield Avenue West From Andrews Avenue to
Academy Avenue
Tatnall Avenue [Added
10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 1079, approved
10-17-2000]
North From Leon Avenue to South
Avenue
Urban Avenue [Added
5-8-1997 by Ord. No.
1041, approved 5-8-
1997; amended
10-17-2000 by Ord.
No. 1079, approved
10-17-2000]
South From South Avenue to Leon
Avenue
§ 157-10. U-turns.
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a motor vehicle or tractor to make a
U-turn on any of the highways or parts thereof described below:
Name of Highway Location
(Reserved)
§ 157-11. Turns at intersections.
No person shall make a turn of the kind designated (left, right, all) at any of
the intersections described below:
Name of Highway
Direction
of Travel Prohibited Turn At Intersection of
(Reserved)
D. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall, upon
summary conviction before a District Justice, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $25 for each and every violation.
§ 157-8.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-12
157:440
§ 157-12. Center structures at intersections.
All vehicular traffic shall keep to the right of the following structures or
barriers located in the center of the specified intersections:
Structure on
(name of highway) At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 157-13. Through highways.
The highways described below are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections where
there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals) shall
come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering any such
through highway:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 157-14. Stop intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected in such a position upon
the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the second-named
highway in the direction or directions indicated. These stop intersections
are in addition to highways intersecting with the through highways
established by § 157-13. All vehicles and tractors approaching any such
intersection upon the first-named highway, in the direction or directions
indicated in each case, shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable
distance, before entering any such intersection:
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Academy Avenue [Added
12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1009, approved
12-8-1994]
Both Wakefield Drive
Academy Avenue East Ashland Avenue
Andrews Avenue Both Hibbs Avenue
Andrews Avenue Both Richfield Avenue
Andrews Avenue East Ashland Avenue
Andrews Avenue [Added
12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1009, approved
12-8-1994]
South Gardner Avenue
§ 157-12 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-14
157:441
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Andrews Avenue West South Avenue
Ashland Avenue Both Glen Avenue
Ashland Avenue Both Llanwellyn Avenue
Ashland Avenue [Added
5-14-1992 by Ord. No.
983, approved
5-14-1992]
Both Scott Avenue
Ashland Avenue South Elmwood Avenue
Benson Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Bonsall Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Bonsall Avenue Both Cooke Avenue
Bonsall Avenue East Oak Lane
Bonsall Drive West South Avenue
Boon Avenue North Chester Pike
Boon Avenue South Glen Avenue
Charmont Avenue
[Added 5-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 983, approved
5-14-1992]
West North Ridgeway Avenue
Cooke Avenue Both Chester Pike
Cooke Avenue Both Glen Avenue
Cooke Avenue Both Llanwellyn Avenue
Cooke Avenue Both MacDade Boulevard
Cooke Avenue Both Scott Avenue
Cooke Avenue Both Wells Avenue
Custer Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Dalmas Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Elmwood Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Elmwood Avenue Both Charmont Avenue
Elmwood Avenue Both Chestnut Street
Elmwood Avenue Both Glenolden Avenue
Elmwood Avenue West South Avenue
Gardner Avenue Both Andrews Avenue
Gardner Avenue Both Llanwellyn Avenue
Gardner Avenue Both Scott Avenue
Gardner Avenue North Academy Avenue
§ 157-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-14
157:442
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Gardner Avenue South MacDade Boulevard
Glen Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Glen Avenue Both Boon Avenue
Glen Avenue Both Cooke Avenue
Glen Avenue Both Isabel Avenue
Glen Avenue Both Lamont Avenue
Glen Avenue Both Rambler Road
Glen Avenue West Knowles Avenue
Glenfield Avenue Both Hibbs Avenue
Glenfield Avenue North Academy Avenue
Glenfield Avenue South MacDade Boulevard
Glen-Nor Avenue North Sylvan Avenue
Glen-Nor Avenue South Harrison Avenue
Glenolden Avenue Both Elmwood Avenue
Glenolden Avenue Both Scott Avenue
Glenolden Avenue Both Sharpe Avenue
Grays Avenue Both Scott Avenue
Grays Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Grays Avenue South Chester Pike
Harrison Avenue Both Glen-Nor Avenue
Harrison Avenue Both South Avenue
Hibbs Avenue Both Andrews Avenue
Hibbs Avenue Both Benson Drive
Hibbs Avenue East South Avenue
Hibbs Avenue West Glenfield Avenue
Hillcrest Avenue West South Avenue
Isabel Avenue Both Glen Avenue
Isabel Avenue North Chester Pike
Knowles Avenue Both At each end of tunnel under
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad
Knowles Avenue Both Chester Pike
Knowles Avenue Both Llanwellyn Avenue
Knowles Avenue North Elmwood Avenue
Lamont Avenue Both Glen Avenue
§ 157-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-14
157:443
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
Leon Avenue [Added
6-12-1986 by Ord. No.
908, approved
6-12-1986]
North Tatnell Avenue
Llanwellyn Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Llanwellyn Avenue Both Cooke Avenue
Llanwellyn Avenue Both Gardner Avenue
Llanwellyn Avenue Both Knowles Avenue
Logan Avenue North Chester Pike
Logan Avenue South Glen Avenue
Lynwood Circle East (2
intersections)
South Avenue
North Ridgeway Avenue
[Added 5-14-1992 by
Ord. No. 983, approved
5-14-1992]
Both Charmont Avenue
Rambler Road Both Glen Avenue
Rambler Road North Chester Pike
Richfield Avenue North Academy Avenue
Ridgeway Avenue East Glenolden Avenue
Ridgeway Avenue West Ashland Avenue
Ridgeway Avenue West South Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Cooke Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Gardner Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Glenolden Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Grays Avenue
Scott Avenue Both Knowles Avenue
Scott Avenue East Oak Lane
Scott Avenue West South Avenue
Sharpe Avenue Both Glenolden Avenue
Sharpe Avenue [Added
8-13-1987 by Ord. No.
921, approved
8-13-1987]
Both Serrill Avenue
Sharpe Avenue West South Avenue
South Avenue Both Elmwood Avenue
§ 157-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-14
157:444
Stop Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
South Avenue South Delmar Drive
Sparks Circle [Added
12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1009, approved
12-8-1994]
South Summit Avenue
Stuart Avenue North Chester Pike
Stuart Avenue South Glen Avenue
Summit Avenue [Added
11-21-2000 by Ord. No.
1083, approved
11-21-2000]
Both Sparks Circle
Summit Avenue [Added
12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1009, approved
12-8-1994]
East Sylvan Avenue
Summit Avenue [Added
12-8-1994 by Ord. No.
1009, approved
12-8-1994]
West Trites Avenue
Sylvan Avenue East South Avenue
Tatnall Avenue East South Avenue
Trites Avenue East South Avenue
Urban Avenue East South Avenue
Wells Avenue Both Ashland Avenue
Wells Avenue West Knowles Avenue
Werner Avenue North MacDade Boulevard
Woodland Avenue East Ashland Avenue
Woodland Avenue East Primos Avenue
§ 157-15. Yield right-of-way intersections.
The intersections described below are hereby established as yield right-ofway
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
upon the first-named highway as to face traffic approaching the secondnamed
highway in the direction or directions indicated. All vehicles and
tractors approaching any such intersection upon the first-named highway,
in the direction or directions indicated, shall yield the right-of-way to any
vehicle in the intersection or approaching on the second-named highway
so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time that the
operator of such vehicle or tractor is moving across or within such
intersection:
§ 157-14 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-15
157:445
Yield Sign on
Direction
of Travel At Intersection of
(Reserved)
§ 157-16. No-passing zones.
The zones described below are hereby established as no-passing zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person driving a vehicle to pass any other vehicle
which is proceeding in the same direction:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 157-17. Closing certain highways to certain vehicles.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor except
a passenger vehicle (but not including any passenger vehicle drawing any
trailer or towing any other vehicle) upon any of the portions of the highways
described below; provided, however, that nothing herein shall prohibit the
operation of any commercial vehicle or tractor upon any highway or portion
thereof listed below where such operation thereon shall be necessary in
order to pick up or deliver any goods, wares, merchandise or material from
or to any premises located upon any such highway or portion thereof:
Name of Highway Limits
(Reserved)
§ 157-18. (Reserved)92
§ 157-18.1. Weight limits on Primos Avenue Bridge. [Added
4-12-1984 by Ord. No. 888, approved 4-12-1984]
A. Weight limit. It shall be unlawful for any truck, tractor, combination,
machinery or other motor vehicle with a gross weight in excess of 2 1/2
tons to use, cross, encroach on or travel on the Primos Avenue Bridge.
The two-and-one-half-tons maximum load limit includes any
attachments, trailers or cargo of such truck, tractor, combination,
machinery or other motor vehicle.
B. Violation; summary offense. Any person operating a truck, tractor,
combination, machinery or other motor vehicle upon the Primos Avenue
Bridge in violation of this section is guilty of a summary offense and
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 plus $150 for
each 500 pounds or part thereof in excess of 1,500 pounds over the
maximum allowable weight of 2 1/2 tons.
92.Editor's Note: Former § 157-18, Vehicle weight limits established, as amended, was
repealed 11-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1046, approved 11-13-1997.
§ 157-15 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-18.1
157:446
C. Posting security for fine and costs. Upon the arrest of any person for a
violation of this section, the vehicle which was involved in the violation
shall be rendered temporarily inoperative by the Police Department of
the Borough of Glenolden. Upon the posting of an amount equal to the
fine and costs or other appropriate security as approved by the District
Justice for the Borough of Glenolden, the vehicle shall be released to
the operator thereof. If the fine and costs or other appropriate security
are not posted within 24 hours after the arrest, the vehicle shall be
impounded by either the Sheriff of Delaware County or a Constable for
the Borough of Glenolden as directed by the District Justice. The
impoundment shall continue until the first of the following occurs:
(1) The appropriate security as set forth above is posted;
(2) The operator is found not guilty of the charges; or
(3) The operator is found guilty of the charges and the fine and costs
imposed are paid.
D. Notice. If the vehicle is impounded under the terms of Subsection C, the
Police Department of the Borough of Glenolden shall give immediate
notice by the most expeditious means and by certified mail, return
receipt requested, of the impoundment and location of the vehicle or
combination to the owner of the vehicle or combination and to the
owner of the load if the names and addresses of the owners are known
or can be ascertained by the Police Department.
E. Recoverable costs. The costs of the impoundment, as well as any costs
of sale of any item as set forth in this section, including reasonable
storage fees and other reasonable costs incident to the seizure,
impoundment and sale, shall be recoverable in addition to the cost of
prosecution.
F. Load. The title to the load on an impounded vehicle or combination
remains in the owner, who may repossess the load at any time upon
presentation of proof of ownership to the Police Department. If the load
spoils during impoundment, the loss shall be on the owner, subject to
any right of recovery of damages that the owner may have against the
owner of the vehicle or combination or against any other party. The cost
of disposition of the load shall be recoverable in addition to the cost of
prosecution.
G. Sale of unclaimed vehicle or load. If, 60 days after the notice of
impoundment is given, any impounded vehicle or combination is
unredeemed or the load is unclaimed, the vehicle or load shall be sold at
a public sale upon order of the issuing authority by the Sheriff or
Constable as determined by the District Justice. Ten days' notice of the
sale must be given to the owners, lienholders or secured parties of the
vehicle or load, except that, if the Sheriff or Constable determines it to
be necessary to preserve the value of goods which may spoil, such
goods may be sold in any commercially reasonable manner prior to
§ 157-18.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-18.1
157:447
§ 157-18.2. Weight limits on Ashland Avenue. [Added 11-13-1997 by
Ord. No. 1044, approved 11-13-1997]
§ 157-19. Operation of vehicles on closed highways.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any vehicle or tractor upon
any highway in the Borough that is under construction, resurfacing or
repair, in disregard of any official sign, barricade or notice that the same is
closed to vehicular traffic.
§ 157-20. Play highways.
expiration of the sixty-day period, and notice need not be given to the
owners, lienholders or secured parties if it is impractical to do so.
H. Disposition of proceeds of sale. The proceeds of sale shall first be
applied to the payment of the fine and costs, as defined herein, and
second, to the payment of the encumbrances. The remainder shall be
paid to the owner of the vehicle.
A. Purpose. Pursuant to the authority granted it in the Motor Vehicle Code,
75 Pa.C.S.A. § 4902, the Borough has determined, after review and
inspection by its Engineer, that Ashland Avenue between Chester Pike
and Elmwood Avenue may be damaged or destroyed unless the
permissible weight of vehicles is reduced to a maximum weight of five
tons.
B. Restriction. It should be unlawful for any person to operate a motor
vehicle with a gross weight in excess of five tons on Ashland Avenue
between Chester Pike and Elmwood Avenue except for local deliveries
and emergencies.
C. Posting. When conditions warrant it, in the judgment of the Borough
Manager and Borough Engineer, restriction signs shall be erected and
maintained at each end of the designated street.
D. Penalties. Any person operating a motor vehicle in violation of this
section is guilty of a summary offense and shall, upon conviction, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $75, except that any person convicted of
operating a vehicle with a gross weight in excess of a posted weight
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $150 for each 500
pounds or part thereof in excess of 3,000 pounds over the maximum
allowable weight.
A. The Chief of Police is hereby authorized to designate as play highways,
whenever he shall deem such action advisable and for whatever period
of time directed by him, any portion of any highway in the Borough
whereon sledding and coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall
be set apart for the purpose under the direction of the Chief of Police.
B. No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any play
highway at any time when such highway shall be so designated, except
§ 157-18.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-20
157:448
§ 157-21. Accident reports.
The operator of any motor vehicle involved in an accident in the Borough
and required by law to report such accident to any department or agency of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or any other person required to make
such report, shall, at the time of making such report to the commonwealth,
make a written report to the Chief of Police of the Borough containing the
same information.
in case of emergency with special permission of the Chief of Police or
of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play highway
of all persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was set
aside.
C. The portions of highways described below are hereby established as
play highways during the times designated:
Name of Highway Days Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 157-20 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-21
157:449

ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 157-22. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Glenolden are hereby established as
a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 157-23. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 157-24. Parking over curbline or sidewalk.
The parking of a motor vehicle in such a way as to be partially on or
over the highway and partially over or on the curbline or curb, or partially
on the highway and partially on or over the sidewalk, or partially on the
highway and partially on or over the area between the curb and sidewalk,
or partially or entirely over the area of the curb and/or sidewalk and/or the
area between the curb and sidewalk, is hereby prohibited.
§ 157-25. Angle parking.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any of the highways or parts thereof
described below except at the angle designated and only within the painted
stall lines. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now
or shall hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
Name of Highway Side Angle Location
(Reserved)
§ 157-26. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 7-8-1982 by
Ord. No. 863, approved 7-8-1982;93 6-12-1986 by Ord. No. 908,
approved 6-12-1986]
No person shall park a vehicle at any time upon any of the highways or parts
thereof described below:
93.Editor's Note: Section 4 of this ordinance provided that "Any person violating any of the
provisions of this ordinance shall, upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $5 for each and every violation."
§ 157-22 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-26
157:451
Name of Street Side Location
Chester and Darby
Turnpike Road
Both Entire length
East Ashland Avenue South From 38 feet east of the center line
of Ridgeway Avenue and west to the
railroad bridge
Gardner Avenue South From Llanwellyn Avenue to the
railroad
Glen Avenue [Added
5-11-1995 by Ord. No.
1018, approved
5-11-1995]
West From Oak Avenue to Knowles Avenue
Glenolden Avenue North From Chester Pike to Scott Avenue
Glenolden Avenue South From the west driveway of
Pennsylvania Railroad to California
Homes driveway
Isabel Avenue North From Chester Pike to a point 100 feet
east thereof
Isabel Avenue South From Chester Pike to Glen Avenue
Knowles Avenue South From Scott Avenue to Llanwellyn
Avenue
Knowles Avenue South From Llanwellyn Avenue to
Baltimore & Ohio Railroad underpass
Knowles Avenue [Added
10-10-1996 by Ord. No.
1032, approved
10-10-1996]
North Between exiting "No Parking" signs
from Llanwellyn Avenue to railroad
tunnel
Lamont Avenue North From Chester Pike to Glen Avenue
MacDade Boulevard Both Entire length
South Avenue Both From Academy Avenue to MacDade
Boulevard
South Avenue [Added
4-18-2000 by Ord. No.
1077, approved 4-18-
2000]
North From Hillcrest Avenue eastward 125
feet
South Wells Avenue West From Custer Avenue to Ashland
Avenue
Stuart Avenue North From Chester Pike to a point 250 feet
east thereof
Stuart Avenue South From Chester Pike to Glen Avenue
§ 157-26 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-26
157:452
Name of Street Side Location
Sylvan Avenue [Added
4-8-1993 by Ord. No.
993, approved
4-8-1993]
West From South Avenue to the Borough
line
Woodland Avenue South From Ashland Avenue west to the
terminus of Woodland Avenue
§ 157-27. Parking prohibited during certain hours. [Amended
6-12-1986 by Ord. No. 908, approved 6-12-1986]
§ 157-28. Parking time limited. [Amended 6-12-1986 by Ord. No.
908, approved 6-12-1986]
No person shall park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked upon any
of the highways or parts of highways described below between the hours
A. No persons shall park a vehicle between the hours specified below of
any day except Sundays upon any of the highways or parts of highways
described below:
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
Knowles Avenue North 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Llanwellyn
Avenue to the railroad
tunnel
Llanwellyn Avenue West 9:00 p.m. to
6:00 a.m.
From Glenolden
Avenue to Gardner
Avenue
Mac Dade Boulevard East 7:00 a.m. to
8:00 a.m.,
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Custer Avenue
to Cooke Avenue
Mac Dade Boulevard East 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Werner Avenue
to Bensen Avenue
Mac Dade Boulevard West 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.,
4:00 p.m. to
6:00 p.m.
From Ashland Avenue
to Gardner Avenue
B. No person shall park a vehicle between November l and March 31 of
each and every year upon any of the highways or parts of highways
described below during the hours specified:
Name of Highway Side Hours Location
(Reserved)
§ 157-26 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-28
157:453
specified for longer than the time limit indicated below, provided that, if
parking meters have been installed at any of the described locations, the
parking time limits for parking meters shall be observed:
Name of
Highway Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
Bruner Avenue North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
except
Saturday and
Sunday
2 hrs. From Sylvan Avenue
to Harrison Avenue
Chester Pike Both All 2 hrs. From Glenolden
Avenue to Grays
Avenue
Chester Pike Both All 2 hrs. From Glenolden
Avenue to Oak Lane
East
Glenolden
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Chester Pike
east to the boundary
line
East Knowles
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Sharp Avenue
to Elm- wood Avenue
East Knowles
Avenue
North 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
except
Saturday and
Sunday
2 hrs. From Chester Pike to
Penn Central Railroad
Inskeep
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From South
Ridgeway Avenue
east to the boundary
line
Karen Circle Both All 2 hrs. Entire length
South
Elmwood
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Inskeep Avenue
to the creek
South
Ridgeway
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Inskeep Avenue
to East Glenolden
Avenue
South Scott
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Glenolden
Avenue to Gardner
Avenue
South Sharp
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Inskeep Avenue
to East Knowles
Avenue
§ 157-28 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-28
157:454
Name of
Highway Side Hours
Time
Limit Location
Sylvan Avenue East 8:00 a.m. to
4:00 p.m.,
except
Saturday and
Sunday
2 hrs. From South Avenue
to the Borough line
Unit Block of
North Chester
Pike [Added
5-9- 1996 by
Ord. No.
1027,
approved
5-9-1996]
East All 30 min. Unit Block of North
Chester Pike, east
side
West Gardner
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Chester Pike to
Llanwellyn Avenue
West Knowles
Avenue
Both All 2 hrs. From Chester Pike to
Llanwellyn Avenue
§ 157-29. Special purpose parking zones.
The following are hereby established as special purpose parking zones, and
it shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle or tractor or to allow
the same to remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided
for such zone:
Name of Highway Side
Authorized Purpose
or Vehicle Location
(Reserved)
§ 157-29.1. No waxing or polishing of cars at certain locations.
[Added 6-12-1986 by Ord. No. 908, approved 6-12-1986]
No waxing or polishing of cars is permitted at the following locations:
Name of Street Side Location
Knowles Avenue North From Llanwellyn Avenue to the
railroad tunnel
Llanwellyn Avenue West From Glenolden Avenue to Gardner
Avenue
§ 157-28 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-29.1
157:455

ARTICLE IV
Special Parking Permits
§ 157-30. Special parking permits required for certain areas.
The parking of a motor vehicle on any of the areas of the highways within
the Borough of Glenolden wherein the area is posted by a sign or signs
prohibiting parking between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. is hereby
prohibited unless the owner has obtained a special parking permit as
provided herein.
§ 157-31. Committee to consider applications; procedure.
[Amended 12-8-1994 by Ord. No. 1010, approved 12-8-1994;
2-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1016, approved 2-9-1995]
The Borough Council shall appoint a committee to consider applications
from owners of motor vehicles for said special parking permits. The
Committee shall be comprised of three members of Borough Council, being
the Chairman of the Borough Police Committee, the Chairman of the
Borough Zoning Committee and the Chairman of the Highway Committee.
The Committee shall meet within 30 days following receipt by the Borough
Secretary of any application for a special parking permit. The Committee's
decision regarding the issuance or nonissuance of a special parking permit
shall be made in part after a consideration of the recommendations and
input of the Chief of Police and shall be final. The Committee shall meet
and discuss such applications and shall render a decision in writing within
five days after such Committee meeting. The Committee shall direct the
Borough Secretary to inform the applicant, in writing, of its decision. The
applicant shall have the right to appear before the Committee to present
his position in support of his application and to answer any questions
concerning the request for the special parking permit. All Committee
meetings shall be open to the public. Notice of such meetings shall be
posted in a prominent place in the Borough Office and mailed to each
applicant.
§ 157-32. Considerations.
The Committee shall not issue a special parking permit unless the applicant
is able to prove that he does not have adequate off-street parking for the
vehicle at his family living unit. Each family living unit shall be limited to
one special parking permit.
§ 157-33. Duration of permit; fee.
The special parking permit shall be issued for a one-year term, from the
first day of March until the last day of February of every year. The fee for
said one-year term shall be $50. An applicant may request a one-half-year
term, to commence on the first day of September and continue through the
last day of February. The fee for said partial term shall be $25. The fee
shall be paid to the Borough Secretary upon completion and submission to
§ 157-30 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-33
157:457
the Borough Secretary of a special parking permit application. In the event
that the Committee declines to issue a permit, the fee as tendered will be
returned to the applicant less a retention by the Borough of the sum of $5
per application to cover Borough expenses in processing the same.
§ 157-34. Details of permit; transfer; display. [Amended 12-8-1994
by Ord. No. 1010; approved 12-8-1994]
The special parking permit shall designate the name of the person to whom
and the vehicle to which the permit is issued. The permit may be transferred
to another vehicle owned by the applicant upon written notification to
the Borough Secretary, who shall issue a new special parking permit. The
permit must be prominently displayed on the vehicle in the area as shall be
designated by the Council.
§ 157-35. Designation of parking area.
The special parking permit shall be issued for a designated area within
the "No Parking 2:00 a.m. to 6:00 a.m." zone in the immediate vicinity or
location of the family dwelling unit wherein the motor vehicle owner or
operator resides. No special parking permit may be issued for the side of a
highway where there is a fire hydrant.
§ 157-36. Revocation of permit; legal actions.
If the owner of a motor vehicle who has been issued a special parking
permit violates any terms or conditions of this article, the Committee may,
after hearing, revoke such permit or direct commencement of legal action
against the special parking permit holder as provided for by this chapter.94
There will not be any return of the special parking permit fee or any portion
thereof to any special parking permit holder violating any terms of this
article.
§ 157-37. Snow emergencies.95
At any time that the Mayor of the Borough or any other appropriate official
declares a snow emergency, then all motor vehicles parked on Borough
highways pursuant to the special parking permit must be removed at the
request of any Borough employee or of anyone authorized and directed by
the Borough to remove snow from the highways of the Borough. In the event
that the special permit holder fails to remove any vehicle during the course
of a snow emergency after being requested to do so, then the Borough shall
have the authority to direct the removal of such vehicle at the expense of
the special permit holder. The failure to remove any motor vehicle parked
on the highways of the Borough pursuant to a special parking permit shall
constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of the special parking permit.
94.Editor's Note: See § 157-55, Violations and penalties.
95.Editor's Note: See Art. V, Snow and Ice Emergencies.
§ 157-33 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-38
157:458
§ 157-38. Application forms.
The Committee hereinbefore established shall draft an appropriate special
parking permit application form pursuant to the terms of this article. The
application may be secured from the Borough Secretary in the Borough
Office during usual business hours.
§ 157-39. Reduced permit fees.
Any applicant who has been exempted from the payment of the Borough per
capita tax due to attaining age 65 shall only pay 1/2 the stated annual or
semiannual fee for a special parking permit.
§ 157-38 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-39
157:459

ARTICLE IVA
Handicapped Parking
[Added 3-8-1990 by Res. No. R-5-90, approved 3-8-1990]
§ 157-39.1. Completion of application.96
The applicant must fill out Page Nos. 1 and 2. All questions from Nos. 1 to
13 must be completed by the applicant.
§ 157-39.2. Physician's certification.
The applicant must have Page No. 3 filled out by his/her family physician
or physician of his/her choice. The physician is asked to fill out Page No.
3 and may use Pages 4, 5 and 6 for eligibility criteria. The physician is
asked to sign Page No. 3 to certify the applicant's disability and need for a
handicapped parking zone.
§ 157-39.3. Special license plate.
The applicant must have a special license plate issued by State of
Pennsylvania with HP or DV on the same, designating handicapped person
or disabled veteran.
§ 157-39.4. Submission of application.
The applicant shall submit the completed application from Page Nos. 1, 2
and 3 to the Borough of Glenolden, 36 East Boon Avenue, Glenolden, PA,
19036, in person or by mail.
§ 157-39.5. Verification and investigation of application.
After the application has been received by the Borough of Glenolden, it
shall be checked for completion; then, if completed, it shall be verified
and investigated. If not completed, it shall be returned to applicant for
completion. Only fully completed applications will be verified or
investigated.
§ 157-39.6. Notification of approval or denial; placement of signs.
The applicant shall be notified of approval or denial of his/her request. If
approved, signs will be placed at the requested area and the street shall be
marked. The area will then be designated "handicapped parking zone only;"
no other vehicles may park in this zone.
§ 157-39.7. Use of zone.
The applicant may park only the vehicle registered with HP or DV license
in the handicapped parking zone. No other vehicle may park in this zone,
96.Editor's Note: The Handicapped Parking Application and Eligibility Criteria, Pages 1
through 6, are included at the end of this chapter.
§ 157-39.1 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-39.7
157:461
and the zone may not be used for any other purpose by the applicant or any
other person or vehicle. If the applicant uses the zone for any purpose or
manner other than as stated in the request, the permit and the zone shall be
removed by the Borough of Glenolden. Also, the Borough of Glenolden shall
retain the right to access of zone and removal of the same if the applicant is
in violation of use.
§ 157-39.8. Expiration of permit.
Each such permit issued following approval of the application shall be
issued for a two-year period only. Two years from the date of issue, every
issued permit shall expire unless renewed as set forth hereinafter. A copy
of this handicapped parking zone permit will be issued to each applicant, if
approved.
§ 157-39.9. Renewal of permit.
All new applicants and persons who have been issued a permit for a
handicapped parking zone in past years must submit another completed
handicapped parking zone request, Form No. HPR-10, on or before 10
working days prior to the expiration date on the existing permit in order for
same to be considered for renewal. If the aforesaid renewal application is
not filed or if an issued permit is not renewed, the zone and all signs and
markings thereof will be removed by the Borough of Glenolden.
§ 157-39.7 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-39.9
157:462
ARTICLE IVB
Tractor-Trailer Parking
[Added 11-8-1990 by Ord. No. 956, approved 11-8-1990]
§ 157-39.10. Definitions.
As used herein, the following terms shall have the following definitions:
PERSON — Any individual, association or partnership, corporation, other
legal entity and/or any combination thereof.
PRIVATE PROPERTY — Any real property in any zoning district within the
Borough of Glenolden.
PROPERTY OWNER — Any person who holds legal or equitable title to any
real property within the Borough of Glenolden.
TRACTOR-TRAILER VEHICLE — Any truck, truck-tractor, trailer or a
tractor-trailer combination having the weight classification of Class 6 or
higher as determined by its registered gross weight or combination weight
in pounds as set forth in the Pennsylvania Motor Vehicle Code of 1976, as
amended, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 1916.
VEHICLE OWNER — Any person who holds legal or equitable title to any
tractor-trailer vehicle.
§ 157-39.11. Prohibited acts.
No person, property owner and/or vehicle owner shall park and/or shall
allow to be parked, temporarily or permanently, any tractor-trailer vehicle
upon any private property within the Borough of Glenolden for any purpose
whatsoever, except as set forth hereinafter, from 9:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. on
any day of the calendar year.
§ 157-39.12. Exceptions.
Exceptions to the above prohibition are as follows:
A. Temporary parking while loading or unloading personal property from
any tractor-trailer vehicle with the permission of the property owner;
however, said personal property must be continuously removed until
the tractor-trailer is completely unloaded. Once the tractor-trailer is
completely unloaded, it shall be removed from the private property.
B. Any tractor-trailer vehicle providing requested services of any kind to
any municipal government property owner.
C. Any tractor-trailer vehicle providing requested services and/or
emergency services for public utility purposes.
D. Any tractor-trailer vehicle providing necessary services for any
construction projects of any kind, original construction, repairs and/or
alterations of buildings; however, said tractor-trailer vehicle shall be
removed once the construction is completed.
§ 157-39.10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-39.12
157:463
§ 157-39.13. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this article shall, upon
conviction before any District Justice, be punished by a fine of not more
than $600 or, in default thereof, by imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Each day's failure to comply with any provision of this article, as aforesaid,
shall constitute a separate violation.
E. Tractor-trailer vehicles. [Amended 6-13-1991 by Ord. No. 967,
approved 6-13-1991]
(1) Any tractor-trailer vehicle which complies with all of the following
criteria:
(a) Is currently registered or licensed and is currently inspected in
Pennsylvania or in any other jurisdiction and bears the usual
and normal documentary evidence thereof.
(b) Is capable of being used and operated and is being used and
operated on the public highways as it was manufactured,
registered, licensed and inspected to do.
(c) Is used and operated on a daily basis for the delivery of goods
and/or services in the normal operation of a permitted business
located on the private property on which said vehicle is being
parked and is a necessary and integral part of such business.
(d) Is owned, leased and/or contracted by the owner of such
permitted business.
(2) Despite meeting any or all of the above criteria, any tractor-trailer
vehicle which is continually parked on such private property and
which remains empty and/or is used for storage or other purposes
of such permitted business other than the daily delivery of goods
and/or services is not included within the above exception and is
specifically included within the prohibition of § 157-39.11
hereinbefore.
§ 157-39.12 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-39.13
157:464
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergencies
§ 157-40. Declaration of emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of excessive snow and ice on the highways or portions of highways named
in § 157-41 below, either the Borough Council, the Mayor or the Police
Department in its or his discretion may declare an emergency due to such
hazards.
§ 157-41. Parking prohibited on certain streets.
§ 157-42. Placement of signs.
A. After any such emergency shall have been declared, it shall be unlawful
during the period of such emergency for any person to park a motor
vehicle or tractor or to allow the same to remain parked on any highway
or portion thereof named in Subsection B below, or to operate any
motor vehicle or tractor on any such highway or portion thereof unless
such vehicle or tractor shall be equipped with adequate equipment to
provide sufficient traction to keep such vehicle or tractor in motion so
that other traffic on such highways will not be blocked or seriously
impeded.
B. The highways or portions thereof to which the provisions of this article
shall be applicable during all periods of emergency declared as
provided in § 157-40 above shall be as described below:
Name of Highway Location
Ashland Avenue [Added 6-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 1029, approved 6-13-1996]
Entire length
Chester Pike [Added 3-10-1983 by Res. No.
7-83, approved 3-10-1983]
Entire length
East Glenolden Avenue [Added 6-13-1996
by Ord. No. 1029, approved 6-13-1996]
Entire length
Elmwood Avenue [Added 6-13-1996 by
Ord. No. 1029, approved 6-13-1996]
Entire length
Mac Dade Boulevard [Added 3-10-1983 by
Res. No. 7-83, approved 3-10-1983]
Entire length
Scott Avenue [Added 6-13-1996 by Ord.
No. 1029, approved 6-13-1996]
Entire length
South Avenue [Added 3-10-1983 by Res.
No. 7-83, approved 3-10-1983]
Entire length
West Glenolden Avenue [Added 6-13-1996
by Ord. No. 1029, approved 6-13-1996]
Entire length
§ 157-40 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-42
157:465
§ 157-43. Violations.
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Borough Council,
Mayor and Police Department or the Chief of Police shall place around
the utility poles on the highways or portions thereof designated in
§ 157-41B above, signs reading as follows:
SNOW EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR
CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES
TOWED AWAY
B. The Mayor or the Chief of Police shall also, through radio, newspaper or
other available media, disseminate information as to the existence of
such emergency.
A. Any person who shall park a motor vehicle or tractor upon or along any
of the highways or portions thereof listed in § 157-41B at any time
during a period of emergency declared as provided in § 157-40 shall be
guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor upon any highway or
portion thereof listed in § 157-41B, which such vehicle or tractor shall
become stalled upon any of such highways during a period of
emergency declared as provided in § 157-40 of this article and such
stalling shall be by reason of the failure to have such vehicle or tractor
equipped with the equipment hereinabove prescribed, shall be guilty of
a violation of this article.
§ 157-42 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-43
157:466
ARTICLE VI
Removal and Impounding of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 157-44. Authorization for removal and impoundment.
The Chief of Police of the Borough is hereby authorized to remove and
impound or to order the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked on
any of the streets, highways or public property in the Borough in violation
of any provision of the law or of any ordinance of the Borough; provided,
however, that no such vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in
strict adherence to the provisions of this article.
§ 157-45. Approved storage garages.
The following garages located in the Borough are hereby designated as
approved storage garages, as pounds for the storage of such impounded
vehicles:
Name of Garage Address
(Reserved)
§ 157-46. Bonding of garages.
Every such approved storage garage or pound shall be bonded in the
amount of $2,000 for the indemnifying of the owner of every such
impounded vehicle against the loss thereof or injury or damage thereto
while in the custody of such poundkeeper.
§ 157-47. Towing and storage charges.
The towing charge to be collected by every such poundkeeper shall be $25
per vehicle, and the storage charge shall be $5 per vehicle per day or
fraction thereof.
§ 157-48. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, notice of the fact that such vehicle has been
impounded shall be sent by the Chief of Police of the Borough to the owner
of record of such vehicle. Such notice shall designate the place from which
such vehicle was removed, the reason for its removal and impounding and
the pound in which it shall have been impounded.
§ 157-49. Payment of charges; protests.
A. The payment of any towing and impounding charges authorized by this
article shall, unless such payment shall have been made under protest,
be final and conclusive and shall constitute a waiver of any right to
recover the money so paid.
§ 157-44 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-49
157:467
§ 157-50. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Chief of Police shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded and shall
be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or the agents of the
owners thereof with information as to the place of storage of such vehicles.
§ 157-51. Liability of owner or operator for fine or penalty.
The payment of towing and storage charges authorized by this article shall
not operate to relieve the owner or operator of any vehicle from liability for
any fine or penalty for violation of any law or ordinance on account of which
such vehicle was removed and impounded.
§ 157-52. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the time
of the intended removal thereof, the owner or person for the time being in
charge of such vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove such vehicle immediately.
B. In the event that any towing and impounding charges so imposed shall
be paid under protest, the offender shall be entitled to a hearing before
a District Justice or court of record having jurisdiction, in which case
such defendant shall be proceeded against and shall receive such notice
as is provided in the Vehicle Code in other cases of summary offenses
and shall have the same rights as to appeal and waiver of hearing.
§ 157-49 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-52
157:468
ARTICLE VII
Interpretation and Repeal; Penalties
§ 157-53. Severability.
The provisions of this chapter shall be severable and, if any of its provisions
shall be held to be unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise invalid, such
decision shall not affect the validity of any of the remaining provisions of
this chapter. It is hereby declared as a legislative intent that this chapter
would have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or otherwise
invalid provision not been included herein.
§ 157-54. Repeal of previous ordinances; effect.
§ 157-55. Violations and penalties.
A. All previous ordinances of the Borough of Glenolden pertaining to the
regulation of traffic and parking are hereby repealed.
B. The repeal of ordinances provided for in Subsection A above shall not
affect or prevent the prosecution or punishment of any person for any
act done or liability incurred in violation of any ordinance or regulation
in force immediately prior to the taking effect of this chapter.
C. The provisions of this chapter, insofar as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments.
A. Traffic violations. Any person violating the provisions of Article II,
except § 157-18, of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of $25 and
costs of prosecution.
B. Parking violations.97 Any person violating the provisions of Article III, IV
or VI of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of $15 and costs of
prosecution; provided that, if a notice of violation is placed upon a
vehicle stating the monetary amount to be paid at the Police
Department in satisfaction of the violation and the time within which
such payment is to be made, the payment of the stated amount at the
Police Department of the Borough of Glenolden within the stated time
shall be deemed to be in full satisfaction of the violation.
C. Snow and ice emergency violations. Any person violating the provisions
of Article V of this chapter shall be guilty of a summary offense and,
upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable by a fine of $25 and costs
of prosecution.
97.Editor's Note: For additional penalties for tractor-trailer parking violations, see
§ 157-39.13.
§ 157-53 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC § 157-55
157:469
D. Penalties for violations of § 157-18 shall be calculated in accordance
with § 157-18B. [Added 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 87598]
E. Penalties for violations of § 157-18.1 shall be calculated in accordance
with § 157-18.1B. [Added 4-12-1984 by Ord. No. 888, approved
4-12-1984]
98.Editor's Note: Section 157-18 was repealed 11-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1046, approved
11-13-1997.
§ 157-55 GLENOLDEN CODE § 157-55
157:470
Chapter 159
WASTEWATER TREATMENT
§ 159-1. Purpose.
This chapter is adopted to promote and protect the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and other aspects of the general welfare. The general
goals include among other things, the specific enforcement of the Clean
Water Act and the Pennsylvania Clean Streams Law and the various
regulations promulgated by DELCORA, the City of Philadelphia, the United
States Environmental Protection Agency and the Pennsylvania Department
of Environmental Protection, and such other agencies which may succeed
the aforementioned agencies, and the implementation of the Delaware
County Wastewater Management Plan and the National Pretreatment
Standards, 40 C.F.R. 401 et seq.
§ 159-2. Adoption of wastewater treatment regulations.
The DELCORA Standards, Rules and Regulations of 2011, attached hereto
as Exhibit A, and the City of Philadelphia's Sewer and Wastewater Control
Regulations, attached hereto as Exhibit B,99 are hereby collectively adopted
as the Wastewater Treatment Regulations for Glenolden Borough. Where
any conflict exists between any portions of Exhibit A and B, the most
stringent of the portions in conflict shall apply.
§ 159-3. Local limitations.
The DELCORA Local Limitations for the Eastern Service Area (the "Eastern
Limitations") and the DELCORA Local Limitations for the Western Service
Area (the "Western Limitations"), as set forth in DELCORA Resolution
2011-01, attached hereto as Exhibit C100 are hereby adopted as the local
limitations for all discharges of wastewater in Glenolden Borough. All such
discharges of wastewater shall comply with the Eastern Limitations.
Chapter 160
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Building construction — See Ch. 54.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 64.
Housing standards — See Ch. 93.
Plumbing — See Ch. 127.
Sewers - See Ch. 135.
99.Editor's Note: Exhibits A and B are on file in the Borough offices.
100. Editor's Note: Exhibit C is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 157-55 WATER § 159-3
160:471

ARTICLE I
Water Conservation
[Adopted 3-12-1992 by Ord. No. 981, approved 3-12-1992]
§ 160-1. Statement of policy.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way and for which construction a permit is required to be
obtained from Glenolden (or would be required but for an exemption from
a permit requirement for public or governmental agencies) unless the new,
extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other water using fixtures
therein conform to the requirements and standards of § 160-2 of this article.
The provisions of this article shall apply to any such building or structure
for which such a building permit is issued, or would otherwise be required
to be issued but for such an exemption, on or after May 14, 1992.
§ 160-2. Standards for fixtures and fittings.
Water conservation performance standards for plumbing fixtures and
fittings shall be as follows:
§ 160-3. Applicability of standards; exemptions.
A. Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water
consumption of water closets shall not exceed an average of 1.6 gallons
per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per
square inch. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test
requirements of the ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption
shall not exceed an average of 1.5 gallons per flush cycle over a range
of test pressures from 20 to 80 pounds per square inch. The fixtures
shall perform in accordance with the test requirements of ANSI
A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
C. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed three
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
pounds per square inch. The fixture shall perform in accordance with
the test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory faucet discharge rates shall not exceed three
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
pounds per square inch. The fixture shall perform in accordance with
the test requirements of ANSI A112.18.1M.
A. Special purpose equipment. The performance standards of § 160-2 shall
not apply to fixtures and fittings, such as emergency showers, aspirator
§ 160-1 WATER § 160-3
160:473
§ 160-4. Official review and modification.
The Borough Council may from time to time modify, add to or remove from
the standards and restrictions herein.
§ 160-5. Violations and penalties.
It shall be a misdemeanor for any person to use or apply water within the
Borough of Glenolden contrary to or in violation of the restrictions herein
and, upon conviction thereof, such persons shall be punished by being
imprisoned in the county jail for not more than 10 days or by fine of not
more than $300, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
faucets and blowout fixtures, that in order to perform a specialized
function cannot meet the specified standards.
B. Exemptions. Any person(s) may apply to the Borough of Glenolden for
an exemption to the terms of this article, which may be granted by the
Borough Council upon proof that some other device, system or
procedure will save as much or more water as those set forth herein or
that those set forth herein cannot be complied with without undue
hardship.
§ 160-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § 160-5
160:474
Chapter 162
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 138.
§ 160-5 WATER § 160-5
160:475

ARTICLE I
Purposes; Scope; Interpretation; Definitions
§ 162-1. Purposes and development objectives.
§ 162-2. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, the use of all land and
every building or portion of a building erected, altered with respect to
height and area, added to or relocated and every use within a building or
use accessory thereto in the Borough of Glenolden shall be in conformity
with the provisions of this chapter. Any existing building or structure and
any existing use of building or land not in conformity with the regulations
herein prescribed shall be regarded as nonconforming but may be
A. This chapter is enacted for the following purposes: to promote the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of the inhabitants of the
Borough of Glenolden by lessening congestion in the roads and streets,
securing safety from fire, panic and other dangers, providing adequate
light and air, proper density of population, facilitating the adequate
provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, flood
control and other public requirements, conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land.
B. Statement of community development objectives. This chapter, its
amendments and supplements is designed to guide the development of
the Borough of Glenolden in a manner consistent with law and the
public interest in achieving and retaining the following general goals:
[Added 12-9-1982 by Ord. No. 867, approved 12-9-1982]
(1) To encourage innovations in residential development and renewal
so that the growing demand for housing may be met by greater
variety in type, design and layout of dwellings and by the
conservation of open space ancillary to said dwellings so that
greater opportunities for better housing and recreation may extend
to all citizens and residents of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(2) To promote sound economic development in order to attain a stable
future tax base.
(3) To minimize the conflict between residential and other types of land
use.
(4) To develop sound financial planning.
(5) To recognize that the quality and character of future residential
development, as well as other suburban development, is directly
related to the improvement and extension of various public
utilities.
(6) To consider the highway system and its effects upon the Borough.
§ 162-1 WATER § 162-2
160:477
continued, extended or changed subject to the special regulations herein
provided with respect to nonconforming buildings or uses.
§ 162-3. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health,
safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of
this chapter impose greater restrictions than those of any statute, other
ordinance or regulation, the provisions of this chapter shall be controlling.
Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance or regulation impose
greater restrictions than this chapter, the provisions of such statute,
ordinance or regulation shall be controlling.
§ 162-4. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following words shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meaning herein indicated. Words in the
singular include the plural, and those in the plural include the singular.
ACCESSORY BUILDING OR STRUCTURE — A subordinate building or
structure, the use of which is customarily incidental to that of the principal
building and which is used for an accessory use and is located on the same
lot[Amended 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 919, approved 7-9-1987]
ACCESSORY USE —
ADVERTISING SIGN — See "sign" and "billboard."
AGRICULTURE — The cultivating of the soil and the raising and harvesting
of the products of the soil, including, but not by way of limitation, nursery,
horticulture and forestry.
ALTERATIONS — Includes but is not limited to the following:
A use conducted on the same lot as a principal use to which it is
related and located either within the same structure or in an accessory
structure or as an accessory use of land.
A.
A use which is clearly incidental to and customarily found in connection
with a particular principal use.
B.
All incidental changes or replacements in the nonstructural parts of a
building or other structure.
A.
Minor changes or replacements in the structural parts of a building or
other structure, including but not limited to the following examples:
Alteration of interior partitions to improve livability in
nonconforming residential buildings, provided no additional
dwelling units are created thereby.
(1)
Alteration of interior partitions in all other types of buildings or
other structures.
(2)
B.
§ 162-2 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-4
160:478
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.[Amended 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999,
approved 8-12-1993]
BILLBOARD — (Either freestanding or attached to the surface of a building
or other structure):
BLOCK — A tract of land bounded by streets.
BUILDING — Any structure which is permanently affixed to the land and
has enclosing walls and a roof.
BUILDING SETBACK LINE — An established line within a property defining
the minimum required distance between any structure to be erected and an
adjacent right-of-way or street line.
BULK — The term used to describe the size of buildings or other structures
and their relationship to each other, to open areas such as yards and to lot
lines, and therefore includes:
CELLAR — An enclosed building space more than 33 1/3% below grade,
which shall be considered as unhabitable for living purposes.
CENTER LINE OF STREET — See "street, center line of."
CORNER LOT — See "lot, corner."
DETACHED HOUSE — A house which has yards on all four sides.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.[Added
5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916, approved 5-14-1987]
DWELLING — Any structure or part thereof designed to be occupied as
living quarters as a single housekeeping unit.
(3) Making windows or doors in exterior walls.
Strengthening the load-bearing capacity in not more than 10% of
the total floor area to permit the accommodation of a specialized
unit of machinery or equipment.
(4)
A sign other than one indicating a business conducted on the premises,
and
A.
A sign upon which advertising matter of any character is printed,
posted or lettered by any means and which is designed for such
purposes.
B.
The size, including height and floor area, of a building or other
structure.
A.
The relation of the number of dwelling units in a residential building to
the area of the lot.
B.
C. All open areas in yard space relating to buildings and other structures.
§ 162-4 WATER § 162-4
160:479
ENLARGEMENT — An addition to the floor area of an existing building, an
increase in size of another structure or an increase in that portion of a tract
of land occupied by an existing use.
FAMILY —
FLOOD — The general and temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams, creeks,
rivers, watercourses or other inland water from any source.
FLOODPLAIN or FLOODPLAIN CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The
floodplain or Floodplain Conservation District shall be any area of the
Borough of Glenolden subject to the one-hundred-year flood which is
identified as a Special Flood Hazard Area (Zone A) on the Flood Insurance
Rate Map (FIRM) as issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, dated
November 18, 1981.[Amended 5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916, approved
5-14-1987]
FLOODPROOFING — Structural and/or nonstructural additions, changes or
adjustments to buildings, structures or real property in order to reduce or
eliminate flood damage to such buildings, structures or real property or to
the contents of any such building or structure.[Added 5-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 916; approved 5-14-1987]
FLOODWAY or REGULATORY FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or
other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water
surface elevation more than a designated height.[Added 5-14-1987 by
Ord. No. 916, approved 5-14-1987; amended 8-12-1993 by Ord. No.
999, approved 8-12-1993]
FLOOR AREA — The sum of the area of the several floors of a building or
buildings measured from the face of the exterior walls or from center lines
of walls separating two buildings. In particular, "floor area" includes but is
not limited to the following:
A. A single person occupying a dwelling unit and maintaining a household.
Two or more persons related by blood or marriage occupying a dwelling
unit, living together and maintaining a common household.
B.
Not more than three unrelated persons occupying a dwelling unit, living
together and maintaining a common household.
C.
A. Basement space, if it meets the requirements of a building story.
Elevator shafts, stairwells and attic space (whether or not a floor has
been laid) providing structural headroom of eight feet or more.
B.
Roofed terraces, exterior balconies, breezeways or porches, provided
that over 50% of the perimeter of these is enclosed.
C.
Any other floor space used for dwelling purposes no matter where
located within the building.
D.
§ 162-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-4
160:480
FLOOR AREA RATIO — The total allowable floor area for a given lot divided
by the area of that lot. (For example, a building containing 15,000 square
feet of floor area on a given lot of 10,000 square feet of lot area has a floor
area ratio of 1.5.)
FRONT YARD — See "yard."
GARAGE, PRIVATE — A garage which is:
GASOLINE SERVICE STATION — An area of land, together with any
structure thereon, used for:
HEIGHT OF BUILDING — The vertical distance measured from the average
level of finished grade along all the exterior walls of a building to:
HEIGHT OF SIGN — The vertical distance measured:
HOME OCCUPATION —
Accessory buildings, excluding space used for accessory off-street
parking or used for loading berths.
E.
Any other floor space not specifically excluded, excluding space used
for air-conditioning machinery or cooling towers and similar
mechanical equipment serving the building and cellar space.
F.
A. Accessory to a principal building, either attached to it or separate, and
B. Used only for storage purposes.
The retail sale of motor fuel and lubricants and incidental services, such
as lubrication and hand-washing of motor vehicles, and
A.
The sale, installation or minor repair of tires, batteries or other
automobile accessories.
B.
A. The highest point of the roof in the case of a flat roof.
B. The mean height between eaves and ridge in the case of a pitched roof.
The highest point on any structure which rises wholly or partly above
the roofline and whose area equals or exceeds 20% of the ground floor
area of the building which supports it.
C.
From ground level to the highest point on the sign itself and/or its
supporting structure.
A.
Along the face of the sign or its supporting frame from lowest point to
highest.
B.
An accessory use which:
Is clearly incidental or secondary to the residential use of the
dwelling unit or is customarily carried on within a dwelling unit by
one or more occupants of such dwelling unit (a person not residing
in such dwelling unit may not be employed and occupies not more
(1)
A.
§ 162-4 WATER § 162-4
160:481
JUNKYARD — An area of land, with or without buildings, used for the
storage, outside a completely enclosed building, of used and discarded
materials, including but not limited to wastepaper, rags, metal, building
materials, house furnishings, machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, with
or without the dismantling, processing, salvage, sale or other use or
disposition of the same. The deposit or storage on a lot of two or more
unlicensed, wrecked or disabled vehicles or the major part thereof shall be
deemed to make a junkyard.
LOT — A tract or parcel of land held in single and separate ownership.
LOT, CORNER — A lot bounded on at least two sides by streets whenever
the lines of such streets, extended, form an interior angle of 135° or less.
The owner or developer of a corner lot may specify which street line shall
be the front lot line; he shall be required to so specify at the time of filing
an application for a zoning permit.
LOT COVERAGE — The ratio of the total ground floor area of all buildings
on a lot or of the total ground area of paved off-street parking areas
and driveways thereto to the total area of the lot on which they are
located.[Amended 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 965, approved 2-14-1991]
LOT LINE, FRONT — The line separating the lot from the street line.
LOT LINE, REAR — Any lot line, except a front lot line, which is parallel
to or within 45° of being parallel to and does not intersect any street line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. (See definition of "corner lot" for requirements.)
LOT LINE, SIDE — Any lot line which is not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
In the case of a corner lot, the owner or developer may make a different
designation. (See definition of "corner lot" for requirements.)
LOT WIDTH — The horizontal distance between side lot lines measured at
right angles to the lot depth.
than 25% of the total floor area of such dwelling unit or 500 square
feet, whichever is less.
Does not permit the following operations:
(a) Selling articles produced elsewhere than on the premises.
(b) Having exterior displays of goods visible from the outside.
(c) Storing materials or products outside the dwelling unit.
Making external alterations which are not customary in
residential buildings.
(d)
(2)
The conducting of a clinic, hospital, barbershop, beauty parlor,
tearoom, tourist home, animal hospital, animal care of any kind, animal
boarding or any similar use shall not be deemed to be a "home
occupation."
B.
§ 162-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-4
160:482
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
the basement, of any building or structure. An unfinished or flood-resistant
enclosure, usable solely for the parking of vehicles, for building access or
for storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not to be considered
the lowest floor of a building or structure, provided that such enclosure
is not built so as to render the building or structure in violation of the
applicable nonelevation design requirements of the Floodplain
Conservation District Ordinance.101[Added 5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916,
approved 5-14-1987]
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a recreational
vehicle.[Added 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999, approved 8-12-1993]
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.[Added 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999, approved
8-12-1993]
MOTEL — A building or a group of two or more detached or semidetached
buildings containing rooms or apartments having separate entrances
provided directly or closely in connection with automobile parking or
storage space serving such rooms or apartments, which building or group
of buildings is designed, intended or used principally for the providing
of sleeping accommodations for automobile travelers and is suitable for
occupancy at all seasons of the year.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Either:
NONCONFORMING BUILDING OR OTHER STRUCTURE — Any lawful
building or other structure which does not conform to one or more of the
applicable area and bulk regulations of the district in which it is located
either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a subsequent
amendment thereto. Any building or other structure existing in the
Floodplain Conservation District at the time of the enactment of this
chapter shall be considered a nonconforming building or other
structure.[Amended 5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916, approved 5-14-1987]
NONCONFORMING LAND — Any lawful lot which does not conform to
one or more of the applicable area regulations of the district in which it
An apartment building of not more than four stories in height
containing three or more separate dwelling units, or
A.
A townhouse building consisting of a cluster of not less than four
nor more than eight attached single-family dwellings, each dwelling
having a direct entrance on the ground floor and arranged in groups or
clusters and not in long rows parallel to street lines.
B.
101. Editor's Note: See Article VII, Floodplain Conservation District.
§ 162-4 WATER § 162-4
160:483
is located either on the effective date of this chapter or as a result of a
subsequent amendment thereto.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any lawful use, whether of a building or other
structure or of a tract of land, which does not conform to the applicable use
regulations of the district in which it is located either on the effective date
of this chapter or as a result of subsequent amendments thereto. Except for
R-1 and R-2 Districts, no existing use shall be deemed nonconforming solely
because of the existence of less than the required off-street parking.
OFF-SITE SEWER SERVICE — The disposal of sewage by use of a sanitary
sewer system served by a central sewage treatment plant approved by the
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources.
OFF-SITE WATER SERVICE — The supply of water to a user from a public
water supply approved by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Resources.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD or BASE FLOOD — The flood having a onepercent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.[Added
5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916, approved 5-14-1987; amended 8-12-1993
by Ord. No. 999, approved 8-12-1993]
OPEN SPACE —
PARKING SPACE — Consists of:
PERSON — Includes an individual, corporation, partnership, incorporated
association or any other similar entity.
PRIVATE GARAGE — See "garage, private."
PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — Any pool located on a residential or other
property, the use of which is limited by the owner to his or her own
family and such guests as shall be admitted to the pool and its accessory
facilities. "Private swimming pool" shall include any hot tub or spa.[Added
5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2009, approved 5-13-2003]
PUBLIC RECREATION — Refers to leisure-time activities, including but
not limited to sports and entertainment, that are open to anyone without
restriction, except for rules and standards of conduct and use.
Parks, other recreation space or generally open areas available to the
public either free or by fee, or
A.
Yards or other open areas in connection with residential buildings
which are intended for the sole use of the occupants of such buildings
and their guests.
B.
Open space with a dustless all-weather surface, or space in a private
garage or other structure.
A.
An area at least nine feet by 18 feet in size for the storage of one
automobile, accessible from a public way.
B.
§ 162-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-4
160:484
PUBLIC SWIMMING POOL — Any pool not defined herein as a private
swimming pool, including public pools and semipublic pools as defined
in Chapter 47, Bathing Places, of the Code of the Borough of
Glenolden.[Added 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2009, approved 5-13-2003]
REAR YARD — See "yard, rear."
RIGHT-OF-WAY — Refers to land reserved as a street, crosswalk or for other
public purposes.
SATELLITE ANTENNA — A dish-shaped or parabolic antenna, together with
all attachments and parts, the purpose of which is to receive communication
from orbiting satellites or other extraterrestrial sources.[Added 7-9-1987
by Ord. No. 919, approved 7-9-1987]
SEMIDETACHED HOUSE — A house which is:
SETBACK — See "building setback line."
SIDE YARD — See "yard, side."
SIGN — Any letter, word, model, device or representation intended as an
announcement, direction or advertisement. It may be:
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which offers services or goods produced or
available somewhere other than on the lot on which the sign is located. The
words "advertising sign" include the word "billboard."
SIGN, BUSINESS — A sign which offers services or goods available on the
lot on which the sign is located.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign which:
SINGLE AND SEPARATE OWNERSHIP — The ownership of a lot by one or
more persons, partnerships or corporations, which ownership is separate
and distinct from that of any abutting or adjoining lot.
STORY — That portion of a building located between the surface of any floor
and the next floor above it; if there is not more than one floor, the space
between any floor and the ceiling next above it shall be considered a "story."
STREET — A way intended for general public use to provide means of
approach for vehicles and pedestrians. The word "street" includes the words
"road," "highway," "thoroughfare" and "way."
A. Surrounded on three sides by yards.
Located so that one wall is on or adjoining a side lot line and abuts the
neighboring dwelling.
B.
A. A structure, either freestanding or attached to another structure.
B. A notice painted on an exterior wall or a building or other structure.
A. Offers premises for sale, rent or development, or
Advertises the services of building trades during construction or
alteration of the premises upon which the sign is located.
B.
§ 162-4 WATER § 162-4
160:485
STREET, CENTER LINE OF — A line which is an equal distance from both
street lines.
STREET LINE — A right-of-way line.
STRUCTURE — Any form or arrangement of building materials involving
the necessity of providing proper support, bracing, tying, anchoring or
other protection against the forces of the elements.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage of any origin sustained by a structure,
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before
the damage occurred.[Added 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999, amended
8-12-1993]
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any repair, reconstruction or
improvement of any kind to an existing structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure either:[Added
5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916, approved 5-14-1987]
USABLE SATELLITE SIGNAL — A satellite signal which, when viewed
on a conventional television set, is at least equal in picture quality to
that received from local commercial television stations or by way of cable
television.[Added 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 919, approved 7-9-1987]
YARD — That portion of the lot which is unoccupied and open to the sky and
extends from the lot line to the structure.
YARD, FRONT — The yard extending along the full length of the front lot
line.
YARD, REAR — A yard extending the full length of the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — A yard extending along the side lot line from the required
front yard to the required rear yard.
A. Before the repair, reconstruction or improvement is started; or
Before the damage occurred, if the structure has been damaged and is
being restored.102
B.
102. Editor's Note: The former definition of “swimming pool,” which immediately followed this
definition, was repealed 5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2009, approved 5-13-2003. See now the
definitions of “private swimming pool” and “public swimming pool.”
§ 162-4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-4
160:486
ARTICLE II
Classification of Districts
§ 162-5. Classes of districts.
For the purpose of this chapter, the Borough of Glenolden is hereby divided
into the following districts:
§ 162-6. Zoning Map.
The boundaries of said districts shall be as shown on the map attached to
and made a part of this chapter,103 which map shall be known as the "Official
Zoning Map of the Borough of Glenolden," prepared by Damon and Foster,
now known as H. Gilroy Damon and Associates, Civil Engineers, under date
of February 15, 1937, as revised. Said map and all notations, references and
dates shown thereon are hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter
and shall be as much a part of this chapter as if all were fully described
herein.
§ 162-7. District boundaries.
The boundaries between districts are, unless otherwise indicated, either
the center lines of streets or railroad rights-of-way or such lines extended
or lines parallel or perpendicular thereto. Where figures are shown on the
Zoning Map between a street and a district boundary line, they indicate
that the district boundary line runs parallel to the street line at a distance
therefrom equivalent to the number of feet so indicated.
A. Residential.
R-1 Low Density
R-2 Medium Density
R-3 High Density
B. Business.
B-1 Neighborhood Oriented
B-2 Shopping Center
C. Industrial.
I-1 Industrial
D. Floodplain Conservation District.
103. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is to be included in a pocket at the end of this volume.
§ 162-5 WATER § 162-7
160:487

ARTICLE III
Regulations for Residential Districts R-1, R-2 and R-3
§ 162-8. Applicability.
Unless stated otherwise, each of the following regulations applies to all
residential districts.
§ 162-9. Uses permitted by special exception.
The following uses shall be permitted when authorized as a special
exception by the Zoning Hearing Board, subject to the standards set forth
in § 162-61:
§ 162-10. Height regulations.
No building shall exceed 35 feet in height from the lowest point of grade to
highest part of the building, except chimneys, spires, elevator shafts, tanks,
air-conditioning equipment and similar projections of the building.
§ 162-11. Private swimming pools. [Amended 5-14-1981 by Ord. No.
849, approved 5-14-1981; 10-7-1997 by Ord. No. 1043, approved
10-7-1997; 2-15-2000 by Ord. No. 1076, approved 2-15-2000;
5-13-2003 by Ord. No. 2009, approved 5-13-2003]
A private swimming pool shall be permitted as an accessory use to a singlefamily
residential dwelling (attached or detached) use, provided that it
meets the requirements of this section.
A. Religious uses such as churches, including Sunday school and related
religious education and training and a dwelling auxiliary to any such
religious use upon the same or contiguous lot.
B. Philanthropic and educational uses, including public, private or
parochial schools and colleges, but not including a business or trade
school or any form of correctional or rehabilatory-type institutions,
including but not limited to a halfway house or drug or alcohol
treatment center.
C. Municipal or community playgrounds, recreational centers or parks,
provided such centers are not carried on for profit and are not
accompanied by or incidental to a principal activity customarily carried
on for profit.
D. Home occupation and professional office, provided the operator lives on
the premises and there shall be no public display of goods or sale of
merchandise on the premises.
A. Permit required.
(1) Except as otherwise set forth in this section, no private swimming
pool or appurtenances thereto shall be constructed, installed,
§ 162-8 WATER § 162-11
160:489
enlarged or altered until construction documents have been
submitted and a permit has been obtained from the Borough.
Where required and as applicable, the approval of all county and
state authorities having jurisdiction over the proposed private
swimming pool shall be obtained before applying to the Borough
for a permit. Certified copies of all such county and state approvals
shall be filed as part of the supporting data for the permit
application.
(2) Design, construction and installation of all private swimming pools
shall comply with this section and all other rules, regulations,
ordinances and codes of the Borough.
(3) Construction documents shall accurately show dimensions and
construction of the private swimming pool and appurtenances and
properly established distances to lot lines, buildings, walks and the
surrounding enclosure as well as details of the drainage and water
disposal systems.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words shall have the
meanings set forth below.
ABOVEGROUND SWIMMING POOL — An aboveground swimming pool
shall mean any private swimming pool designed to be constructed or
installed and constructed or installed above the existing grade, not
including any minor excavation required for leveling.
ENCLOSURE — A fence, wall, building wall, wall of an aboveground
swimming pool or a combination thereof that serves to completely
surround the private swimming pool and obstruct or prohibit access to
the private swimming pool.
INDOOR PRIVATE SWIMMING POOL — An indoor private swimming
pool shall mean any private swimming pool that is totally contained
within a residential dwelling or structure accessory to a dwelling and
surrounded on all four sides by walls of said structure and covered by a
roof.
IN-GROUND SWIMMING POOL — An in-ground swimming pool shall
mean any private swimming pool designed to be constructed or
installed and constructed or installed below the existing grade.
POWER SAFETY COVER — A pool cover that is placed over the water
area of a private swimming pool and is opened and closed with a
motorized mechanism by a control switch.
C. Dimensional requirements.
(1) All private swimming pools shall be constructed or installed
entirely within the rear yard of the lot.
(2) No private swimming pool shall be located closer than 10 feet to
the residential dwelling.
§ 162-11 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-11
160:490
(3) The interior wall of any private swimming pool shall not be closer
than six feet to any side or rear lot line nor closer than 10 feet to
any lot line abutting a street.
(4) Decking which extends outward from the interior wall of any
private swimming pool shall not be closer than six feet to any side
or rear lot line or closer than 10 feet to any lot line abutting a
street.
D. Enclosure requirements. Every person owning land upon which there is
located a private swimming pool shall erect and maintain thereon an
adequate enclosure surrounding the private swimming pool area.
(1) Fences.
(a) Fences serving as an enclosure shall be a minimum height of
48 inches and maximum height of 72 inches above finished
grade, as measured on the side of the fence which faces away
from the private swimming pool.
(b) The maximum vertical clearance between the finished grade
and the bottom of the fence shall not exceed two inches, as
measured on the side of the fence which faces away from the
private swimming pool. For an aboveground swimming pool,
the fence may be located on the ground or mounted on top of
the aboveground private swimming pool structure, and if
mounted on top of the aboveground private swimming pool
structure, the vertical clearance between the top of the
aboveground private swimming pool structure and the bottom
of the fence shall not exceed four inches, as measured on the
side of the fence which faces away from the aboveground
private swimming pool.
(c) Horizontal or vertical openings or spaces in the fence shall not
allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.
(d) For any fence composed of closely spaced horizontal and
vertical members where the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is less than 45 inches, the horizontal
members shall be located on the swimming pool side of the
fence. Spacing between vertical members shall not exceed 1 3/
4 inches in width. Where there are decorative cutouts within
vertical members, spacing within the cutouts shall not exceed
1 3/4 inches in width.
(e) For any fence composed of widely spaced horizontal and
vertical members where the distance between the tops of the
horizontal members is 45 inches or more, spacing between
vertical members shall not exceed four inches. Where there are
decorative cutouts within vertical members, spacing within the
cutouts shall not exceed 1 3/4 inches in width.
§ 162-11 WATER § 162-11
160:491
(f) For any fence composed of diagonal members, the maximum
opening formed by the diagonal members shall be no more
than 1 3/4 inches.
(g) Maximum mesh size for chain link fences shall be 2 1/4 inch
square, unless the fence is provided with slats fastened at the
top or the bottom which reduce the openings to no more than
1 3/4 inches.
(h) Access gates shall comply with the requirements applicable to
the particular type of fence utilized and shall provide a locking
device. Pedestrian access gates which open directly to provide
access to the pool must open outwards away from the pool and
be self-closing with a self-latching device. Gates other than
pedestrian access gates which open directly to the pool shall
have a self-latching device. Where the release mechanism of
the self-latching device is located less than 54 inches from the
bottom of the gate, the release mechanism shall be located on
the pool side of the gate at least three inches below the top of
the gate, and the gate and fence shall have no opening greater
than 1/2 inch within 18 inches of the release mechanism.
(2) Other enclosures.
(a) Solid enclosures, such as a dwelling wall, which do not have
openings, shall not contain indentations or protrusions except
for normal construction tolerances and tooled masonry joints.
(b) Where a wall of a dwelling serves as part of the enclosure, one
of the following shall apply:
[1] Doors with direct access to the private swimming pool
through that wall shall be equipped with an alarm which
produces an audible warning when the door and its screen
are opened. The alarm shall sound continuously for a
minimum of 30 seconds immediately after the door is
opened and be capable of being heard throughout the
house during normal household activities. The alarm shall
automatically reset under all conditions. The alarm shall
be equipped with a manual means to temporarily
deactivate the alarm for a single opening. Such
deactivation shall last no more than 15 seconds. The
deactivation switch shall be located at least 54 inches
above the threshold of the door;
[2] The private swimming pool shall be equipped with a power
safety cover, which complies with ASTM F 1346, or
[3] Other means of protection, such as self-closing doors with
self-latching devices, which are approved by the Borough,
shall be accepted so long as the degree of protection
§ 162-11 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-11
160:492
afforded is not less than the protection afforded by the
above sections.
(c) Where part of an aboveground swimming pool structure is
used as an enclosure or where the enclosure is mounted on top
of the aboveground pool structure, and the means of access is
a ladder or steps, then the ladder or steps shall be capable of
being secured, locked or removed to prevent access, or the
ladder or steps shall be surrounded by a enclosure which
meets the requirements of this section. When the ladder or
steps are secured, locked, or removed, any opening created
shall not allow the passage of a four-inch diameter sphere.
(3) All enclosures shall be located, constructed and installed so as to
prohibit permanent structures, equipment or similar objects from
being used to climb the enclosure to gain access to the private
swimming pool.
E. Drainage requirements. All private swimming pools and equipment
shall be equipped to be emptied completely of water. All discharged
water shall be disposed of in a manner approved by the Borough. In all
cases the drainage method must comply with all Borough health and
safety requirements and shall not create a nuisance to adjoining
properties or the public in general.
F. Applicability/penalties/exceptions.
(1) The requirements of this section shall be applicable to all private
swimming pools constructed on or after the effective date of this
section and shall be applicable to all existing private swimming
pools 90 days after the effective date of this section.
(2) Any person who has an existing private swimming pool who is cited
by the Borough for noncompliance with the provisions of this
section shall be granted a sixty-day grace period (from the date of
the citation) to make any required changes to comply with the
provisions of this section.
(3) Any person who fails to comply with this section, upon being found
liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding, shall pay a
judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorney fees incurred by the Borough. Each day that a
violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
(4) The provisions of this section shall not be applicable to:
(a) Any private swimming pool without a permanent water
recirculating system and which does not involve structural
materials and which:
[1] Is less than 24 inches deep; or
[2] Has a surface area less than 100 square feet.
§ 162-11 WATER § 162-11
160:493
§ 162-12. Low-Density District R-1.
(b) A stand-alone, prefabricated (delivered to the property
partially or totally assembled) spa or hot tub having an
approved safety cover.
(c) Fixtures which are under 30 inches in depth and drained after
each use.
(d) Indoor private swimming pools, when constructed or
integrated within the residential dwelling, except that such
indoor private swimming pool shall comply with one of the
requirements of Subsection D(2)(b), above.
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit continued residential
development which is compatible with existing types of housing and lot
size in low-density areas of Glenolden Borough.
B. Uses permitted. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) One single-family detached dwelling.
(2) Customary residential accessory uses.
C. Area, driveway and parking regulations.
(1) Lot width. Each lot on which a dwelling is constructed shall have a
frontage of at least 60 feet on a public street and a depth of not less
than 125 feet. Said street shall be fully improved, which includes
curbs, sidewalks, street paving and all sanitary sewers and
necessary utilities.
(2) Lot coverage. Not more than 30% of the area of any lot shall be
occupied or covered by buildings, including accessory structures,
and not more than 10% of the area of any lot shall be occupied or
covered by paved off-street parking areas, driveways thereto,
sidewalks and other paved areas and not less than 60% of the area
of any lot shall be occupied or covered by grass and planted areas.
[Amended 10-11-1990 by Ord. No. 955, approved
10-11-1990; 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 965, approved
2-14-1991; 7-11-1991 by Ord. No. 968, approved
7-11-1991]
(3) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, provided that
the front yard on the long side of a corner lot may be reduced to a
depth of not less than 12 feet.
(4) Side yard. Except for a corner lot, there shall be two side yards on
each lot, neither of which shall be less than 10 feet in width.
§ 162-11 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-12
160:494
§ 162-13. Medium-Density District R-2.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall have a
depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6) Driveways. All driveways must: [Amended 10-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 955, approved 10-11-1990]
(a) Be hard-surfaced, according to Borough specifications.
(b) Be a maximum of 10 feet in width; provided, however, that in
any case involving a multivehicle garage, a portion of the
driveway may exceed 10 feet in width as required for access.
(7) There shall be provided at least two off-street parking places
consisting of a hard-surfaced area of not less than nine feet by 18
feet. Said parking places may be part of the driveway.
(8) The setbacks and area regulations herein shall apply to all
buildings with the exception that an accessory building may have
one side yard of not less than three feet and a rear yard of not less
than three feet. [Amended 12-11-1981 by Ord. No. 852,
approved 12-11-1981]
(9) All decks or open balconies erected or constructed shall have a side
yard setback of three feet from each property line. [Added
12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1084, approved 12-19-2000;
amended 5-20-2008 by 2058, approved 5-20-2008]
D. Garages and other accessory buildings. All garages must conform to the
open space requirement and may not exceed 600 square feet. Maximum
height for a garage with an A-frame roof shall be 15 feet and 10 feet for
a flat roof. All other accessory buildings must conform to the open space
requirement and may not exceed 200 square feet. [Added 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 1017, approved 3-9-1995]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to permit continued residential
development which is compatible with existing types of housing and lot
sizes in medium-density areas of Glenolden Borough.
B. Uses permitted. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) One single-family dwelling.
(2) One single-family semidetached dwelling (twin).
(3) Customary residential accessory uses.
C. Area, driveway and parking regulations. The area, driveway and
parking regulations set forth in § 162-12C hereof shall apply to all
detached single-family dwellings. The following regulations shall apply
to semidetached dwellings:
§ 162-12 WATER § 162-13
160:495
(1) Lot width. Each lot on which a semidetached dwelling is
constructed shall have a frontage of at least 30 feet on a public
street and be not less than 125 feet in depth.
(2) Lot coverage. Not more than 30% of the area of any lot shall be
occupied or covered by buildings, including accessory structures,
and not more than 10% of the area of any lot shall be occupied or
covered by paved off-street parking areas, driveways thereto,
sidewalks and other paved areas and not less than 60% of the area
of any lot shall be occupied or covered by grass and planted areas.
[Amended 10-11-1990 by Ord. No. 955, approved
10-11-1990; 2-14-1991 by Ord. No. 965, approved
2-14-1991; 7-11-1991 by Ord. No. 968, approved
7-11-1991]
(3) Front yard. There shall be a front yard on each street on which a lot
abuts which shall be not less than 25 feet in depth, provided that
the front yard on the long side of a corner lot may be reduced to a
depth of not less than 12 feet.
(4) Side yards. For every building consisting of two semidetached
dwellings, there shall be two side yards, neither of which shall be
less than 10 feet in width; accordingly, every semidetached
dwelling shall have one side yard, which shall be not less than 10
feet in width.
(5) Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall have a
depth of not less than 25 feet.
(6) Driveways. All driveways must: [Amended 10-11-1990 by Ord.
No. 955, approved 10-11-1990]
(a) Be hard-surfaced, according to Borough specifications.
(b) Be a maximum of 10 feet in width; provided, however, that in
any case involving a multivehicle garage, a portion of the
driveway may exceed 10 feet in width as required for access.
(7) There shall be provided at least two off-street parking places
consisting of a hard-surfaced area of not less than nine feet by 18
feet. Said parking spaces may be part of the driveway.
(8) The setbacks and area regulations herein shall apply to all
buildings with the exception that an accessory building may have
one side yard of not less than three feet and a rear yard of not less
than three feet. [Amended 12-11-1981 by Ord. No. 852,
approved 12-11-1981]
(9) All decks or open balconies erected or constructed shall have a side
yard setback of three feet from each property line. [Added
12-19-2000 by Ord. No. 1084, approved 12-19-2000;
amended 5-20-2008 by 2058, approved 5-20-2008]
§ 162-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-13
160:496
§ 162-14. High-Density District R-3.
D. Garages and other accessory buildings. All garages must conform to the
open space requirement and may not exceed 600 square feet. Maximum
height for a garage with an A-frame roof shall be 15 feet and 10 feet for
a flat roof. All other accessory buildings must conform to the open space
requirement and may not exceed 200 square feet. [Added 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 1017, approved 3-9-1995]
A. Purpose. It is the purpose of this section to provide multiple dwelling
units as described herein.
B. Uses permitted. A building may be erected or used and a lot may be
used or occupied for any of the following purposes and no other:
(1) Apartments.
(2) Townhouses.
C. Area and parking regulations.
(1) Apartment building. All lots wherein an apartment building is
hereafter erected or used shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) Minimum size: 15,000 square feet. Apartments shall be limited
to 12 dwelling units per single unattached building.
(b) Maximum lot coverage. The building coverage shall not exceed
30% of the lot size.
(c) Minimum lot width: 75 feet on a public street and at the
building line.
(d) Minimum front yard: 60 feet.
(e) Minimum side yards: 10 feet on each side of the building.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(g) Minimum parking: 1 1/2 off-street parking places of nine feet
by 18 feet for each apartment unit, exclusive of driveways.
(h) Design standards as required by § 162-53.
(2) Townhouses. All lots whereon a townhouse or townhouses are
constructed shall be subject to the following requirements:
(a) Minimum size: a minimum lot size of 2,500 square feet for each
townhouse, each group or cluster to be not more than eight
units.
(b) Minimum lot coverage: The building coverage shall not exceed
35% of the lot size for interior lots and 30% for end lots.
§ 162-13 WATER § 162-14
160:497
(c) Minimum lot width: 15 feet for interior lots and 25 feet for end
lots.
(d) Minimum front yard: 25 feet.
(e) Minimum side yard: 20 feet between clusters, 10 feet for one
side yard of exterior lots.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 25 feet.
(g) Minimum parking: two off-street parking places for each
townhouse unit.
(h) Design standards as required by § 162-53.
D. Garages and other accessory buildings. All garages must conform to the
open space requirement and may not exceed 600 square feet. Maximum
height for a garage with an A-frame roof shall be 15 feet and 10 feet for
a flat roof. All other accessory buildings must conform to the open space
requirement and may not exceed 200 square feet. [Added 3-9-1995
by Ord. No. 1017, approved 3-9-1995]
§ 162-14 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-14
160:498
ARTICLE IV
Regulations for Neighborhood Business District B-1
§ 162-15. Applicability.
In a Neighborhood Business District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 162-16. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other, provided that no merchandise or
equipment shall be sold, displayed or stored on a public sidewalk or rightof-
way:
A. Hotel or motel.
B. Offices, post office, banks or other financial institutions.
C. Bakeries, confectioners, ice cream shops, excluding lunch wagons,
automobiles and other similar vehicles from which food is sold.
D. Nurseries, greenhouses and flower shops.
E. Jewelers, opticians, music stores and repair shops for jewelry, watches,
musical instruments, clocks or optical goods.
F. Barbershops, beauty parlors, hairdressing or manicuring
establishments.
G. Furniture and household appliances.
H. Neighborhood grocery store for the retail sale of food products and
normal household supplies.
I. Telephone or utility office.
J. Laundry, self-service launderette; tailoring, dressmaking or shoe
repairing.
K. Clothing or haberdashery.
L. Funeral parlor.
M. Stationers, news dealers, pharmacists, drugstores.
N. The following uses when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board as a
special exception in accordance with the standards set forth in
§ 162-61:
(1) Any use substantially similar to the above-enumerated uses.
(2) Restaurant.
(3) Sale or minor repair of motor vehicles, car wash and motor vehicle
service station, provided that no pump or other filling service
§ 162-15 WATER § 162-16
160:499
§ 162-17. Area regulations.
§ 162-18. Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
§ 162-19. Parking.
Parking spaces shall be provided as required by § 162-54.
§ 162-20. Design standards.
Design standards shall conform to the requirements of § 162-53.
device shall be erected within 20 feet of the street line; that all
washing and/or repair work is done and all services are conducted
within an enclosed building; and that the parking and/or storage
of any motor vehicle, other than a currently licensed and inspected
vehicle, is prohibited.
A. Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be 5,000 square feet.
B. Lot coverage. Building area may not exceed 40% of the lot area.
Parking, driveways, sidewalks and other paved areas may not exceed
40% of the lot area. Minimum of 20% of the lot area shall be kept in
grass and planted areas.
C. Minimum width. The minimum lot width shall be 50 feet.
D. Front yard. No building shall be erected, constructed or maintained
closer than 25 feet to the street line.
E. Side yards. A building shall have at least one side yard not less than 10
feet.
F. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot which shall have a
depth of not less than 15 feet.
G. Garages and other accessory buildings. The above dimensional and
area regulations shall apply to all buildings, except for an accessory
building(s) as defined herein, which shall have at least one side yard not
less than three feet and a rear yard which shall have a depth of not less
than three feet. All garages must conform to the open space
requirement and may not exceed 600 square feet. Maximum height for
a garage with an A-frame roof shall be 15 feet and 10 feet for a flat roof.
All other accessory buildings must conform to the open space
requirement and may not exceed 200 square feet. [Added 1-9-1992 by
Ord. No. 979, approved 1-9-1992; amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No.
1017, approved 3-9-1995]
§ 162-16 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-21
160:500
§ 162-21. Signs.
Signs shall conform to the requirements of § 162-45.
§ 162-21 WATER § 162-21
160:501

ARTICLE V
Regulations for Shopping Center Districts B-2
§ 162-22. Applicability.
In Shopping Center Districts, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 162-23. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 162-24. Special regulations, garages and other accessory
buildings. [Amended 3-9-1995 by Ord. No. 1017, approved
3-9-1995]
§ 162-25. Area regulations.
§ 162-26. Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed 35 feet in height.
A. Any use permitted in a B-1 District.
B. Places of amusement and motion-picture theaters.
C. Supermarkets for the sale of food and normal household supplies.
D. Department stores.
A. Sales, exhibiting for sale, business, service, repair or processing shall
be conducted within a completely enclosed building.
B. All garages must conform to the open space requirement and may not
exceed 600 square feet. Maximum height for a garage with an A-frame
roof shall be 15 feet and 10 feet for a flat roof. All other accessory
buildings must conform to the open space requirement and may not
exceed 200 square feet.
A. Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be two acres.
B. Lot coverage. Building area may not exceed 33 1/3% of the lot area.
Parking, driveways, sidewalks and other paved areas may not exceed
33 1/3% of the lot area. Minimum of 33 1/3% of the lot area shall be
kept in grass and planted areas.
C. Side yards. Side yards shall be a minimum of 50 feet wide on each side
of a building.
D. Rear yard. A rear yard shall be a minimum of 50 feet in depth.
§ 162-22 WATER § 162-27
160:503
§ 162-27. Parking.
Parking spaces shall be provided as required by § 162-54.
§ 162-28. Design standards.
Design standards shall conform to the requirements of § 162-53.
§ 162-29. Signs.
Signs shall conform to the requirements of § 162-46.
§ 162-27 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-29
160:504
ARTICLE VA
Regulations for LOL Limited Office - Laboratory District
[Added 11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 2003, approved 11-19-2002]
§ 162-29.1. Purpose.
It is the purpose of this section to permit modern, low-impact laboratory and
office facilities while protecting the nearby residential neighborhoods.
§ 162-29.2. Applicability.
In the Limited Office - Laboratory District the following regulations shall
apply.
§ 162-29.3. Uses permitted.
A building may be erected or used and a lot may be used or occupied for
any of the following purposes and no other:
§ 162-29.4. Area regulations.
A. Research, scientific or testing laboratories, provided that there is no
commercial production and no storage of any commodity or substance
whatsoever at such laboratories except for such storage as is necessary
for the conduct of scientific research, and provided further that such
laboratories do not emit odors, dust, fumes, smoke, heat or gas or
discharge any uncontrolled liquid or solid wastes or cause vibrations,
noise or glare that may be detrimental to the public health, safety, or
general welfare or which may cause damage to or unreasonably
interfere with the use and enjoyment of public or private property.
B. Offices.
A. Minimum lot size. The minimum lot size shall be 90,000 square feet.
B. Building coverage. The ratio of the total ground floor area of all
buildings on a lot shall not exceed 35% of the total area of the lot on
which they are located. Impervious surface coverage, including but not
limited to buildings, parking, driveways, sidewalks and other paved
areas, may not exceed 65% of the total area of the lot on which they are
located. A minimum of 35% of the lot shall be kept in grass and planted
areas.
C. Minimum width. The minimum lot width shall be 250 feet.
D. Front yard. No building shall be erected, constructed or maintained
closer than 25 feet to the street line.
E. Side yards. Side yards shall be a minimum of 50 feet on each side of the
building.
§ 162-29.1 WATER § 162-29.4
160:505
§ 162-29.5. Height regulations.
No building or structure shall exceed 40 feet in height.
§ 162-29.6. Design standards.
Design standards shall conform to the requirements of § 162-53.
§ 162-29.7. Parking.
Parking spaces shall be provided as required by § 162-54.
§ 162-29.8. Signs.
Signs shall conform to the requirements of § 162-48.
§ 162-29.9. Buffer requirements.
Along each side or rear property line of a lot which directly abuts a
residence district of the Borough, a buffer planting strip of not less than 50
feet in width shall be provided. Within the buffer planting strip there shall
be placed shrubbery, trees or other plantings sufficient to screen the lot and
the use conducted thereon from abutting residential districts and to ensure
that the residential character of abutting districts is not adversely affected
by such lot or any use conducted thereon. Along each street line of the lot a
buffer strip of not less than 25 feet in width shall be provided which shall be
landscaped in the manner provided above and which may include sidewalks
and accessways necessary or appropriate for the use conducted on the lot.
F. Rear yard. There shall be a rear yard on each lot that shall have a depth
of not less than 50 feet.
§ 162-29.4 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-29.9
160:506
ARTICLE VI
Regulations for I-1 Industrial District
§ 162-30. Applicability.
In any I-1 Industrial District, the following regulations shall apply.
§ 162-31. Permitted uses.
A building may be erected, altered or used and a lot or premises may be
used for any of the following purposes and for no other:
§ 162-32. Area and bulk regulations.
The following area and bulk regulations shall apply:
A. Research, engineering or testing laboratories.
B. Any production, processing, cleaning, testing, repair, storage and
distribution of materials, goods, foodstuffs and products.
C. Public utility installations and public-service uses.
D. Truck freight terminal.
E. Contractor's establishment not engaging in any retail activities on the
site.
F. Administrative activities and offices.
G. Building supply.
H. Customary accessory uses associated with industrial districts.
I. Other substantially similar uses shall be permitted as a special
exception when authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the standards set forth in § 162-61.
A. Lot size: one acre minimum.
B. Lot width: 150 feet minimum at building line.
C. Lot coverage: 35% maximum.
D. Building setback line: 25 feet minimum.
E. Side yards: 25 feet minimum each side.
F. Rear yard: 25 feet minimum.
G. Maximum building height: 40 feet.
H. Tower and chimney location: 50 feet minimum from any lot line.
I. Paved surface area may not exceed 40% of lot area.
§ 162-30 WATER § 162-33
160:507
§ 162-33. Design standards.
Design standards shall conform to the requirements of § 162-53.
§ 162-34. Parking.
Parking spaces shall be provided as required by § 162-54.
§ 162-35. Signs.
Signs shall conform to the requirements of § 162-47.
§ 162-36. General standards.
The following limitations shall be applied to any use permitted in this
district:
A. Manufacturing activities in this district shall be carried on in
completely enclosed buildings. Only storage may be permitted out of
doors, under the provisions of § 162-53.
B. Noise emanating from a use in this district shall not exceed the level of
ordinary conversation at the boundaries of the lot. Short, intermittent
noise peaks may be permitted if they do not exceed normal traffic noise
peaks at any point on the lot boundaries.
C. Uses in this district shall be such that they:
(1) Emit no obnoxious, toxic or corrosive fumes or gases.
(2) Emit no odors perceptible at the lot boundaries.
(3) Emit no smoke.
(4) Discharge into the air no dust or other particulate matter.
(5) Produce no heat or glare perceptible at or beyond the lot
boundaries.
(6) Utilize lighting in a manner which produces no glare in public
streets or on any other parcel.
(7) Produce no physical vibration perceptible at or beyond the lot
boundaries.
(8) Produce no electromagnetic radiation or radioactive emission
injurious to human beings, animals or vegetation. Electromagnetic
radiation or radioactive emissions shall not be of an intensity that
interferes with the use of any other property.
(9) Do not engage in reproduction or storage of any material designed
for use as an explosive, or in any way create any other danger to
the safety of the surrounding area.
§ 162-33 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-36
160:508
§ 162-36.1. Adult entertainment regulations. [Added 2-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 1015]
(10) Discharge no untreated potentially dangerous effluent from plant
operations.
(11) Do not engage in the storage of waste materials on the lot for any
period beyond 30 days.
A. Legislative intent and purpose.
(1) It is hereby determined that adult entertainment uses, as defined
by this section, tend to bring with them secondary concerns that
impact on the health, safety and general welfare concerns of the
Borough of Glenolden. These associated concerns include
difficulties for law enforcement, municipal maintenance, trash,
deleterious effects on business and residential property values,
increased crime, particularly corruption of the morals of minors
and prostitution, and encourage residents and businesses to move
elsewhere.
(2) With these goals in mind, the Borough of Glenolden is amending
the Zoning Chapter to restrict or limit the location of where said
activities can locate within the bounds of the Borough of Glenolden.
The Borough of Glenolden has concluded that a permitting and/or
licensing process is a legitimate and reasonable means of
accountability to ensure that the operators of adult entertainment
uses comply with reasonable regulation and do not knowingly allow
their establishments to be used as places of illegal sexual activity or
solicitation. The Borough of Glenolden also does not intend by this
section to effect or suppress any activities protected by the First
Amendment but instead address these secondary effects.
B. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically
or mechanically controlled still or motion-producing devices are
maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at
any one time or where the image is so displayed or distinguished or
characterized by depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
ADULT CABARET, ADULT DANCE HALL, ADULT CLUB, ADULT BAR,
ADULT TAVERN, NIGHTCLUB, RESTAURANT OR SIMILAR
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment offering adult
entertainment; any cabaret, dance hall, club, tavern, bar nightclub,
restaurant or similar commercial establishment offering entertainment
used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an
emphasis on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein,
§ 162-36 WATER § 162-36.1
160:509
whether or not liquor is sold on the premises. Such presentation or
material may be live or through films, motion picture, videocassettes,
slides or other photographic reproduction depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT ENTERTAINMENT — Live or non-live entertainment containing
specified sexual activities or displaying or presenting specified
anatomical areas. This definition is a broad overall definition which
includes the activities adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult club, adult
bar, adult tavern, adult material sales, adult mini-motion-picture
theater, adult motion-picture theater and peep show as part of the
definition for "adult entertainment."
ADULT MATERIAL SALES —
ADULT MINI-MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any enclosed or
semienclosed or unenclosed building which houses a commercial
establishment with the capacity for less than 50 persons used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, for observation by patrons therein.
Book, video or magazine sales, other printed matter, photographs,
films, motion-picture videos or production slides or other visual
representation and/or rentals where either the materials,
advertising, displays or signs in or out of the locations offer written
material showing, displaying or used for presenting material
distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas for observation by patrons therein. This does not apply to the
availability for sale of any material displayed in such a way that
only the name of the book or magazine appears.
(1)
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis
on matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
(2)
Such commercial establishments as listed in Subsections (1) and
(2) of this definition may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale or rental of material
depicted or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and still be characterized as "adult material
sales." Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such commercial establishments from being categorized as "adult
material sales" as long as one of its principal business purposes
is the offering for sale or rental for consideration of specified
materials used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
(3)
§ 162-36.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-36.1
160:510
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproduction which are used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — Any enclosed or partially
enclosed or unenclosed building which houses a commercial
establishment with the capacity of 50 or more persons used for
presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on
matter depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein.
APPLICANT — A person who applies by filling out an application for a
permit for an adult entertainment business.
CERTIFICATION — A department and/or agency for the Borough, after
inspection of the premises for adult entertainment, writes a report to
the Code Zoning Officer regarding compliance or noncompliance.
ESTABLISHMENT —
NUDITY or STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of the specified
anatomical areas without any coverings on the body area.
PEEP SHOWS — Any enclosed or semienclosed or unenclosed building/
enclosure which houses a commercial establishment with the capacity
for one person, used for presenting material distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or describing
specified sexual activity or specified anatomical areas for observation
by parties therein.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person or persons to whom a
permit and/or license to operate an adult entertainment has been
issued, as well as the individual or individuals listed as an applicant on
the application for a permit and/or license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMI-NUDE OR SEMI-NUDITY — State of dress in which clothing
partially or opaquely covers specified anatomical areas.
The opening or commencement of any adult entertainment as a
new business.
(1)
The conversion of an existing business, whether or not an adult
entertainment, to an adult entertainment business.
(2)
The addition of any adult entertainment business to any other
existing adult entertainment business.
(3)
(4) The relocation of any adult entertainment business.
§ 162-36.1 WATER § 162-36.1
160:511
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial
enterprise that as one of its primary business purposes offers for any
form of consideration:
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS —
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES —
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL —
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
persons of opposite sex.
(1)
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the
same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or
semi-nude.
(2)
(1) Human genitals; pubic region; anus.
(2) Buttocks.
Female breast(s) below a point immediately above the top of the
areola and/or female breast(s) with the areola partially or
completely covered.
(3)
Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if
completely and opaquely covered.
(4)
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
Acts or simulated acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse,
sodomy or oral copulation.
(2)
Fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breast(s).
(3)
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the
activities set forth in Subsections (1) through (3) of this definition.
(4)
(1) The sale, lease or sublease of a business.
The transfer of securities which constitutes a controlling interest in
the business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
(2)
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for
transfer by a bequest or other operation of law upon the death of a
person possessing the ownership or control.
(3)
C. Uses.
(1) Only in the Industrial District, when authorized by a special
exception, shall the land, buildings or premises be used for the
following uses:
(a) Adult arcade.
§ 162-36.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-36.1
160:512
(b) Adult cabaret, adult dance hall, adult club, adult bar, adult
tavern, nightclub, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment.
(c) Adult entertainment.
(d) Adult material sales.
(e) Adult mini-motion-picture theater.
(f) Adult motel.
(g) Adult motion-picture theater.
(h) Peep shows.
(i) Sexual encounter center.
(2) In addition, the above additional uses are allowed by permit only in
the Industrial District if the property line of this use is greater than
650 feet from the property lines of a:
(a) School.
(b) House of worship.
(c) Borough-owned park.
(d) Residential district.
(e) Any other adult use establishment as listed above.
(3) For purposes of this section, measures shall be made in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the
nearest portion of the building or structure used as a part of the
premises where an adult entertainment business is conducted to
the nearest property line of a school, house of worship, Boroughowned
park and/or residential district.
D. Inspection.
(1) An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Marshal, Zoning Officer or other Borough
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of an adult
entertainment business for the purpose of ensuring compliance
with the law at any time the adult entertainment business is
occupied or open for business. These inspection departments/
agencies shall certify in writing to the Code Enforcement Officer
whether compliance is achieved.
(2) A person who operates an adult entertainment business or his
agent or employee violates the Zoning Ordinance of the Borough of
Glenolden if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the
business at any time it is occupied or open for business.
§ 162-36.1 WATER § 162-36.1
160:513
E. Fees. The annual fee for an adult entertainment business permit is
$500.
F. Suspension. The Zoning Officer or his representative shall suspend a
permit for a period not to exceed 30 days if he determines that a
permittee or an employee of the permittee has:
(1) Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this section or
the Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the adult
entertainment premises.
(3) Refused to allow an inspection of the adult entertainment premises
as authorized by this section.
G. Revocation.
(1) The Zoning Officer or his representative shall revoke a permit if a
cause of suspension set forth in Subsection F occurred and the
permit has been suspended within the preceding 12 months.
(2) The Zoning Officer or his representative shall also have the power
to revoke a permit if he determines that:
(a) A permittee or any of the persons specified has given false or
misleading information or materials submitted to the Borough
during the application process.
(b) A permittee or employee of the permittee has knowingly
allowed prostitution on the premises as defined by the
Pennsylvania Crimes Code.104
(c) A permittee or employee of the permittee knowingly operated
the adult entertainment business during a period of time when
the permittee's permit was suspended or revoked.
(d) A permittee or employee of the permittee knowingly allowed
any action of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises.
(e) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Borough or state
for any taxes or fees past due.
(3) When the Zoning Officer revokes the permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued an
adult entertainment business permit for one year from the date
when the revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation,
the Zoning Officer finds that the basis for the revocation has been
corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a permit if at
104. Editor's Note: See 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5902.
§ 162-36.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-36.1
160:514
least 90 days have elapsed since the date when the revocation
became effective.
(4) After denial of an application or denial of a renewal of an
application or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant
or licensee or permittee may seek prompt judicial review of such
administrative action in a court of competent jurisdiction. The
administrative action shall be promptly reviewed by the court.
H. Transfer of permit. A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another
person nor shall a permittee operate an adult entertainment business
under the authority of a permit at any place other than the address
designated within the application.
I. Injunction. A person who operates or causes to be operated an adult
entertainment business without a valid permit or in violation of this
section is subject to an action in equity or a suit for injunction as well as
citations for violations of the Zoning Ordinance.
J. Violations. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall be
subject to the penalties set forth in § 162-64, Violations and penalties.
§ 162-36.1 WATER § 162-36.1
160:515

ARTICLE VII
Floodplain Conservation District
§ 162-37. Legislative intent.
The specific intent of the regulations contained in this article is:
§ 162-37.1. Definitions. [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068,
approved 11-17-2009]
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
COMPLETELY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain totally dry during
flooding; the structure is designed and constructed to prevent the passage
of water and water vapor.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
A. To provide additional regulations covering the construction of
improvements in locations where they would likely be damaged by
floods or where they would be washed away and cause damage to
downstream properties.
B. To prevent encroachments on the floodplain which would cause damage
to other properties on the watercourse by increasing the height or the
velocity of floods.
C. To prevent pollution of watercourses during floods by preventing the
placing or storing in the floodway of unsanitary or dangerous
substances.
D. To prevent excessive development in areas unfit therefor by reasons of
flooding, unsanitary conditions and related hazards.
E. To minimize the danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
F. To protect and promote the general health, welfare and safety of
property owners in and near streams and areas subject to flooding in
the Borough of Glenolden and neighboring municipalities.
G. This article supersedes any other conflicting provision which may be in
effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of
the provisions of this article, the more restrictive shall apply. [Added
11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
§ 162-37 WATER § 162-37.1
160:517
filling, grading and evacuation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
ESSENTIALLY DRY SPACE — A space which will remain dry during
flooding, except for the passage of some water vapor or minor seepage; the
structure is substantially impermeable to the passage of water.
FLOODWAY: — The designated area of a floodplain required to carry and
discharge floodwaters of a given magnitude. For the purposes of this article,
the floodway shall be capable of accommodating a flood of the one-hundredyear
magnitude.
HISTORIC STRUCTURE — Any structure that is:
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement).
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use with
or without permanent foundation when attached to the required utilities.
The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and other
similar vehicles which are placed on site for more than 180 consecutive
days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership,
which has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
manufactured homes for nontransient use.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after November 11, 1981, and includes any subsequent
improvements thereto.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states
with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
D.
§ 162-37.1 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-37.1
160:518
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year flood elevation
level plus freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached
to the ground including, but not limited to buildings, sheds, manufactured
homes, and other similar items.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its predamaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start
of construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which
have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. The term does not include either:
§ 162-38. Establishment of floodplain. [Amended 1-12-1984 by Ord.
No. 887]
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more then 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use.
D.
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations
of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which
have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which
are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
A.
Any alteration of an historic structure, provided that the alteration
will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic
structure.
B.
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of
Glenolden subject to the one-hundred-year flood, which is identified as
Zone A (area of special flood hazard) in the Flood Insurance Study (FIS)
dated November 18, 2009, and the accompanying maps or the most
recent revision thereof as issued by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency, including all digital data developed as part of the
Flood Insurance Study. [Amended 8-12-1993 by Ord. No.
999, approved 8-12-1993; 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068,
approved 11-17-2009]
§ 162-37.1 WATER § 162-38
160:519
§ 162-39. Uses. [Amended 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. 887]
B. The Borough Engineer shall establish the elevation of the floodplain
boundaries in any portion of the floodplain on which there is an inquiry,
by one of two methods, as follows:
(1) If there is an elevation appearing on the FIRM at or very close to
the portion of the floodplain in question, the Borough Engineer
shall indicate this elevation in answer to the inquiry.
(2) If there are no elevations at or very close to the portion of the
floodplain in question, the Borough Engineer shall indicate an
elevation which he shall calculate in relation to the nearest
elevation in the floodplain, preferably by interpolating between
known elevations above- and below-stream from the area in
question, measuring along the line of the stream valley.
C. Any party aggrieved by the elevation of the floodplain as indicated on
the FIRM or as determined by the Borough Engineer from elevations
appearing on the FIRM as defined in Subsection B may appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board. The burden of proof in such an appeal shall be
on the appellant.
D. The Floodplain Conservation District may be revised or modified by the
Zoning Hearing Board when studies or information provided by a
qualified agency or person documents the need for such revision.
However, prior to any such change, approval must be obtained from the
Federal Insurance Administration (FIA).
E. The Floodplain Conservation District shall be deemed an overlay on any
zoning district now or hereafter applicable to any tract. Should the
Floodplain Conservation District be declared inapplicable to any tract
by reason of any action by Borough officials or any court, the zoning
applicable to such lot shall be deemed to be the district in which it is
located, without consideration of this article.
A. The following uses and no others are permitted in the Floodplain
Conservation District:
(1) Cultivation and harvesting of crops according to recognized soil
conservation practices, which shall in no case cause alluvial
deposits to build up the watercourses or cause undue erosion of the
floodplain.
(2) Pasture; grazing land.
(3) Outdoor plant nursery; orchard.
(4) Tree farms or reforestation.
(5) Game farm; fish hatchery (excluding structures).
(6) Wildlife sanctuary; woodland preserves; arboretum.
§ 162-38 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-39
160:520
(7) Sealed public water supply wells.
(8) Underground utility transmission lines, excluding substations or
similar structures.
(9) Front, side or rear yards for any district.
(10) Parking lots with a surface permeable to stormwater where
required by the regulations for the district applicable to the lot,
without consideration of this article.
(11) Sanitary sewers and sewage pumping stations of floodproofed
design, subject to the approval of the Borough Council.
B. The following uses shall be permitted in the Floodplain Conservation
District when authorized as special exceptions by the Zoning Hearing
Board in accordance with the standards and conditions set forth in
Subsections C, D and E of this section: [Amended 5-14-1987 by Ord.
No. 916; approved 5-14-1987]
(1) Dams, culverts and bridges approved by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources, if the same
has jurisdiction over the watershed in question.
(2) Grading or regrading of lands and the construction of retaining
walls if a permit therefor has been granted by the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania, Department of Environmental Resources,
provided that a detailed engineering study shall accompany an
application for special exception.
(3) Recreation use, including park, day camp, picnic grove, golf
course, fishing and boating club.
(4) Private roads and driveways.
(5) Storm sewers.
(6) The cutting, killing and destruction of trees over three inches in
diameter.
(7) Alteration, extension or substantial improvement of any structure
which existed within the flood plain at the time of the enactment of
this chapter.
(8) Other uses similar to the above, provided that the effect is not to
alter the cross-sectional profile of the stream basin at the point of
the proposed construction or use.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may approve an application for a special
exception for the uses listed in § 162-39B of this chapter if: [Added
5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916]
(1) The Zoning Hearing Board considers the standards set forth in
§ 162-61 of the Code of the Borough of Glenolden and determines
§ 162-39 WATER § 162-39
160:521
that the issuance of a special exception would be appropriate under
the circumstances; and if
(2) The Zoning Hearing Board determines that all other applicable
standards, requirements and conditions set forth in this Floodplain
Conservation District Ordinance have been met.
D. Approval of any special exception shall be conditioned upon compliance
with all feasible floodproofing and other requirements necessary to
minimize damage and the hindrance of flood flows and to minimize
potential danger to life and property. [Added 5-14-1987 by Ord. No.
916; approved 5-14-1987]
E. Under no circumstances will the Zoning Hearing Board authorize a
special exception for any of the uses, activities and/or developments
which are regulated by the Floodplain Management Act of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania (Act 1978, P.L. 851, No. 166, as
amended), 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq., as amended. [Added 5-14-1987
by Ord. No. 916]
F. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for building
permits shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail
and clarity to enable the Zoning Officer to determine that: [Added
11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform to the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances;
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage; and
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
G. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information (e.g., any or all of the information contained in
§ 162-41) as may be required by the Zoning Officer to make the above
determination: [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved
11-17-2009]
(1) A completed building permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 100 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines, if available;
§ 162-39 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-39
160:522
§ 162-40. Construction, development and substantial improvement.
[Amended 1-21-1984 by Ord. No. 887; 5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916]
(c) All property and lot lines, including dimensions, and the size of
the site expressed in acres or square feet;
(d) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and land development;
(e) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(f) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, corporation
or other entity to undertake or cause to be undertaken any
construction, development or substantial improvement anywhere
within the Floodplain Conservation District unless a building permit has
been obtained from the Zoning Officer and all applicable requirements
of this chapter have been met.
B. "Development" shall be defined as set forth in § 162-37.1. [Amended
11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
C. A building permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures.
D. Prohibited structures. The following structures are prohibited:
(1) Any structure which, acting alone or in combination with an
existing or future structure, could adversely affect the efficiency or
the capacity of the floodplain or adversely affect existing drainage
courses or facilities.
(2) Structures that are associated with high flood damage potential,
not connected with permitted open space uses and structures
consistent with open space uses that could obstruct flood flows.
E. Structure elevation. No structure or any portion thereof shall be
erected unless:
(1) The finished surface of the ground is higher than, or is raised by
filling outside the boundaries of the floodplain to an elevation of at
least one foot above the elevation of the Floodplain Conservation
District boundary nearest to the site.
(2) (Reserved)105
F. Structure anchoring.
§ 162-39 WATER § 162-40
160:523
(1) Any structure placed in the floodplain shall be firmly anchored to
prevent floodwaters from carrying it downstream. Such anchoring
shall be sufficient to withstand a flood velocity of 20 feet per
second. The Zoning Officer shall require the applicant to submit the
written opinion of a registered professional engineer qualified in
hydraulics that the proposed structural design meets this standard
and to provide engineering data supporting the opinion that the
structure should withstand the force of a moving body at this
particular flow. The Zoning Officer will take this written opinion
into consideration in his decision concerning the adequacy of the
method of anchoring.
(2) Where permitted, all manufactured homes and additions thereto
shall be placed on a permanent foundation and elevated so that the
lowest floor of the manufactured home is 1 1/2 feet above the
elevation of the one-hundred-year flood and anchored to resist
flotation, collapse or lateral movement. [Added 8-12-1993 by
Ord. No. 999, approved 8-12-1993]
G. Storage of materials. No materials that can float or that are explosive or
that are toxic to humans, animals or vegetation shall be stored in the
floodplain.
H. Expansion of existing structures. When permitted as a special exception
by the Zoning Hearing Board, any structure within the floodplain at the
time of enactment of this chapter may be altered or extended, provided
that:
(1) The alteration or extension conforms to all applicable regulations
of this chapter.
(2) Any increase in volume or area shall not exceed an aggregate of
more than 25% of such volume or area during the life of the
structure.
(3) No increase of any on-lot sewer system presently located either
wholly or partially in the floodplain is needed.
I. Regulations relating to alteration and relocation of watercourses and
storm drainage.
(1) No encroachment, alteration or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the Borough
of Glenolden and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the Department of Environmental Resources
and Bureau of Dams and Waterway Management. In addition the
Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Pennsylvania
Department of Community and Economic Development, Bureau of
105. Editor's Note: Former Subsection E(2), regarding minimum elevation, was repealed
8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999, approved 8-12-1993.
§ 162-40 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-40
160:524
Community Planning, shall be notified by the Borough of Glenolden
prior to any alteration or relocation of any watercourse. [Amended
11-7-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
(2) Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to convey the flow of
stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The systems shall
ensure proper drainage along streets and provide positive drainage
away from buildings. This system shall also be designed to prevent
the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
J. All new construction and substantial improvements which are
permitted within the Floodplain Conservation District shall:
(1) Be constructed with materials resistant to flood damage;
(2) Be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood
damage; and
(3) Be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and
air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or
accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
K. All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems, which are permitted in the Floodplain Conservation District
shall be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
Permitted new or replacement water supply systems and sanitary
sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate the
infiltration of floodwaters into the systems. Permitted new or
replacement sanitary sewage systems shall also be designed to
minimize or eliminate discharges from the systems into floodwaters.
Permitted on-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
L. The Zoning Officer shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base
flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or
other source as criteria for requiring the following within the
Floodplain Conservation District:
(1) Any new construction or substantial improvement of any
residential structure in the Floodplain Conservation District which
is permitted by this chapter shall have the lowest floor, including
the basement, elevated to at least 1/2 feet above the base flood
elevation.
(2) Any new construction or substantial improvement of any
nonresidential structure in the Floodplain Conservation District
which is permitted by this chapter shall either:
(a) Have the lowest floor, including the basement, elevated to at
least 1 1/2 feet above the base flood elevation; or
(b) Together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities:
§ 162-40 WATER § 162-40
160:525
[1] Be floodproofed so that below the base flood elevation the
structure is watertight with walls substantially
impermeable to the passage of water;
[2] Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of
buoyancy; and
[3] Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the design and methods of construction are
in accordance with accepted standards of practice for
meeting the provisions of this paragraph.
(3) Any encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial
improvements and other developments which are permitted by this
chapter, shall nevertheless be prohibited in any floodway unless a
technical evaluation demonstrates that the encroachments will not
result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the
base flood discharge.
M. There shall be no new construction of, and/or substantial improvements
to, any fully enclosed area below the lowest floor of a building or
structure in the floodplain conservation district as defined in § 162-38.
[Added 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999, approved 8-12-1993;
amended 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
N. Paints and adhesives: [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068,
approved 11-17-2009]
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation should be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finished
material.
(4) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(chapters 401-405) as amended, the 2003 IBC (Secs. 801.1.3,
1403.7 and Appendix G) and the 2003 IRC (Secs. R323.1.7), as
amended, shall be utilized.
O. Electrical components: [Added 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068,
approved 11-17-2009]
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
one-hundred-year flood elevation level.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
§ 162-40 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-40
160:526
§ 162-41. Issuance of building permits, variances and
nonconforming structures. [Amended 1-12-1984 by Ord. No. 887]
(3) The provisions relevant hereto and referenced in the UCC and 34
Pa. Code (chapters 401-405) as amended and contained in the 2003
IBC (Sec. 1612.4), the IRC (Sec. R323.1.5), the 2000 IFGC (Secs.
R301.5 and R1601.3.8) and ASCE 24 (Chapter 8) as amended, shall
be utilized.
A. Application procedures and requirements. Plans of all proposed
buildings, structures and other improvements shall be submitted to the
Zoning Officer. These plans shall be drawn at suitable scale and shall
show the following: [Amended 5-14-1987 by Ord. No. 916,
approved 5-14-1987]
(1) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building based
upon National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929;
(2) The elevation of the one-hundred-year flood; and
(3) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures.
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Zoning Officer shall
review the application for a permit to determine if all other necessary
permits required by federal, state and local laws have been obtained,
including but not limited to those permits required by the Pennsylvania
Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S.§ 750.1 et seq. (Act 1966-537, as
amended); the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and Encroachments Act, 32
P.S. § 693.1 et seq. (Act 1978-325, as amended); the Pennsylvania Clean
Streams Law, 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq. (Act 1937-394, as amended); the
Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq. (Act 1966-581); the Pennsylvania
Flood Plain Management regulations, 25 Pa. Admin. Code Section 106.1
et seq.; the Water Pollution Prevention and Control Act, 33 U.S.C.
§ 1251 et seq.; and any other applicable laws. Prior to the issuance of a
building permit, the Zoning Officer shall also review the application for
a permit to determine whether the proposed construction, development
or substantial improvement will be reasonably safe from flooding. No
permits shall be issued until the above determinations have been made.
C. Granting of variances. Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough of
Glenolden shall notify the applicant in writing that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variance may increase the risks to life and property.
(3) No variance shall be granted for any construction development, use
or activity within any floodway area that would cause any increase
in the one-hundred-year-flood elevation. A complete record of all
variance requests and related actions shall be maintained by the
§ 162-40 WATER § 162-41
160:527
§ 162-42. Nonliability of Borough. [Amended 11-17-2009 by Ord.
No. 2068, approved 11-17-2009]
Borough. In addition, all variances granted during the year shall be
included in the annual or biennial report to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency. [Added 8-12-1993 by Ord. No. 999,
approved 8-12-1993; 11-17-2009 by Ord. No. 2068, approved
11-17-2009]
D. Nonconforming structures. Structures existing in the Floodplain
Conservation District prior to the enactment of this chapter may
continue to remain, provided that:
(1) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or
more of its market value, shall constitute a substantial
improvement and shall be undertaken only in full compliance with
the provisions of this chapter.
(2) Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than
50% of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to
the greatest extent possible.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this article is
considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
acceptable engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur,
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as
ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. The provisions of
foregoing ordinances do not imply that areas outside any identified
floodplain areas or that land uses permitted within such areas will be
free from flooding or flood damages.
B. This article shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Glenolden or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
C. The grant of a zoning permit or approval of a plan in the Floodplain
Conservation District shall not constitute a representation, guaranty or
warranty of any kind by the Borough or by any official or employee
thereof of the practicability or safety of the proposed use and shall
create no liability upon the Borough, its officials or employees.
§ 162-41 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-42
160:528
ARTICLE VIII
Sign Regulations
§ 162-43. Signs in R-1 and R-2 Districts.
In R-1 and R-2 Residence Districts, the following signs may be erected and
maintained only when in compliance with the provisions of this article and
any and all other ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden
relating to the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar
devices:
A. Signs advertising the sale or rental of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected by the owner or a broker or other person
interested in the sale or rental of such premises; provided the size of
any such sign is not in excess of six square feet and not more than one
sign is placed upon any property in single and separate ownership,
unless such property fronts upon more than one street, in which event
one such sign may be erected on each frontage. Signs shall not be
illuminated.
B. Signs advertising the sale or development of the premises upon which
they are erected, when erected in connection with the development of
the premises by a builder, contractor, developer or other person
interested in such sale or development, provided the size of any such
sign is not in excess of 20 square feet and not more than one sign is
placed upon any property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts upon more than one street, in which event one such sign
may be erected on each frontage. Signs shall not be illuminated except
when authorized as a special exception. All such signs shall be removed
when the sale or development has been completed.
C. Signs indicating the location and direction of premises available for or
in process of development, but not erected upon such premises and
having inscribed thereon the name of the owner, developer, builder or
agent; provided the size of any such signs is not in excess of six square
feet and not in excess of four feet in length and not more than one such
sign is erected on each 500 feet of street frontage. Signs shall not be
illuminated. All such signs shall be removed when the sale or
development has been completed.
D. Signs bearing the word "sold" or the word "rented" with the name of the
person effecting the sale or rental, provided the conditions specified in
Subsection A hereof are complied with. Signs shall not be illuminated.
E. Signs of contractors, mechanics, architects and other artisans may be
erected and maintained during the period such persons are performing
work on the premises on which such signs are erected, provided the
size thereof is not in excess of 12 square feet and such signs are
removed promptly upon completion of the work. Signs shall not be
illuminated.
§ 162-43 WATER § 162-43
160:529
§ 162-44. Signs in R-3 District.
In R-3 Districts, signs may be erected and maintained only when in
compliance with the provisions of this article and any and all other
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden relating to the
erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices. The
regulations of this section shall apply to all apartment complexes and
townhouse complexes under single ownership or Unit Property Act
ownership. Individually owned townhouses shall be regulated by § 162-43.
§ 162-45. Signs in Business Districts B-1.
In Business Districts, the following signs may be erected and maintained
only when in compliance with the provisions of this article and any and all
other ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden relating to
the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices:
F. Signs of schools, colleges, churches, hospitals, sanatoriums or other
institutions of a similar nature, provided the size of any such sign is not
in excess of 20 square feet and not more than one sign is placed on a
property in single and separate ownership, unless such property fronts
upon more than one street, in which event one such sign may be
erected on each frontage. Illuminated signs may be permitted when
authorized as a special exception.
G. Signs designating the name of the owner or occupant of a property and/
or the name of the property, if it has a name, provided that the size of
any such sign is not in excess of one square foot and not more than one
such sign is erected. Such signs may be internally illuminated.
A. One sign advertising the name of the apartment or townhouse complex,
not exceeding 20 square feet in area, will be permitted at each entrance
from a public street or road.
B. Internally illuminated signs are permitted, provided that such
illumination shall be so arranged and of such character as not to be a
nuisance to residents or a hazard to street or highway traffic.
C. Signs advertising the development of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected in connection with development or construction
by a builder, contractor, developer or other person interested in such
development, may be erected and maintained, provided the size of any
such sign is not in excess of 20 square feet and not more than one sign
is placed upon any property in single and separate ownership, unless
such property fronts upon more than one street, in which case one such
sign may be erected on each frontage. Illumination of such signs is
permitted. All such signs shall be removed upon completion of
construction.
A. Signs advertising one business use or other permitted use when located
on the site where such use is conducted, provided the signs do not
§ 162-43 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-45
160:530
§ 162-46. Signs in Shopping Center Districts B-2.
In B-2 Shopping Center Districts, signs may be erected and maintained
only when in compliance with the provisions of this article and any and all
other ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden relating to
the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices.
exceed two in number and do not exceed an area of 25 square feet
for each sign. At least one such sign shall be located on the building
involved in such business use.
B. Illumination of signs is permitted, provided that such illumination shall
be so arranged and of such character as not to be a nuisance to
residential areas or a hazard to street or highway traffic.
C. Signs advertising the development of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected in connection with development or construction
by a builder, contractor, developer or other person interested in such
development, provided the size of such signs is not in excess of 50
square feet and not more than one sign is placed upon any property in
single and separate ownership, unless such property fronts on more
than one street, in which case one such sign may be erected on each
frontage. Illumination of such signs is permitted. All such signs shall be
removed upon completion of construction.
A. One sign advertising the shopping center will be permitted on each
street frontage except for a corner property, in which case only one sign
is permitted, provided each such sign does not exceed 50 square feet in
area and is in accord with plans submitted and approved by Borough
Council. Such signs may be illuminated, provided such illumination
shall be so arranged and of such character as not to be a nuisance to
residential areas or a hazard to street or highway traffic.
B. One sign advertising each business within the shopping center will be
permitted, provided each such sign does not exceed 25 square feet in
area. Such sign shall be attached to the building involved and may be
illuminated within the restrictions of Subsection A.
C. Signs advertising the development of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected in connection with development or construction
by a builder, contractor, developer or other person interested in such
development, may be erected and maintained, provided the size of such
sign is not in excess of 50 square feet and not more than one sign is
placed upon any property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign
may be erected on each frontage. Illumination of such signs is
permitted. All such signs shall be removed upon completion of
construction.
§ 162-45 WATER § 162-47
160:531
§ 162-47. Signs in Industrial District I-1.
In I-1 Industrial Districts, signs may be erected and maintained only when
in compliance with the provisions of this article and any and all other
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden relating to the
erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar devices.
§ 162-48. Signs in Limited Office - Laboratory District. [Added
11-19-2002 by Ord. No. 2003, approved 11-19-2002]
In the Limited Office - Laboratory District, signs may be erected and
maintained only when in compliance with the provisions of this article and
any and all other ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden
relating to the erection, alteration or maintenance of signs and similar
devices.
A. One sign advertising the industrial use will be permitted on each street
frontage except for a corner property, in which case only one sign is
permitted, provided each such sign does not exceed 50 square feet in
area and is in accord with plans submitted and approved by Borough
Council. Such signs may be illuminated, provided such illumination
shall be so arranged and of such character as not to be a nuisance to
residential areas or a hazard to street or highway traffic.
B. Signs advertising the development of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected in connection with development or construction
by a builder, contractor, developed or other person interested in such
development, may be erected and maintained, provided the size of such
signs is not in excess of 50 square feet and not more than one sign is
placed upon any property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign
may be erected on each frontage. Illumination of such signs is
permitted. All such signs shall be removed upon completion of
construction.
A. One sign advertising the limited office - laboratory use will be permitted
on each street frontage except for a corner property, in which case only
one sign is permitted, provided each such sign does not exceed 50
square feet in area and is in accord with plans submitted and approved
by Borough Council. Such signs may be illuminated, provided such
illumination shall be so arranged and of such character as not to be a
nuisance to residential areas or a hazard to street or highway traffic.
B. Signs advertising the development of the premises upon which they are
erected, when erected in connection with development or construction
by a builder, contractor, developer or other person interested in such
development, may be erected and maintained, provided the size of such
signs is not in excess of 50 square feet and not more than one sign is
placed upon any property in single and separate ownership, unless such
property fronts on more than one street, in which case one such sign
may be erected on each frontage. Illumination of such signs is
§ 162-47 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-48
160:532
§ 162-48.1. General regulations.
The following general provisions apply to all signs within the Borough of
Glenolden:
permitted. All such signs shall be removed upon completion of
construction.
A. A sign may be double-faced, provided it has two parallel surfaces that
are opposite and matching in size and shape and are not over 10 inches
apart. Should the two surfaces deviate from being parallel, the sign
shall be considered as two signs. Where illumination is permitted
without a restriction of internal or external, such illumination may be
either from an internal or external source or sources.
B. Flashing, animated, rotating signs, automatic color changing or similar
devices are prohibited.
C. Freestanding signs shall be limited to a maximum height, at the top of
the sign, of not more than 25 feet. There shall be a sufficient open area
between the ground and the bottom of the sign to permit clear visibility
for vehicular traffic.
D. In addition to the other requirements of this article, every sign referred
to herein must be constructed of durable materials and in a fixed
position so as not to swing, kept in good condition and repair and not
allowed to become dilapidated. Each such sign shall be removed when
the circumstances leading to its erection no longer apply. The
construction or erection of any such signs within the lines of any street
is hereby prohibited.
E. It shall be unlawful to erect or maintain billboards within the limits of
the Borough of Glenolden.
F. Portable signs, be they freestanding on the ground or temporarily
attached to a building or other support, are prohibited.
§ 162-48 WATER § 162-48.1
160:533

ARTICLE IX
General Regulations
§ 162-49. Nonconforming buildings and uses.
§ 162-50. Nonconforming lots of record.
A. Continuation. The lawful use of a building or land existing on the
effective date of this chapter may be continued although such use does
not conform to the provisions of this chapter.
B. Extension. A building housing a nonconforming use may be extended
upon the lot occupied by such building held in single and separate
ownership at the effective date of this chapter when authorized as a
special exception by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance with the
standards set forth in § 162-61, provided that the Zoning Hearing Board
in granting such special exception may impose other requirements on
the extension of a building housing a nonconforming use so that the
extended building will conform in all respects to the area, setback and
bulk regulations and design standards which apply in the district in
which the building is located; provided further that the applicant shall
have the burden of proof that his application falls within the provisions
of this chapter and that the granting of his application will not be
contrary to the public interest.
C. Restoration. A nonconforming building which has been damaged or
destroyed by fire or other casualty may be reconstructed and used for
the same nonconforming use, provided that the reconstructed building
shall not exceed in height, area and volume the building destroyed and
that building reconstruction shall be commenced within one year from
the date the building was destroyed and shall be carried on without
interruption.
D. Cessation of nonconforming use. If a nonconforming use of land or of a
building ceases for a continuous period of one year or more, subsequent
use of such building or land shall be in conformity with the provisions of
this chapter.
A. No building may be erected, altered or extended on any lot held at the
effective date of this chapter in single and separate ownership which is
not of the required minimum area or width or is of such unusual
dimensions that the owner would have difficulty in providing the
required open spaces for the district in which such lot is situated,
unless a special exception is authorized by the Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the standards set forth in § 162-61, and provided that
the applicant does not own or control other adjoining property
sufficient to enable him to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Hearing Board shall deem it properly incumbent upon the
applicant to conform as much as reasonably possible with the
provisions of this chapter. Thus, the owner of a nonconforming lot has
§ 162-49 WATER § 162-50
160:535
§ 162-51. Nonconforming signs.
§ 162-52. Registration of nonconformity.
The Zoning Officer shall compile and maintain a registration file or list of all
nonconforming uses and structures within Glenolden Borough. The Zoning
Officer shall give notice of the registration or refusal to register to the
property owner and any occupant or user thereof. Any person aggrieved by
the Zoning Officer's registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use or structure shall appeal in the manner and within the time limits
provided or be forever barred therefrom.
§ 162-53. Design standards.
Design standards for all areas shall be as follows:
no inherent right to build in gross conflict with setback, side and rear
yard requirements.
C. The design standards imposed for uses within the district in which the
nonconforming lot lies may be applied to the use of the nonconforming
lot.
A. Any sign, signboard, billboard or advertising device existing at the time
of the passage of this chapter that does not conform to the regulations
of the district in which it is located shall be considered a nonconforming
sign and may be used in its existing location, provided it is maintained
in good condition and repair at all times.
B. Nonconforming signs once removed may be replaced only with
conforming signs; however, legal nonconforming signs may be
repainted or, after issue of a permit, repaired or modernized, provided
that such repaired or modernized sign does not exceed the dimensions
of the existing sign.
A. Screening. A complete visual barrier consisting of evergreen plantings
at a minimum height of six feet or a suitable landscape screen approved
by the Zoning Officer shall be provided and continually maintained
between any industrial or commercial district and contiguous
residentially zoned districts and in a residential district between an
apartment or townhouse use and a contiguous R-1 or R-2 residential
use. All uses permitted by special exception shall require screening
when so directed by the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Storage. All storage shall be completely screened from view from any
public right-of-way and any R-1 or R-2 Residential District which abuts
the district. Screening shall consist of evergreen planting or an
architectural screen. All trash, garbage or rubbish shall be contained in
airtight, verminproof containers, which containers shall be in an
enclosed area and screened from view.
C. Landscaping.
§ 162-50 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-53
160:536
(1) Any part or portion of the site which is not used for buildings, other
structures, loading or parking spaces and aisles, sidewalks and
designated storage areas shall be planted and continually
maintained with an all-season ground cover and shall be
landscaped in accordance with an overall landscape plan.
(2) No less than 10% of a parking area shall be landscaped and
continually maintained. Planting along the perimeter of a parking
area, whether for required screening or general beautification,
shall be considered as part of the 10% parking area landscaping.
(3) In parking areas large enough to have rows of parking stalls placed
back to back, each row of stalls shall be separated by a five-foot
planting strip of permeable surface to allow water to percolate into
the ground.
D. Access and traffic control. All accessways to any public street or
highway shall be located at least 80 feet from the intersection of any
street line and shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress
and egress. The developer shall be responsible for the construction of
any necessary traffic control devices or additional acceleration lanes
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department of
Transportation.
E. Interior circulation.
(1) Interior drives shall be designed so as to prevent blockage of
vehicles entering or leaving the site. Drives may be one-way or twoway.
(2) Areas provided for loading and unloading of delivery trucks and
other vehicles and for the servicing of shops by refuse collection,
fuel and other service vehicles shall be adequate in size and shall
be so arranged that they may be used without blockage or
interference with the use of accessways or automobile parking
facilities.
F. Lighting. The parking, loading, ingress and egress areas of any zoning
district shall be provided with a minimum of 0.75 lumen at any point,
with lighting standards in parking areas being located not farther than
100 feet apart. All light sources shall be completely shielded from
traffic on any public right-of-way and from any residential district.
G. Off-street loading regulations.
(1) Off-street loading and unloading space or spaces with proper and
safe access from a street shall be provided on each lot either within
a structure or in the open.
(2) Loading and unloading spaces shall be at least 12 feet wide, 45 feet
long and shall have at least a fourteen-foot vertical clearance.
§ 162-53 WATER § 162-53
160:537
§ 162-54. Off-street parking for other than residential use.
(3) Loading and unloading spaces shall have all-weather surfaces to
provide safe and convenient access during all seasons.
(4) Loading facilities shall not be constructed between the building
setback line and a street right-of-way line.
(5) Required off-street parking space shall not be used for loading and
unloading purposes except during hours when business operations
are suspended.
A. Standards. Off-street parking spaces, with proper and safe access from
a street, shall be provided on each lot, either within a structure or in the
open. Parking space for one vehicle shall be nine feet by 18 feet in size.
Parking spaces shall have an approved paved surface and shall have a
safe and convenient access in all seasons. Parking lots shall be lined to
show access lanes and parking spaces.
B. Requirements. There shall be sufficient parking spaces provided for
each use so that there is a minimum of one space for each employee
plus additional parking spaces to be provided by the application of the
appropriate formula listed below for each use. All other uses not
specified below shall provide at least one off-street parking space for
each employee.
Use
At Least 1 Parking Space
for Each
Industry Employee; in computing the
number of employees, only those
employees working day shifts shall
be counted
Eating and drinking places 2 seats
Theater and churches 5 seats
Bowling alley 1/4 alley
Wholesale sales or storage 1,000 square feet of floor area
Gasoline service station 1/2 pump
Elementary school 20 seats
All other schools 10 seats
Food stores and pharmacies 200 square feet of sales area
Department and variety stores 200 square feet of sales area
Gift, apparel, hardware and other
housewares; service shops
200 square feet of sales area
Offices; clinics; financial
institutions
300 square feet of floor area
All other uses 200 square feet of floor area
§ 162-53 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-54
160:538
ARTICLE X
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 162-55. Membership and organization.
The terms of the existing three members of the Board shall continue. The
appointment, removal of members, organization of the Zoning Hearing
Board and hearings conducted by the Zoning Hearing Board shall be as
provided by the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (Act 247 of
1968, as amended106).
§ 162-56. Notice of hearings.
In any case where the Zoning Hearing Board shall hold a public hearing,
the Board shall give notice as follows, which notice shall state the time and
place of the hearing and the particular nature of the matter to be considered
at the hearing:
A. By publishing a notice thereof once each week for two consecutive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough of
Glenolden. The first notice shall be published not more than 30 days nor
less than 14 days prior to the hearing.
B. Mailing of notice.
(1) By mailing notice thereof to the following:
(a) The applicant or his attorney.
(b) All property owners within 500 feet of the subject property.
(c) All persons or organizations who have filed their names with
the Borough Zoning Officer within the last year indicating their
desire to receive such notices.
(d) The Borough Secretary.
(e) The Borough Engineer.
(f) The Borough Solicitor.
(g) The Borough Zoning Hearing Board Solicitor.
(h) Each member of the Zoning Hearing Board.
(i) Secretary of the Borough Planning Commission.
(j) The County Planning Commission.
(k) The Borough Zoning Officer.
(2) The failure to send notice to any of the above-named or -designated
persons shall not invalidate any action taken by the Board.
106. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., particularly Art. IX, §§ 10901 through 10916.
§ 162-55 WATER § 162-57
160:539
§ 162-57. Powers, duties and functions.
The powers, duties and functions of the Zoning Hearing Board shall be as
provided in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.107
§ 162-58. Hearings and decisions.
The Board shall conduct hearings, make decisions and give notice of said
decisions as required by Section 908 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, as amended,108 and in accordance with such rules of
procedure as may be adopted by the Zoning Hearing Board.
§ 162-59. Expiration of special exception or variance.
Unless otherwise specified by the Zoning Hearing Board, a special
exception or variance shall expire if the applicant fails to obtain a building
permit within six months from the date of authorization thereof.
§ 162-60. Application deposits; use.
A. Upon submission of any application to the Zoning Hearing Board, the
applicant shall deposit with the Borough such sum as is designated by
resolution by Borough Council.
B. Charges against deposit. The following costs, fees and expenses shall
be charged against the applicant's deposit:
(1) Cost of preparation and mailing of notices of hearings and
decisions.
(2) Cost of publication of notice of public hearings and other legal
publication charges.
(3) Cost of appearance fees of court reporters.
(4) Cost of the original of the transcript of notes of testimony.
C. Additional deposits. If at any time the charges then made against the
applicant's deposit shall render the balance insufficient to ensure the
payment of all costs, expenses, charges and fees that may accrue in the
disposition of the pending application, the Zoning Hearing Board may
require additional deposits to be made from time to time to assure
adequate funds to pay such charges, costs, expenses and fees as they
may accrue. The failure of the Zoning Hearing Board to demand
additional deposits from time to time shall not relieve the applicant of
liability for costs, charges, fees and expenses in excess of deposits,
hereinafter called "deficiencies."
107. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., particularly Art. IX, §§ 10901 through 10916.
108. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 162-57 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-60
160:540
§ 162-61. Standards for action.
In all cases where the Zoning Hearing Board shall consider an application
for a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board shall, to the full extent
permitted by law:
D. Upon failure of the applicant to pay the deposits, additional deposits or
deficiencies within 30 days or prior to the next scheduled hearing
(whichever shall be the earlier date), the Board may:
(1) Continue the matter generally until such deposits, additional
deposits or deficiencies are paid, in which case the record shall
remain open and the time within which a decision must be
rendered shall not commence to run;
(2) Dismiss applicant's appeal; or
(3) Determine the appeal upon the record as it then stands.
A. Consider the size, scope, extent and character of the exception desired
and assure itself that such request is consistent with the plan for future
land use in Glenolden Borough and with the spirit, purpose and intent
of this chapter.
B. Consider the suitability of the property for the use desired and the
extent to which the new or expanded use is susceptible of regulation or
restriction by appropriate conditions and safeguards.
C. Consider the public interest in or the need for the proposed use or
change, and determine that the proposal will serve the best interests of
the Borough, the convenience of the community (where applicable) and
the public health, safety, morals and general welfare.
D. Consider, where pertinent, the effects of the proposed change with
respect to congestion on the roads or highways, the most appropriate
use of land, conserving the value of buildings, safety from fire, panic
and other dangers, adequacy of light and air, the prevention of
overcrowding the land, congestion of population and the adequacy of
public and community services.
E. Make certain that the proposed change is reasonable in terms of the
logical, efficient and economical extension of public services and
facilities, such as public water, sewers, police and fire protection,
transportation and public schools.
F. Take into consideration the character and type of development in the
area surrounding the location for which the request is made and
determine that the proposed change or modification, as permitted, will
constitute an appropriate use in the area and will not substantially
injure or detract from the use of surrounding property or from the
character of the neighborhood.
§ 162-60 WATER § 162-61
160:541
G. Guide the development of highway frontage insofar as possible so as to
limit the total number of access points, reduce the need for on-street
parking and encourage the frontage of buildings on parallel marginal
roads or on roads perpendicular to the highway.
H. Consider the probable effects of proposed development on highway
congestion and ensure that adequate access arrangements are
provided in order to protect major highways from undue congestion and
hazard.
§ 162-61 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-61
160:542
ARTICLE XI
Administration; Applications and Permits; Penalties
§ 162-62. Duties of Zoning Officer.
§ 162-63. Enforcement.
This chapter shall be enforced by the Zoning Officer of the Borough. No
permit of any kind as provided in this chapter shall be granted by him for
any purpose except in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 162-64. Violations and penalties.
A. Zoning Officer. The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by an
agent to be appointed by Borough Council, who shall be known as the
"Zoning Officer." The Zoning Officer shall be appointed at the first
meeting of Borough Council following the adoption of this chapter, to
serve until the first day of January next following, and shall thereafter
be appointed annually to serve for a term of one year and/or until his
successor is appointed. The Zoning Officer may succeed himself. He
shall receive such fee or compensation as the Borough Council may, by
resolution, provide.
B. Duties. The duties of the Zoning Officer shall be:
(1) To examine all applications for permits.
(2) To issue permits only for construction and uses which are in
accordance with the regulations of this chapter and as may be
subsequently amended.
(3) To record and file all applications for permits and accompanying
plans and documents and keep them for public record.
(4) To inspect nonconforming uses and structures and to keep a filed
record.
(5) Upon the request of the Borough Council or the Zoning Hearing
Board, to present to such body facts, records and any similar
information on specific requests to assist such body in reaching its
decisions.
A. Failure to secure a permit previous to the erection, construction or
alteration of a building or failure to secure a certificate of occupancy
shall be a violation of this chapter.
B. Notification of violation. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he shall notify in writing
the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the
violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. He shall order
discontinuance of illegal use of land, building or structure; removal of
illegal buildings or structures or of additions, alterations or structural
§ 162-62 WATER § 162-64
160:543
§ 162-65. Remedies.
In case any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed,
altered, repaired, converted or maintained or any building, structure or
land is used in violation of this chapter, in addition to other remedies
provided by law, any appropriate action or proceedings, whether by legal
process or otherwise, may be instituted or taken to prevent such unlawful
erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or abate such violation, or to
prevent the occupancy of said building, structure or land, or to prevent any
illegal act, conduct, business or use in or about such premises.
§ 162-66. Appeals.
changes thereto; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall
take any other action authorized by this chapter to ensure compliance
with or prevent violation of its provisions.
C. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint stating fully the causes and basis thereof
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer. He shall record properly such
complaint, immediately investigate and take action thereon as provided
by this chapter.
D. Enforcement penalties. Any person, partnership or corporation who or
which shall violate the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction
thereof in a summary proceeding, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $500. In default of payment of the fine, such person, the
members of such partnership or the officers of such corporation shall
be liable to imprisonment for not more than 60 days. Each day that a
violation is continued shall constitute a separate offense. All fines
collected for the violation of zoning ordinances shall be paid over to the
Borough of Glenolden.
A. Appeals to the Zoning Hearing Board may be taken in accordance with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code as amended.109 The
Zoning Officer shall forthwith transmit to the Board all the papers
constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken.
B. Method of appeal. An appeal or application for a special exception or
variance from the terms of this chapter shall be filed with the Secretary
of the Zoning Hearing Board and shall state:
(1) The name and address of the applicant.
(2) The name and address of the owner of the real estate to be affected
by the proposed special exception or variance.
109. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10909.
§ 162-64 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-66
160:544
§ 162-67. Permits.
(3) A brief description and location of the real estate to be affected by
such proposed change and a copy of the deed.
(4) A statement of the present zoning classification of the real estate in
question, the improvements thereon and the present use thereof.
(5) A statement of the section of this chapter under which the variance
or special exception requested may be allowed, and reasons why it
should be granted.
(6) Other information as required for a permit application in the
district involved.
(7) Any other information required by the rules of the Zoning Hearing
Board.
A. General.
(1) A permit shall be required prior to erection, construction or
alteration of any building, structure or any portion thereof.
(2) Application for permits shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall contain all information necessary for such Officer
to ascertain whether the proposed erection, construction,
alteration or use complies with the provisions of this chapter.
(3) Such permits shall be granted or refused within 30 days from date
of application and shall be valid for a period of time not to exceed
one year to start construction, with a total time of three years to
complete construction.
(4) No permit shall be issued except in conformity with the regulations
of this chapter.
B. Application for permits for uses in R-3, B-1, B-2 and I-1 Districts.
(1) Application for all uses in these districts shall be accompanied by:
(a) A plot plan of the lot showing the location of all present and
proposed buildings, drives, parking lots showing driveways,
circulation patterns, curbcut accesses, parking stalls and
bumpers, access from streets, screening fences and walls,
storage area and other constructional features on the lot and
the location of all topographical features. Plot plans shall be
prepared by a registered surveyor, registered engineer or
registered architect.
(b) Architectural plans for any proposed building.
(c) A description of the operations proposed in sufficient detail to
indicate the effects of those operations in producing traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water pollution,
§ 162-66 WATER § 162-67
160:545
vibration, fire hazards, safety hazards or the emission of any
potentially harmful or obnoxious matter or radiation.
(d) Engineering and architectural plans for the handling of any
excess traffic congestion, noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, vibration, fire hazards or safety hazards, smoke or
emission of any potentially harmful or obnoxious matter or
radiation.
(e) Designation of the manner by which sanitary sewage shall be
disposed and water supply obtained.
(f) The proposed number of shifts to be worked and the maximum
number of employees on each shift.
(g) Where use by more than one firm is anticipated, a list of firms
which are likely to be located in the center, their floor area and
estimated number of employees.
(2) In all instances under this subsection, a temporary ninety-day
certificate of occupancy shall be required under this chapter. Such
a temporary certificate may be renewed until the Zoning Officer is
able to evaluate whether the operation of the facilities meets the
performance standards required. No permanent certificate of
occupancy shall be issued until the operation of the facilities meets
these standards.
C. Application for all other permits. Applications shall be accompanied by
plans in duplicate, drawn to scale and showing the following:
(1) Actual dimensions and shape of lot to be built upon.
(2) Exact size and locations on the lot of all buildings and other
structures, if any, and the location and dimensions of proposed
buildings and other structures or alterations.
(3) Existing and proposed uses, showing number of families the
building is designed to accommodate.
(4) Any other lawful information that may be required by the Zoning
Officer or other sections of this chapter.
D. Sign permit.
(1) A sign permit shall be required prior to the erection of any sign.
(2) Application for permit shall be made in writing to the Zoning
Officer and shall contain all information necessary for such Officer
to determine whether the proposed sign or the proposed
alterations conform to all the requirements of this chapter.
(3) Permits shall be granted or refused within 30 days from date of
application.
§ 162-67 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-67
160:546
§ 162-68. Certificates of occupancy.
§ 162-69. Schedule of fees.
The applicant for a permit and certificate of occupancy shall, at the time of
mailing the application, pay to the Borough a fee in accordance with a fee
schedule adopted by resolution of Borough Council upon the enactment of
this chapter or as such schedule may be amended by resolution of Borough
Council.
§ 162-70. Amendments.
The Borough Council may, from time to time, amend, supplement, change,
modify or repeal this chapter, including the Zoning Map, by proceeding as
specified in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.110
(4) No sign permit shall be issued except in conformity with the
regulations of this chapter.
(5) All applications for sign permits shall be accompanied by plans or
diagrams in duplicate and approximately to scale showing the
following:
(a) Exact dimensions of lot or building upon which the sign is
proposed to be erected.
(b) Any other lawful information which may be required of
applicant by the Zoning Officer.
One copy of said plan or diagram shall be returned to
applicant after the Zoning Officer shall have marked such
copy either approved or disapproved and attested to same.
A. A certificate of occupancy shall be required prior to the occupation for
use or change of use of land, building or structure.
B. Application for a certificate of occupancy shall be made in writing to the
Zoning Officer.
(1) When all of premises involves a new building or structure or
alterations to an existing building or structure, such application
shall be made at the time application for a permit is made.
(2) When no construction or alteration is involved, an application to
occupy and use land may be made at any time. Application shall
contain all information necessary for the Zoning Officer to
determine whether the proposed occupation and use of land
conforms to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Certificates of occupancy shall be granted or refused within 15 days
after the Zoning Officer has been notified of completion of construction
or within 15 days of application to occupy and use land.
§ 162-67 WATER § 162-70
160:547
110. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609 and 10609.1.
§ 162-70 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-70
160:548
ARTICLE XII
Satellite Antennas
[Added 7-9-1987 by Ord. No. 919, approved 7-9-1987]
§ 162-71. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Satellite Antenna Ordinance of the
Borough of Glenolden."
§ 162-72. Purpose.
The purpose of this article shall be to establish regulations governing the
installation, maintenance, use, size and location of satellite antennas within
the Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania.
§ 162-73. Administrative standards.
Whenever, in the course of the administration and enforcement of this
article, it is necessary or desirable to make any administrative decision, the
decision shall be made so that the result will not be contrary to the spirit
and purpose of this article or injurious to the surrounding neighborhood.
§ 162-74. General regulations.
A. Permits.
(1) Prior to the installation, maintenance or use of any satellite
antenna, a permit application shall be made with the Zoning
Officer.
(2) All such permit applications must comply with the applicable
provisions of § 162-67 of the Glenolden Code, which addresses
permits and permit applications. If the permit application is for a
ground-mounted satellite antenna, the permit application must also
be accompanied by a landscaping and/or fencing plan. If the permit
application is for a roof-mounted satellite antenna, the permit
application must also:
(a) Be accompanied by specific mounting and stress analysis
designs;
(b) Be sealed by a registered engineer; and
(c) Be accompanied by evidence that a usable satellite signal
cannot be obtained by a ground-mounted satellite antenna.
(3) No satellite antenna shall be installed, maintained or used unless a
permit for such installation, maintenance or use has first been
issued by the Zoning Officer in accordance with the provisions of
this section and of § 162-67 of the Glenolden Code.
B. Location.
§ 162-71 WATER § 162-74
160:549
§ 162-75. Severability.
This article and the various parts, sections, subsections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses and phrases thereof are hereby declared to be severable.
If any part, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
is adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction; such adjudication shall not affect the validity of the remainder
of this article.
(1) Except as hereinafter provided, ground-mounted satellite antennas
shall only be permitted in a side yard or in a rear yard.
(2) In the event that a usable satellite signal cannot be obtained by a
ground-mounted satellite antenna, a satellite antenna may be
placed on the roof of the building located on the lot.
C. Type of use; setbacks; size; grounding.
(1) The satellite antenna is to be considered an accessory structure
and is thereby subject to all zoning requirements applicable to such
structures.
(2) The height of a ground-mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed
18 feet.
(3) The combined height of a roof-mounted satellite antenna and the
existing building on which it is mounted shall not exceed the
maximum allowable building height for the applicable building.
(4) The diameter of any satellite antenna shall not exceed 10 feet.
(5) Every satellite antenna must be adequately grounded for
protection against a strike of lightning.
D. Screening. All ground-mounted satellite antennas shall be screened by
landscaping or fencing which is sufficient to provide a visual barrier to
the greatest extent possible without preventing the satellite antenna
from obtaining a usable satellite signal. All such landscaping or fencing
shall be approved by the Zoning Officer, whose approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
E. Number of antennas per lot. No more than one satellite antenna shall
be installed or maintained on any one lot, and the use of a satellite
antenna shall be limited to that lot on which it is located.
§ 162-74 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-75
160:550
ARTICLE XIII
Telecommunications Towers and Antennas
[Added 11-13-1997 by Ord. No. 1045, approved 11-13-1997]
§ 162-76. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to establish general guidelines for the siting
of wireless communications towers and antennas. The goals of this article
are to encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas, where
possible; minimize the total number of towers throughout the community;
strongly encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites as a
primary option rather than construction of additional single-use towers;
encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent
possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal;
encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that
minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas through
careful design, siting, landscape screening and innovative camouflaging
techniques; enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications
services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively and
efficiently; consider the public health and safety of communications towers;
avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from structural failure of
the tower through engineering and careful siting of tower structures; and
permit and manage reasonable access to the public ways for
telecommunications purposes on a competitively neutral basis. In
furtherance of these goals, the Borough of Glenolden shall give due
consideration to the Borough of Glenolden's Zoning Map, existing land uses
and environmentally sensitive areas in approving sites for the locations of
towers and antennas.
§ 162-77. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth
below:
ALTERNATIVE TOWER STRUCTURE — Man-made trees, clock towers, bell
steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers.
ANTENNA — Any transmitting or receiving device mounted on a tower,
building or structure and used in communications that radiate or capture
electromagnetic waves, digital signals, analog signals, radio frequencies
(excluding radar signals), wireless telecommunications signals or other
communication signals.
BACKHAUL NETWORK — The lines that connect a provider's towers/cell
sites to one or more cellular telephone switching offices and/or longdistance
providers, or the public switches telephone network.
COUNCIL — The Council for the Borough of Glenolden.
FAA — The Federal Aviation Administration.
FCC — The Federal Communications Commission.
§ 162-76 WATER § 162-77
160:551
HEIGHT — When referring to a tower or other structure, the distance
measured from the finished grade of the parcel to the highest point on the
tower or other structure, including the base pad and any antenna.
PREEXISTING TOWERS AND PREEXISTING ANTENNAS — Any tower or
antenna for which a building permit or special use permit has been properly
issued prior to the effective date of this article, including permitted towers
or antennas that have not yet been constructed so long as such approval is
current and not expired.
TOWER — Any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for
the purpose of supporting one or more antennas for telephone, radio and
similar communication purposes, including self-supporting lattice towers,
guyed towers or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television
transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular
telephone towers, alternative tower structures and the like. The term
includes the structure and any support thereto.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS OVERLAY DISTRICT (TO) — All that property
owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the Borough of Glenolden,
including its rights-of-way, and including the rights-of-way of state highways
located in the Borough with the permission or acquiescence of the state.
§ 162-78. Applicability.
§ 162-79. General requirements.
A. New towers and antennas. All new towers and antennas in the Borough
of Glenolden shall be subject to these regulations, except as provided in
Subsections B through D, inclusive.
B. Amateur radio station operators/receive-only antennas. This article
shall not govern any tower or the installation of any antenna that
complies with the pertinent height requirement of the Zoning Code and
is owned and operated by a federally licensed amateur radio station
operator or is used exclusively for receiving-only antennas.
C. Preexisting towers or antennas. Preexisting towers and preexisting
antennas shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article,
other than the requirements of § 162-79D and E.
D. AM array. For purposes of implementing this article, an AM array,
consisting of one or more tower units and supporting ground system
which functions as one AM broadcasting antenna, shall be considered
one tower. Measurements for setbacks and separation distances shall
be measured from the outer perimeter of the towers included in the AM
array. Additional tower units may be added within the perimeter of the
AM array by right.
A. Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and/or tower
shall provide to Council an inventory of its existing towers, antennas or
sites approved for towers or antennas that are either within the
§ 162-77 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-79
160:552
jurisdiction of the Borough of Glenolden or within one mile of the
border thereof, including specific information about the location, height
and design of each tower. The Council may share such information
with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or special
use permits under this article or other organizations seeking to locate
antennas within the jurisdiction of the Borough of Glenolden; provided,
however, that the Council is not, by sharing such information, in any
way representing or warranting that such sites are available or
suitable.
B. Aesthetics. Towers and antennas shall meet the following requirements:
(1) Towers shall be either blue reinforced concrete or, subject to any
applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to
reduce visual obtrusiveness.
(2) At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures
shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures,
screening and landscaping that will blend them into the natural
setting and surrounding buildings.
(3) If an antenna is installed on a structure or a tower, the antenna and
supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a
neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the
color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and
related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible.
C. Lighting. Towers shall not be officially lighted, unless required by the
FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the lighting
alternative and design chosen must cause the least disturbance to the
surrounding views.
D. State or federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current
standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC and any other agency of
the state or federal government with the authority to regulate towers
and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the
owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring
such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards
and regulations within six months of the effective date of such
standards and regulations unless a different compliance schedule is
mandated by the controlling state or federal agency. Failure to bring
towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and
regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or
antenna at the owner's expense.
E. Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of
towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is designed,
constructed and maintained in compliance with standards contained in
applicable state or local building codes and the applicable standards for
towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as
amended from time to time. All towers shall be designed by a licensed
professional engineer registered in the State of Pennsylvania, and all
§ 162-79 WATER § 162-79
160:553
§ 162-80. Administrative review.
drawings submitted for approvals shall be signed and sealed by the
same engineer responsible for the design. All construction shall be
supervised by qualified personnel, and a certification shall be prepared
and presented to the Borough by a licensed professional engineer
registered in the State of Pennsylvania that the design and construction
conform to the highest standards of engineering and construction. If,
at any time, the Borough of Glenolden concludes that a tower fails
to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to
persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner
of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into
compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such tower into
compliance within said 30 days shall constitute grounds for the removal
of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense.
F. Not essential services. Towers and antennas shall be regulated and
permitted pursuant to this article and shall not be regulated or
permitted as public utilities or private utilities.
G. Franchises. Owners and/or operators of towers or antennas shall certify
that all licenses or franchises required by law for the construction and/
or operation of a wireless communication system in the Borough of
Glenolden have been obtained and shall file a copy of all required
licenses or franchises with the Council.
H. Public notice. For purposes of this article, any special exception request
or appeal of an administrative decision shall require public notice
pursuant to the dictates of the Zoning Code.
I. Signs. No signs shall be allowed on an antenna or tower, except as
required by law.
J. Support equipment. The support equipment associated with antennas
or towers shall comply with the requirements of § 162-83.
K. Multiple antenna/tower plan. The Borough of Glenolden encourages the
users of towers and antennas to submit a single application for approval
of multiple towers and/or antenna sites. Applications for approval of
multiple sites shall be given priority in the review process.
L. Collocation. In order to reduce the number of towers in Glenolden
Borough in the future, the proposed tower, if required by the Council
and/or Zoning Hearing Board, shall be designed to accommodate future
communications users, including commercial wireless communications
companies, local police, fire and ambulance companies.
M. Service to the Borough. A provider of telecommunications service
within the Borough of Glenolden shall make its telecommunications
services available to the Borough at its most favorable rate for similarly
situated users, unless otherwise provided for in a lease, license or
franchise agreement.
§ 162-79 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-80
160:554
§ 162-81. Permitted uses.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the administrative
review of towers and antennas:
(1) The Borough Council shall administratively review each request for
the siting and/or erection of any tower or antenna.
(2) Each applicant for administrative review shall in the first instance
apply to the Council, providing the information set forth in
§ 162-82B(1) and (3) of this article and a nonrefundable charge as
established by resolution of the Council to reimburse the Borough
for the costs associated with reviewing the application. This is in
addition to any other applications or fees that may be required.
(3) The Council shall review the application to determine if the
proposed use complies with §§ 162-79 and 162-82C of this article.
The Council shall also consider the factors set forth at § 162-82B(2)
and (7), inclusive.
(4) In connection with any such administrative review pursuant to
§ 162-82, the Council may recommend to the Zoning Hearing Board
reduction of the setback requirements in § 162-82B(4) and the
separation distances between towers in § 162-82B(5).
(5) In connection with any such administrative approval, the Council
may, in order to encourage the use of monopoles, administratively
allow the reconstruction of an existing tower to monopole
construction.
A. Telecommunications Overlay District. A Telecommunications Overlay
District is hereby created. This Telecommunications Overlay District
applies to all zoning districts in Glenolden. The Telecommunications
Overlay District (TO) shall consist of property owned, leased or
otherwise controlled by the Borough of Glenolden, including its rightsof-
way and including the rights-of-way of state highways within the
Borough, with the permission or acquiescence of the state.
B. Locating antennas or towers within a Telecommunications Overlay
District is a use specifically permitted, provided that:
(1) A license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been
approved by the Borough of Glenolden and the Borough of
Glenolden has administratively approved the application.
(2) The requested use must comply in every way with the Glenolden
Zoning Code.
C. All towers and antennas erected, installed or located as a permitted use
shall be located so as to minimize the adverse visual impact of the tower
and/or antenna.
§ 162-80 WATER § 162-82
160:555
§ 162-82. Special exceptions.
A. General. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of a special
exception for towers or antennas:
(1) If the tower or antenna is not permitted pursuant to § 162-81 of this
article, a special exception shall be required for the construction of
a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts other
than residence districts. Towers and antennas are allowed in
residential districts pursuant to § 162-81 only.
(2) Administrative approval pursuant to § 162-82 of this article shall be
requested at the time an applicant files a request for a special
exception.
(3) Applications for special exceptions under this section shall be
subject to the procedures and requirements of the Glenolden
Zoning Ordinance, including the usual costs and fees.
(4) In granting a special exception, the Zoning Hearing Board (ZHB)
may impose conditions to the extent the Zoning Hearing Board
concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse
effect of the proposed tower or antenna on adjoining properties.
(5) Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant
submits, whether civil, mechanical or electrical, shall be certified
by a licensed professional engineer registered in the State of
Pennsylvania.
(6) An applicant for a special exception shall submit, in duplicate, the
information described in this section with one copy for the Council
and the other copy for the Zoning Hearing Board.
B. Towers.
(1) Information required. In addition to any information required for
applications for a special exception, applicants for a special
exception for a tower shall submit the following information:
(a) A scaled site plan clearly indicating the location, type and
height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning,
adjacent land uses and zoning (including when adjacent to
other municipalities), Master Plan classification of the site and
all properties within the applicable separation distances set
forth in Subsection B(5), adjacent roadways, proposed means
of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of
the proposed tower and any other structures, topography,
parking and other information deemed by the Council to be
necessary to assess compliance with this article.
(b) A legal description of the parent tract and leased parcel (if
applicable).
§ 162-82 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-82
160:556
(c) The setback distance between the proposed tower and the
nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties
and unplatted residentially zoned properties.
(d) The separation distance from other towers described in the
inventory of existing sites submitted pursuant to § 162-79A
shall be shown on an updated site plan or map. The applicant
shall also identify the type of construction of the existing
tower(s) and the owner/operator of the existing tower(s), if
known.
(e) A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials.
(f) Method of fencing and finished color and, if applicable, the
method of camouflage and illumination.
(g) A description of compliance with §§ 162-79A through E, G, I
and J and 162-82B(4) and (5) and all applicable federal, state or
local laws.
(h) A notarized statement by the applicant as to whether
construction of the tower will accommodate collocation of
additional antennas for future users.
(i) Identification of the entities providing the backhaul network
for the tower(s) described in the application and other cellular
sites owned or operated by the applicant in the municipality.
(j) A description of the feasible location(s) of future towers or
antennas within the Borough of Glenolden based upon existing
physical, engineering, technological or geographical
limitations in the event that the proposed tower is erected.
(2) Factors considered in granting a special exception for towers. In
addition to any standards for consideration of special exception
applications pursuant to the Zoning Ordinance, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider the following factors in determining whether
to issue a special exception, although the Zoning Hearing Board
may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of
these criteria if the Zoning Hearing Board concludes that the goals
of this article are better served thereby:
(a) Height of the proposed tower.
(b) Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential
district boundaries.
(c) Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties.
(d) Surrounding topography.
(e) Surrounding tree coverage and foliage.
§ 162-82 WATER § 162-82
160:557
(f) Design of the tower, with particular reference to design
characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating
visual obtrusiveness.
(g) Proposed ingress and egress, with particular reference to
access via streets in nonresidential districts.
(h) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technologies not requiring the use of towers or
structures, as discussed in Subsection B(3) of this article.
(i) Administrative review and recommendation by the Council
pursuant to § 162-80.
(3) Availability of suitable existing towers, other structures or
alternative technology. No new tower shall be permitted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the Zoning
Hearing Board that no existing tower, building, structure or
alternative technology that does not require the use of towers or
structures can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. An
applicant shall submit information requested by the Council related
to the availability of suitable existing towers, buildings, other
structures or alternative technology. Evidence to demonstrate that
no existing tower, structure or alternative technology can
accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any
of the following:
(a) No existing towers, buildings or structures are located within
the geographic area which meet applicant's engineering
requirements.
(b) Existing towers, buildings or structure are not of sufficient
height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements.
(c) Existing towers, buildings or structures do not have sufficient
strength to support the applicant's proposed antenna and
related equipment.
(d) The applicant's proposed antenna would cause
electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing
towers, buildings or structures or the antenna on the existing
towers, buildings or structures would cause interference with
the applicant's proposed antenna.
(e) The fees, costs or contractual provisions required by the owner
in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an
existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs
exceeding new tower development are presumed to be
unreasonable.
(f) The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting
factors that render existing towers and structures suitable.
§ 162-82 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-82
160:558
(g) The applicant demonstrates that an alternate technology that
does not require the use of towers or structures, such as a
cable microcell network using multiple low-powered
transmitters/receivers attached to a wireline system, is
unsuitable. Costs of alternative technology that exceed new
tower or antenna development shall not be presumed to render
the technology unsuitable.
(4) Setbacks. The following setback requirements shall apply to all
towers and antennas for which a special exception is required;
provided, however, that the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the
standard setback requirements if the goals of this article would be
better served thereby:
(a) Towers must be set back a distance equal to at least twice the
applicable setback requirements, but in no case less than 50
feet from any adjoining lot line.
(b) Guys and accessory buildings must satisfy the minimum zoning
setback requirements.
(5) Separation. The following separation requirements shall apply to
all towers and antennas for which a special exception is required;
provided, however, that the Zoning Hearing Board may reduce the
standard separation requirements if the goals of this article would
be better served thereby:
(a) Separation from off-site uses/designated areas.
[1] Tower separation shall be measured from the base of the
tower to the lot line of the off-site uses and/or designated
areas as specified in Table 1, except as otherwise provided
in Table 1.
[2] Separation requirements for towers shall comply with the
minimum standards established in Table 1.
Table 1
Separation From Off-Site Uses/Designated Areas
Off-Site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Single-family or duplex
residential units1
500 feet or 300% height
of tower2, whichever is
greater
Vacant single-family or
duplex residentially zoned
land which is either platted or
has preliminary subdivision
plan approval which is not
expired
500 feet or 300% height
of tower2, whichever is
greater
§ 162-82 WATER § 162-82
160:559
Table 1
Separation From Off-Site Uses/Designated Areas
Off-Site Use/Designated
Area Separation Distance
Existing multifamily
residential units greater than
duplex units
250 feet or 150% height
of tower, whichever is
greater
Nonresidentially zoned lands
or nonresidential uses
None; only setbacks apply
NOTES:
1Includes modular homes and mobile homes used for
living purposes.
2Separation measured from base of tower to closest
building setback line.
(b) Separation distances between towers. Separation distances
between towers shall be applicable for and measured between
the proposed tower and preexisting towers. The separation
distances shall be measured by drawing or following a straight
line between the base of the existing tower and the proposed
base, pursuant to a site plan, of the proposed tower. The
separation distances (listed in linear feet) shall be as shown in
Table 2.
Table 2
Separation Distances Between Towers
Existing Tower Types
Lattice Guyed
Monopole
75 Feet
in Height
or
Greater
Monopole
Less than
75 feet in
Height
Lattice 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Guyed 5,000 5,000 1,500 750
Monopole 75
feet in height or
greater
1,500 1,500 1,500 750
Monopole less
than 75 feet in
height
750 750 750 750
(6) Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not
less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an
§ 162-82 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-82
160:560
§ 162-83. Equipment storage.
appropriate anticlimbing device; provided, however, that the
Council or Zoning Hearing Board may waive such requirements, as
it deems appropriate.
(7) Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the
landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception is
required; provided, however, that the Council or Zoning Hearing
Board may waive such requirements if the goals of this article
would be better served thereby.
(a) Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant
materials that effectively screens the view of the tower
compound from property used for residences. The standard
buffer shall consist of a landscaped strip at least four feet wide
outside the perimeter of the compound.
(b) In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be
minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or
waived.
(c) Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site
shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some
cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural
growth around the property perimeter may be sufficient buffer.
C. Antennas. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna(s) is the
minimum height required to function satisfactorily to serve the
technical requirements of the applicant.
A. Antennas mounted on rooftops. The equipment cabinet or structure
used in association with legally placed antennas mounted on rooftops
shall comply with the following:
(1) The cabinet or structure shall not contain more than 10 square feet
of gross floor area or be more than eight feet in height. In addition,
for buildings and structures which are less than 65 feet in height,
the related unmanned equipment structure, if over 10 square feet
of gross floor area or eight feet in height, shall be located on the
ground and shall not be located on the roof of the structure.
(2) If the equipment structure is located on the roof of a building, the
area of the equipment structure and other equipment and
structures shall not occupy more than 1% of the roof area.
(3) Equipment storage cabinets or structures shall comply with all
applicable building codes.
B. All other legally placed antennas. For all other legally placed antennas,
the related unmanned equipment cabinet or structure shall comply with
all applicable building codes and shall contain no more than 16 square
§ 162-82 WATER § 162-83
160:561
§ 162-84. Removal of abandoned antennas and towers.
Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12
months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna
or tower shall remove the same within 90 days of receipt of notice from
the Council notifying the owner of such abandonment. Failure to remove
an abandoned antenna or tower within said 90 days shall be grounds for
the Borough to cause the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's
expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision
shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower.
§ 162-85. Nonconforming uses.
feet of gross floor area nor be more than 12 feet in height and may be
located:
(1) In the front or side yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is
no greater than six feet in height or 16 square feet of gross floor
area and the cabinet/structure is located a minimum of five feet
from all lot lines. The cabinet/structure shall be screened by an
evergreen hedge, with an ultimate height of at least 60 inches to 66
inches and a planted height of at least 36 inches.
(2) In a rear yard, provided that the cabinet or structure is no greater
than six feet in height or 16 square feet in gross floor area. The
cabinet/structure shall be screened by an evergreen hedge with an
ultimate height of eight feet and a planted height of at least 36
inches.
C. Modification of size requirements. The requirements of this § 162-83
may be modified by the Council in the case of administrative approvals
or by the Zoning Hearing Board in the case of a special exception to
encourage collocation.
A. Not an expansion of nonconforming use. Towers that are constructed
and antennas that are installed in accordance with the provisions of this
article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a
nonconforming use or structure.
B. Preexisting towers. Preexisting towers shall be allowed to continue
their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance (including
replacement with a new tower of like construction and height) shall be
permitted on such preexisting towers. New construction other than
routine maintenance on a preexisting tower shall comply with the
requirements of this article.
C. Rebuilding damaged or destroyed nonconforming towers or antennas.
Notwithstanding § 162-84, preexisting nonconforming towers or
antennas that are damaged or destroyed may be rebuilt without having
to first obtain administrative approval or a special exception and
without having to meet the separation requirements specified in
§ 162-83 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-85
160:562
§ 162-82B(4) and (5). The type, height and location of the tower on site
shall be of the same type and intensity as the original facility. Building
permits to rebuild the facility shall comply with the then-applicable
building codes and shall be obtained with 180 days from the date the
facility is first damaged or destroyed. If no permit is obtained or if said
permit expires, the tower or antenna shall be deemed abandoned as
specified in § 162-84.
§ 162-85 WATER § 162-85
160:563
Appendix
Chapter A165
CABLE TELEVISION FRANCHISE
§ 162-85 GLENOLDEN CODE § 162-85
160:564
ARTICLE I
Suburban Cable Television Franchise
[Adopted 10-10-1977 by Ord. No. 804, approved 10-10-1977.111]
§ A165-1. Grant of franchise; conditions.112
In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the terms,
conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, the Borough Council of
the Borough of Glenolden, hereinafter referred to as "Borough," grants the
nonexclusive franchise to the Delaware County Cable Television Company,
hereinafter referred to as "company," to install, construct, own, operate
and maintain a community antenna cable television system and to erect,
maintain and operate television transmission and distribution facilities,
and additions thereto, in, under, over, along, across and upon the streets,
lanes, avenues, sidewalks, alleys, bridges and other public places in the
Borough of Glenolden, Delaware County, Pennsylvania, for the purpose of
transmission and distribution of audio and visual signals and television
energy in accordance with the laws and regulations of the United States
of America and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, appropriate agencies,
the Federal Communications Commission rules and regulations and the
ordinances and regulations of the Borough of Glenolden now in effect or
hereafter enacted. The company shall observe the following conditions and
terms:
A. No poles or wires shall be erected, constructed or maintained by the
company along public highways which contain neither aerial telephone
nor aerial electric facilities or from which both aerial telephone and
aerial electric facilities are hereafter removed. Where all other utilities
are underground, the company's cable facilities shall be placed
underground.
B. Where the wires and other aerial facilities of the company are erected,
constructed, maintained or operated along or over public highways
which contain an aerial electric or telephone pole line or a joint-use
electric and telephone pole line, the wires and other facilities of the
company shall be supported by attachment to such pole line, but
nothing in this subsection shall relieve the company of the duty of
111. Editor's Note: Ordinance No. 1075, adopted 1-18-2000, provided that the nonexclusive
franchise granted to Suburban be extended for an additional 10 years. Suburban shall
have the option of extending this franchise for an additional five years, unless the
Borough gives the company not less than one year's written notice of the intent not to so
extend this franchise.
112. Editor's Note: Resolution No. 8-86, adopted 6-12-1986, reads as follows: "RESOLVED, that
the Borough of Glenolden does hereby consent to the assignment by the Delaware County
Cable Television Company of its rights under Ordinance No. 804 of October 10, 1977, to
T.V. Power of North County, Inc., a California Corporation, and Community TCI of Ohio,
Inc., a New Jersey Corporation, and to a subsequent assignment of Community TCI of
Ohio, Inc., of its right, title and interest to Suburban Cable TV Co., Inc.; provided,
however, that such subsequent transfer must occur within one year of the date of the
'consent to assignment,' all pursuant to the terms and provisions of a 'consent to
assignment' attached to and made a part of this resolution. "FURTHER RESOLVED, that
Resolution No. 5 of 1986 is hereby repealed." The consent to assignment is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ A165-1 WATER § A165-1
160:565
§ A165-2. Completion of work.
The company shall substantially complete physical installation of its
equipment and facilities within the Borough within five years after receipt
of the certificate of compliance from the Federal Communications
Commission.
§ A165-3. Term of franchise; extensions.
The duration of the rights, privileges and authorities hereby granted shall
be 15 years from the date of acceptance of the ordinance by the company;
provided that the company shall have the option of extending this franchise
for an additional period of 10 years upon application by the company
not later than one year prior to the expiration date of the initial fifteenyear
franchise, and the option of extending this franchise for an additional
period of five years upon application by the company in writing one year
prior to the expiration date of the additional ten-year franchise, provided
further that such a renewal of this franchise is specifically conditioned upon
review and approval by the Borough of Glenolden, at a public proceeding
affording due process, of the company's qualifications and performance, the
adequacy of the franchise provisions and its consistency with the rules and
regulations of the Federal Communications Commission.
§ A165-4. Acceptance of franchise.
This franchise is conditioned and contingent upon the company's filing with
the Council its unconditional acceptance of this franchise as set forth in
this ordinance and the company's promise to comply with and abide by all
the provisions, terms and conditions of this ordinance. Such acceptance and
promise shall be in writing, duly executed and sworn to by and on behalf
of the company before a notary public or other officer authorized by law to
securing the consent for such attachment from the owner of such pole
line.
C. Poles, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be so erected,
constructed and maintained as not to interfere with the traffic over the
public highways. No new poles shall be erected without prior approval
of Borough Council, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld.
D. Poles, lines, cables, ducts and other facilities of the company shall be
removed by the company when no longer used or useful for their
intended purpose or whenever required by the Borough in connection
with any public improvement or other reasonable cause, at company's
expense.
E. Any public highways, sidewalks and abutting property disturbed or
damaged in the erection, construction maintenance or operation of the
facilities of the company shall be promptly repaired by the company to
the reasonable satisfaction of the Borough Engineer.
§ A165-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-4
160:566
administer oaths, and delivered to the Secretary of the Borough within 30
days after passage of this ordinance.
§ A165-5. Liability and indemnification.
A. The company shall indemnify, hold harmless and defend the Borough,
its agents, officers, servants and employees from and against any and
all costs, expenses (including reasonable counsel fees), liabilities,
losses, damages, suits, actions, fines, penalties, claims or demands of
any kind asserted by or on behalf of any person or governmental agency
or authority arising out of or in any way connected with any of the
following, and the Borough, its agents, servants, officers and employees
shall not be liable to the company on account of any of the following:
(1) Any failure by the company to abide by, keep or perform any of the
terms, conditions or provisions of this franchise.
(2) Any failure by the company to comply with any statutes,
ordinances, regulations or orders of any governmental authority.
(3) Any bodily injury (including death) or property damage arising with
respect to this franchise.
(4) Any act or activity relating to the granting of this franchise to the
company or to the operations conducted thereunder.
B. In connection with any suit or other proceeding in which the Borough,
its agents, servants, officers and employees shall be made a party,
involving this franchise or any act or activity conducted thereunder or
relating thereto and which may have any direct effect upon the
Borough, its agents, servants and employees, the company, upon
written request of the Borough, shall come in and defend such suit on
behalf of the Borough, its agents, servants and employees and shall
bear all of the costs and expenses relating thereto.
C. The company shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise
general liability insurance insuring the Borough and the company with
regard to all liabilities and contingencies mentioned in Subsection A
herein in the minimum amounts of:
(1) One hundred thousand dollars for bodily injury or death to any one
person.
(2) Three hundred thousand dollars for personal injury in any one
single accident.
(3) Ten thousand dollars property damage for any one single accident.
(4) A one-million dollar "umbrella" policy.
D. The company shall maintain throughout the term of this franchise a
performance bond in favor of the Borough, with a good and sufficient
surety approved by the Borough, in the sum of $20,000, conditioned
§ A165-4 WATER § A165-5
160:567
§ A165-6. Operation and maintenance of system.
The company shall render efficient service, make repairs promptly and
interruptions, insofar as possible, shall be preceded by notice and shall
occur during minimum use of the system. Upon receipt of a complaint of
the quality of service, equipment malfunctions and similar matters, the
company shall promptly investigate such complaints. Where possible, the
company shall investigate such complaints within 24 hours of their receipt.
Resolution of such service complaints shall be made promptly. For the
purpose of investigation and resolution of regular service complaints, the
company shall maintain an agent or a local business office convenient to
the Borough. In addition, the company shall maintain a toll-free business
telephone for the receipt of complaints and requests for repairs or
adjustment.
§ A165-7. Special service.
The company agrees to and shall, upon request of the Borough or the
institution involved, extend without charge one primary or standard line
available to each fire station, police station, public school, private school,
parochial school, public library, municipal building and such public
auditorium and institutions as are requested by the Borough in the Borough.
Such service shall consist of one television outlet within the building or,
in the case of a group of buildings, within the main building of the group,
providing service to one television receiver. The company shall not be
required to install additional outlets at its expense but shall, at the request
of the Borough, install such additional outlets or other facilities as may
be requested, and the Borough or the institution involved shall pay the
company on a time-and-material basis for such additional installation and
shall pay the company in accordance with its schedule of rates as set forth
in this ordinance for such additional service.
§ A165-8. Safety requirements.
upon the company well and truly performing its several obligations as
set forth in this franchise, and providing that in the event of any failure
by the company to so perform, the Borough may proceed against the
surety either to obtain proper performance of such obligations of the
company or to be compensated for the failure of the company to render
such proper performance.
E. The insurance policy and bond obtained by the company in compliance
with this section must be approved by Council, which approval shall not
unreasonably be withheld, and such insurance policy and bond shall be
filed and maintained with Council during the term of this franchise.
F. Neither the provisions of this section nor any bond accepted by the
Borough pursuant thereto shall be construed as excusing faithful
performance by the company or as otherwise limiting the liability of the
company under this franchise.
§ A165-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-8
160:568
A. In the use and occupation of the surfaces, subsurfaces, space above,
below and adjoining the streets, public ways and places of the Borough,
the company's equipment and plant and their construction, operation
and maintenance shall be in accordance with the provisions of the
following:
(1) The National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire
Underwriters.
(2) The Standards and Practices Code of the National Community
Television Association.
(3) Such applicable ordinances, codes, laws and regulations of the
Borough of Glenolden, County of Delaware, State of Pennsylvania
and the United States of America as are now in effect or hereafter
enacted.
B. Company's equipment and plant shall be kept and maintained in a safe,
suitable and substantial condition and in good order and repair so as
not to endanger the lives or interfere unreasonably with the rights of
persons or to cause physical damage to property or to interfere with
improvements the Borough may deem proper or to hinder or obstruct
unnecessarily pedestrian or vehicular traffic on streets, public ways and
places.
C. Where the Borough or a public utility serving the Borough desires to
make use of the poles or other wire-holding structures of the company
but agreement therefor with the company cannot be reached, the
Council may require the company to permit such use for such
consideration and upon such terms as the Council shall determine to be
just and reasonable, if it is determined by Council that the use would
enhance the public convenience and would not unduly interfere with
the company's operations.
D. Company shall, upon not less than 72 hours' advance notice,
temporarily raise, lower or relocate its wires and cables to permit the
moving of buildings or any other item of bulk, and the expenses
incurred by the company in such raising, lowering or relocation shall be
paid in advance by the person or concern requesting the same.
E. The company shall, at its own cost and expense, replace, restore or
repair any private property, street, sidewalk, alley, public way or paved
area destroyed or damaged by the company or its agents, employees or
servants.
F. If at any time during the term of this franchise the Borough shall elect
to alter or change the grade of any street, sidewalk, alley or other
public way, or when required by reason of traffic conditions, public
safety, street vibration, freeway and street construction, installation of
sewers, drains, water pipes, power lines, signal lines and tracks or any
other type of structure or improvements, when acting in a
governmental or proprietary capacity, the company, upon reasonable
§ A165-8 WATER § A165-8
160:569
§ A165-9. New developments.
It shall be the policy of the Borough to liberally amend this franchise,
upon application of the company, when necessary to enable the company
to take advantage of any developments in the field of television and radio
signals which will afford it an opportunity more effectively, efficiently or
economically to service its customers; provided, however, that this section
shall not be construed to require the Borough to make any amendment or
to prohibit it from unilaterally changing its policy stated herein.
§ A165-10. Removal or abandonment of property.
§ A165-11. Failure to perform street work.
The company shall abide by all applicable ordinances of the Borough
relating to street and sidewalk work and shall make application
accompanied by the required fees for permits to perform any and all such
work before commencing same.113 Upon failure of the company to complete
any work required by law or by the provisions of this ordinance to be
done in any street within the time prescribed and to the satisfaction of the
Borough, the Borough may cause such work to be done and the company
shall pay to the Borough the cost thereof in the itemized amounts reported
by the Borough to the company within 30 days after receipt of such itemized
report.
notice by the Borough, shall remove, relay and relocate its poles, wires,
cables, underground conduits, manholes and other fixtures at its own
cost and expense.
A. In the event that the use of any part or all of the CATV system is
discontinued for a reason for a continuous period of 12 months, or that
such system or property has been installed in any street or public
places without complying with the requirements of this franchise, or
that the franchise shall have been terminated, canceled or expired for
any reason, the company, upon notice, shall promptly remove from the
streets or public places all such property and poles of such system,
other than any which the Borough may permit to be abandoned in such
place, and shall also remove house distribution cables and connections.
In the event of such removal, the company shall promptly restore the
street or other areas from which such property has been removed to a
condition satisfactory to the Borough.
B. Upon termination of service to any subscriber, the company shall
promptly remove all of its facilities and equipment from the premises of
such subscriber upon his request.
113. Editor's Note: See Chapter 144, Streets and Sidewalks; Art. VII, Excavations in Streets.
§ A165-8 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-12
160:570
§ A165-12. Preferential or discriminatory practices prohibited.
The company shall not, as to rates, charges, service, facilities, rules,
regulations or in any other respect, make or grant any preference or
advantage to any person, nor subject any person to any prejudice or
disadvantage.
§ A165-13. Assignment of franchise.
§ A165-14. Availability of copies of filed communications.
Copies of all petitions, applications and communications submitted by the
company to the Federal Communications Commission, Securities and
Exchange Commission or any other federal or state regulatory commission
or agency having jurisdiction in respect to any matters affecting CATV
operations authorized pursuant to this franchise shall be made available to
the Borough if requested.
§ A165-15. Borough's rights in franchise.
A. The right given the company shall not be assignable without the prior
written approval of the Borough, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld.
B. Any assignment attempted by the company in the absence of such
consent shall be ineffective and the right given hereby shall thereby be
rendered null and void; provided, however, that the company may
assign this franchise and contract and its rights hereunder without such
consent to a subsidiary or affiliated corporation owned, controlled or
managed by the company, but the company shall remain liable for the
performance of its obligations hereunder notwithstanding any such
assignment.
A. The right is hereby reserved to Council to adopt, in addition to the
provisions contained herein and in existing applicable ordinances, such
additional regulations as it shall find necessary in the exercise of the
police power.
B. The Borough shall have the right to inspect the books, records, maps,
plans and other like materials of the company at any time during
normal business hours.
C. The Borough shall have the right, during the term of this franchise, to
install and maintain free of charge upon the poles of the company any
wire and pole fixtures necessary for a police alarm system or lighting
fixtures on the condition that such wire and pole fixtures do not
interfere with the CATV operation of the company.
§ A165-12 WATER § A165-16
160:571
§ A165-16. Charges for installation and service. [Amended 7-8-1982
by Ord. No. 866, approved 7-8-1982]
The company's charge for installation of a single residential television cable
connection shall not exceed $25, and the charge for cable television for
a single residential television cable shall not exceed $7.75 per month.
The charge for additional installations in the same residence shall not
exceed $10 per additional installation. The charge for cable service for such
additional connection in the same residence shall not exceed $3 per month,
per additional connection. There shall be no increase in these rates without
the express consent of the Borough. The company shall have the option to
require a deposit for each set commander provided to the subscriber. Each
apartment unit within an apartment building shall be considered a separate
residential dwelling and charged accordingly.
§ A165-17. Fee to Borough. [Amended 11-12-1992 by Ord. No. 985,
approved 11-12-1992; 5-13-1993 by Ord. No. 996, approved
5-13-1993; 1-18-2000 by Ord. No. 1075, approved 1-18-2000]
A. The company shall pay to the Borough 5% of the annual gross receipts.
"Gross receipts" shall mean any and all compensation in any form paid
by and due or owing by subscribers to the company or any lessee of the
company from the distribution of any cable service over the cable
system to said subscriber or lessee of the company within the limits of
the Borough. All installation charges, reconnection charges, service
charges and charges for inspection, repair or modification of
installations, all advertising revenue, all sales commissions from all
present and any future sales (home shopping) channels and any
revenues generated from technologies that are determined by the FCC
to be a cable service shall be included in said sum.
B. Such fee shall be paid by the company to the Borough in quarterly
installments due no later than 30 days following the end of the calendar
year quarters ending March 31, June 30 and September 30, and its best
effort within 45 days, but no later than 60 days, following the end of the
calendar year, ending December 31. With each payment of said fee,
upon the request of the Borough, the company shall submit a report of
gross receipts for such quarter year, certified by a representative of the
company.
C. The company shall pay to the Borough a fee on internet access revenues
in addition to the franchise fee provided in Subsection A hereinabove.
For the purposes of this franchise, "internet access revenues" shall be
defined to be those revenues collected for the provision of two-way,
high-speed data services to residences within the Borough. The fee on
internet access revenues shall be calculated as follows:
(1) If there is no other provider of two-way, high speed data services
(128 Kbs or greater) to residences within the Borough, then 3% of
all internet access revenues received by Suburban for each twelvemonth
period (payable quarterly on internet access revenues); or
§ A165-16 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-17
160:572
§ A165-18. Borough's right of intervention.
The company agrees not to oppose intervention by the Borough in any
suit or proceeding to which the company is a party and which may have a
substantial adverse effect on the company's operations within the Borough.
§ A165-19. Channels and programs.
The company shall comply with the present and future rules and regulations
of the Federal Communications Commission in connection with and relating
to the operation of its system and shall provide a minimum service offering
as follows:
(2) At such time as any other provider of two-way, high speed data
services is providing such service to residences within the
Borough, the franchise fee paid by Suburban on internet access
revenues shall be increased or decreased from that provided in
Subsection C(1) herein, to equal the franchise fee (if any) or similar
use fee or charge based on internet access revenues or similar
revenues paid to the Borough by any other such provider or, if there
is more than one such provider, to the lower or lowest such
franchise fee or similar use fee or charge paid by any such
provider; provided, however, that in no event shall Suburban be
required to pay a fee in excess of 5% on internet access revenues.
(3) If internet access service provided over a cable system is
designated a noncable service under applicable law, then payment
of a franchise fee on internet access revenue shall not be governed
by Subsection C(1) and (2). Payment to the Borough of such fees on
internet access revenue shall be governed by federal and state law
applicable to revenues of cable systems from such noncable
services.
(4) Any dispute or controversy arising under or in connection with this
provision concerning the fee payable on internet access revenues
shall be settled exclusively by arbitration in the Borough, in
accordance with the rules of the American Arbitration Association
then in effect.
A. Channel capacity. Company shall construct a system with a minimum
channel capacity of 20 television channels and shall maintain a plant
having technical capacity for nonvoice return communications.
B. Signals to be carried. Company shall carry on its system the signals of
all stations significantly viewed in the Borough of Glenolden, Delaware
County, and the signals of no less than two distant independent
commercial stations as well as the signals of educational stations as
may be feasible and permitted under the rules and regulations of the
Federal Communications Commission.
§ A165-17 WATER § A165-19
160:573
§ A165-20. 65-20. Legal limitations and restrictions.
§ A165-21. Right of revocation.
The Borough shall have the right to rescind or revoke the rights herein
granted upon any substantial violation by the company of any of the
obligations and requirements contained herein, after written notice by the
Borough to the company and continuation of such violation, failure or
default.
C. Access channels. Company shall maintain all access channels as
required by the Federal Communications Commission. As a minimum,
however, unless prohibited by law, the company shall provide public,
governmental and educational channels to the Borough to be shared by
others.
D. The company shall not engage in the sale or rental of television or radio
receivers, the furnishing of television or radio receiver repair service or
the solicitation or referral to particular persons or classes of persons for
such sale, rental or service. The facilities of the company shall not be
constructed or operated so as to necessitate the use of a receiver of a
unique type for optimum reception of signals. However, nothing
contained herein shall be interpreted to prohibit the use of converters
or descramblers on the CATV system.
E. Program origination. Grantee shall conduct program origination cable
casting as required by the Federal Communications Commission.
A. The performance by the company hereunder is subject to the
limitations, restrictions or requirements now existing or which may
henceforth be imposed by law, rules or order of the Federal
Communications Commission or any other governmental board,
commission or authority of any kind.
B. Should the Federal Communications Commission modify or amend the
provisions of Section 76.31 of its rules and regulations entitled
"Franchise Standards," such modifications or amendments shall be
incorporated into this franchise within one year of the adoption of the
modification or amendment or at the time of the renewal at the
expiration of the franchise pursuant to the terms and provisions hereof.
A. Such written notice to the company shall specify the manner in which
the company is in violation, failure or default with respect to the
franchise.
B. The notice given by the Borough shall give the company a specified,
reasonable amount of time within which to correct the violation, failure
or default, but in no event shall the time period be less than 30 days
from the date of receipt of the notice to the company.
§ A165-19 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-22
160:574
§ A165-22. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct
and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portions hereof.
§ A165-23. Implementation of ordinance.
The Borough and the executive officers of said Borough and the
departments and bureaus of the Borough shall issue to the company in
the name of the Borough all permits necessary or convenient to evidence
the grant of the franchise herein and to implement the provisions of this
ordinance.
§ A165-24. Fees for permits.
Company shall make application to the Borough and pay all fees for any and
all street work permits as required by Borough ordinances.114
§ A165-25. Certification of compliance.
Company shall supply Borough annually with a letter signed by the
president of the company certifying compliance with Federal
Communication Commission regulations and with this ordinance.
§ A165-26. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 675 and all ordinances or parts of ordinances conflicting with
the provisions of this ordinance are hereby repealed to the extent of such
conflict.
114. Editor's Note: See Chapter 144, Streets and Sidewalks; Art. VII, Excavations in Streets.
§ A165-22 WATER § A165-26
160:575

ARTICLE II
RCN Telecom Services of Philadelphia Cable Television Franchise
[Adopted 10-19-1999 by Ord. No. 1068, approved 10-19-1999;
amended in is entirety 2-17-2015 by Ord. No. 2104, approved
2-17-2015]
§ A165-27. Franchise granted; renewal.
A. In consideration of the faithful performance and observance of the
conditions and reservations hereinafter specified, the nonexclusive
right (hereinafter referred to as "franchise") is hereby granted to RCN
Telecom Services of Philadelphia, LLC (hereinafter referred to as
"RCN" or "the company") to construct, own, operate and maintain a
cable television system and to erect, maintain and operate television
transmission and distribution facilities and additions thereto in, under,
over, along, across and upon the streets, lanes, avenues, sidewalks,
alleys, bridges and other public places in the Borough of Glenolden,
Delaware County, Pennsylvania, and subsequent additions thereto, for
the purpose of reception, transmission, collection, amplification,
origination, distribution and/or redistribution of signals in accordance
with the laws and regulations of the United States of America, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Federal Communications
Commission (the "FCC") and the ordinances and regulations of the
Borough of Glenolden, now in effect or hereafter enacted. The duration
of the rights, privileges and authorities hereby granted shall be 10
years from the date of acceptance of this ordinance by the company,
provided that the company shall have the option of extending this
franchise for an additional term of five years unless the Borough gives
the company not less than one year's written notice of the intent not to
so extend this franchise.
B. Renewal.
(1) During the six-month period which begins with the 36th month
before the franchise expiration, the Borough may on its own
initiative, and shall, at the request of the company, commence
proceedings which afford the public appropriate notice and
participation for the purpose of:
(a) Identifying the future cable-related community needs and
interest.
(b) Reviewing the company's performance under the franchise.
Upon completion of the above proceeding, the company may
submit a proposal for renewal.
(2) A four-month period shall be allowed for determining the
company's eligibility for franchise renewal. The Borough shall
consider the company's annual reports to the Borough, the Federal
Communications Commission and the Commonwealth, if such is
required, and these shall be considered in light of cable television
§ A165-27 WATER § A165-27
160:577
§ A165-28. Authority to obtain and use equipment and facilities.
There is hereby granted the further right, privilege and authority to the
company to lease, rent, subscribe to service or in any other manner obtain
the use of towers, poles, lines, cable, facilities, services, licenses and
franchises within the limits of the Borough of Glenolden, Pennsylvania,
including the Bell Telephone Company of Pennsylvania and the Philadelphia
Electric Company and to use such towers, poles, lines, cables and other
equipment and facilities, subject to all existing and future ordinances and
regulations of the Borough, so long as such future ordinances and
regulations of the Borough do not materially adversely affect the rights
granted herein. The poles used for the company's distribution system shall
be those erected and maintained by the telephone or electric companies
when and where practicable, provided that mutually satisfactory rental
ordinances can be entered into with said companies.
§ A165-29. Rights of company; construction and maintenance of
distribution system.
industry performance on a national basis in respect to technical
developments and performance, programming, costs of service and
the particular requirements set out in this ordinance. After a public
hearing, duly advertised, the Council shall make recommendation,
in writing to the Borough for renewal of the franchise without
change in contract, renewal with amendment(s) to the contract or
termination of the franchise. In the latter instance, the specific
reasons for nonrenewal of the franchise are to be stated.
A. The company shall have the right and privilege to construct, erect,
operate and maintain in, upon, along, above, across, over and under the
streets such poles, wires, cable, conductors, ducts, conduit, vaults,
manholes, amplifiers, appliances, attachments, and other property as
may be necessary and appurtenant to its system, provided that all
appropriate permits from the Borough are obtained in advance of any
activity that requires a permit including, but not limited to, the
individual permits that are issued for the location of such poles subject
to the approval of the affected homeowner and the Borough in
conjunction with the Borough Council and, in addition, so to use,
operate and provide similar properties rented or leased from other
persons, firms or corporations for such purpose. In addition, the
company shall be required to provide seven days' advance notification
of construction activity to affected property owners.
B. The company's rights and privileges shall be subordinated to any prior
lawful use of occupancy of the streets or other public property and shall
not be so used as to interfere with existing improvements or with new
improvements this Borough may deem proper to make or as to hinder
or obstruct the free use of the streets, alleys, bridges or other public
property. In the event that any equipment or facilities of the company
shall interfere with any such improvement existing or intended to be
§ A165-27 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-29
160:578
§ A165-30. Limitation.
The franchise granted herein grants the company the right to install and
operate a cable system, and does not take the place of any other franchise
license or permit which may be required by law or ordinance or regulation.
made by the Borough, the company shall, upon reasonable notice from
the Borough, forthwith relocate said equipment and facilities at the
company's expense so as to eliminate said interference.
C. Construction and maintenance of the transmission distribution system
shall be in accordance with the provisions of the National Electrical
Safety Code, 1993 (NED-70), or any amendments or revisions thereof
and in compliance with any applicable rules, regulations or orders now
in effect or hereafter issued by any federal or state commission or any
other public authority having jurisdiction.
D. All installations of equipment shall be durable or of a permanent nature
and installed in accordance with good engineering practice as outlined
by the National Bureau of Standards, American Institute of Electrical
Engineers and American Society of Mechanical Engineers. The
company shall comply with all Borough regulations, ordinances and
state and federal laws now existing or hereinafter enacted so as not to
interfere with the right of the public or individual property owner and
so as not to unduly interfere with the travel and use of public places by
the public during the construction, repair or removal thereof.
E. In the construction, conduct, maintenance and operation of its
business, the company shall comply with all requirements of Borough
ordinances, resolutions, local laws, rules, regulations and specifications
heretofore or hereafter enacted or established, including but not
limited to those concerning street work, street excavation, use and
removal and relocation of property within a street.
F. If the company, in the exercise of its franchise, shall disturb any lawn or
landscaped area, pavement, sidewalk, street, driveway, public way or
other surface, it shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by
the Borough, replace and restore such areas so disturbed in as like a
condition as before the work was commenced.
G. Restoration on private property shall be conducted in a timely and
professional manner. The restored area or surface shall be in a like
condition as was present prior to the disturbance by the company. The
company shall not be liable for any defacement of or damage to
customer's premises resulting from the furnishing of services or
equipment on such premises or the installation or removal thereof,
unless such defacement or damage is caused by negligence or willful
misconduct of the company's agents or employees.
§ A165-29 WATER § A165-31
160:579
§ A165-31. Facilities to be placed underground.
In all areas of the Borough where cables, wires or other like facilities of
public utilities are placed underground, the company shall place its cables,
wires or other like facilities underground.
§ A165-32. Joint use of facilities.
The company shall grant to the Borough, free of expense, joint use of any
and all poles owned by it for any proper Borough purpose, provided that
it may be done without interfering with the free use and enjoyment of the
company's own facilities and provided that the Borough does not compete
with the company.
§ A165-33. Use of facilities during emergency.
In case of any emergency or disaster, the company shall, upon request of
the Borough or its civil defense authority, make its facilities and personnel
available to the Borough or said authority during the emergency or disaster
period without charge and in accordance with the federal Emergency Alert
System (EAS) regulations as promulgated by the FCC.
§ A165-34. Local office.
In lieu of maintaining an office and studio in the Borough, the company
shall install a television monitor and state of the art character generator
and videocassette recorder in the Municipal Building and shall maintain the
necessary equipment to provide exclusive use of one channel for Borough
residents only.
§ A165-35. Requirements.
A. The company shall construct and operate a cable system and render
service to all subscribers consistent with all applicable rules and
regulations of the FCC and any other applicable laws, rules or
regulations of municipal, state or federal agencies having jurisdiction
over such matters.
B. The company shall comply with all FCC requirements that pertain to
signal leakage performance criteria, and provide a timely response and
repair at no charge for all complaints from non-cable customers who
are experiencing impaired reception caused directly by the
transmission of the company's cable system.
C. The company shall provide same-day service response, on any normal
working day, for all complaints and requests for adjustments received
before 12:00 noon. Calls received after 12:00 noon must be responded
to within 24 hours. After 12:00 noon on Saturdays or Sundays and
holidays, customers with problems must have a callback by 12:00 noon
the next working day. Twenty-four-hour emergency service will always
be available for the following: loss of channels for the entire cable
§ A165-31 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-35
160:580
§ A165-36. Fee to Borough; filing of statement and reports.
system, downed lines blocking streets or sidewalks, cable causing a
dangerous situation to pedestrians or traffic, or when five or more
calls come from the Borough due to loss of signal or impaired picture
quality. Upon failure to remedy a loss of service attributable to the cable
system within 24 hours after a complaint, if requested, the company
shall credit 1/30 of the regular monthly charge to the subscriber for
each 24 hours or fraction thereof, until service is restored.
D. The company shall have the work done between the hours of 7:00 a.m.
and 12:00 noon whenever possible, anytime there is a loss or
interruption of service to more than 500 subscribers caused by the
company. Whenever the company has a planned outage due to
maintenance of the system, for a period of 24 hours or more, the
company shall credit to the subscriber's account 1/30 of the monthly
subscription fee. The requirements for maintenance of equipment
contained in this provision shall not apply to a subscriber's television
set.
E. The company shall keep a log and, at the request of the Borough, file a
copy thereof at the end of each quarter with the Borough listing by
category all complaints and trouble calls received, the number of
second or subsequent calls on the same complaint, the remedial action
taken and the period of time required to satisfy each reported
complaint. The Company shall maintain and make available upon
request a list of credits with the Borough, when available.
F. The company shall be required to interconnect its cable system, to
facilitate the carriage of public, educational and government access
channels, with any other franchised cable company operating in the
Borough. Such interconnection shall be made within 60 days of a
request by the Borough. The company may request and the Borough
may grant reasonable extension of time for the company to comply with
this requirement.
G. The company shall have a representative attend meetings of the
Borough or any other meetings when requested.
A. The company shall pay to the Borough 5% of the annual gross receipts.
"Gross receipts" shall mean any and all compensation and other
considerations in any form paid by and due or owing by subscribers to
the company or any lessee of the company from the distribution of any
cable service over the cable system to said subscriber or lessee of the
company within the limits of the Borough. All installation charges,
reconnection charges, service charges and charges for inspection,
repair or modification of installations, all advertising revenue, all sales
commissions from all present and future sales channels, and any
revenues generated from technologies that are determined by the FCC
to be a cable service shall be included in said sum.
§ A165-35 WATER § A165-36
160:581
§ A165-37. Transferability; borough's right of first refusal.
B. While the company is in the process of franchising in the various
municipalities in the County of Delaware, should any other municipality
in said county receive a better fee package in any franchising ordinance
than that set forth in Subsection A above, the Borough shall
automatically be entitled to receive, and the company shall be obligated
to pay, the higher fee upon adoption by the Borough of an ordinance
with the higher fee set forth therein.
C. The company shall provide and file with the Borough annual certified
audited financial statements. The company shall also make available to
the Borough, upon request, all documents necessary for the Borough to
determine whether or not the company is fulfilling its obligations. Such
documentation shall include but not be limited to maps, plans, a
schedule of proposed installation, certificates of insurance and
performance bonds. The company shall notify the Borough of any
material alteration or change of insurance coverage within seven to 30
days in advance of said change.
D. Within the second year of this franchise term, the Borough shall be
permitted to conduct an audit of the company's records to ascertain
whether the company is in compliance with the financial terms and
provisions of this ordinance. The company shall be responsible for the
payment of the Borough's auditor's reasonable fees.
E. The company is required to file quarterly reports, including but not
limited to the franchise fee payment worksheet (to be provided by the
Borough) within 15 days of quarter's end which present earned
revenue. On a quarterly basis, the company shall pay 100% of the fees
to the Borough. The Borough Manager/Secretary or his/her
representative shall have the right to examine or have examined the
books and records of the company to assure compliance with the terms
and provisions of this ordinance, such cost to be paid by the company.
Noncompliance with the aforementioned will result in a penalty of 10%
on moneys due for that quarter.
F. The company shall keep on file with the Borough a current list of its
stockholders, bondholders, owners and partners and the holdings
thereof.
A. This franchise right is a privilege to be held in personal trust by the
original grantee. It cannot be transferred, leased, assigned or disposed
of as a whole or in part, either by forced sale, merger, consolidation or
otherwise, without first offering to transfer, lease, assign or dispose of
in whole or in part to the Borough by giving written notice to the
Borough. The Borough shall have 120 days to accept said offer under
the same terms and conditions as the offer received by the company. In
the event that the Borough does not accept the offer, the franchise
cannot be transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, as a whole or in
part either by forced sale, merger, consolidation or otherwise, without
§ A165-36 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-37
160:582
§ A165-38. Termination of service.
Upon request by a subscriber for termination of service and such
termination is not due to nonpayment for service, the company shall
promptly:
§ A165-39. Expiration of term.
At the expiration of the term for which this franchise is granted or upon
its termination and cancellation as provided for herein, the Borough shall
have the right to require the company to remove at its own expense all
aboveground portions of the system from all public ways within the
Borough.
the prior consent of the Borough expressed by this ordinance, which
consent shall not be unreasonably withheld.
B. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Borough's consent to transfer shall
not be required in the event of a transfer or assignment of this franchise
to a parent, subsidiary or affiliated entity that has control, is controlled
by or under the same control as the original grantee, subject to the
company providing notice to the Borough at least 30 days in advance of
such transfer. In this event, the Borough shall not be afforded the right
of first refusal.
A. Remove all personal property and/or equipment, including but not
limited to converters and remote controls .
B. Disconnect cable or wiring into the subscriber's premises either at the
point of entry or at a feed point from cable tap.
C. Refund payment made in advance for service. The refund of advance
payment should be calculated based upon an effective termination date,
which shall be the date which occurs first that is the actual date of
termination of service into the premises, or seven days after a request is
made by the customer to discontinue service. If the company has the
capability of discontinuing service without visiting the premises, then
the effective date of termination shall be the day the customer requests
termination of service.
D. Promptly return security deposits, if any, upon the customer returning
equipment for which deposit is applicable.
E. Submit final statement of account to customer within 45 days of
voluntary termination of service.
F. The company shall not impose a termination charge or fee to a
customer who requests termination of service. The company shall not
be required to remove cable or wiring from either the inside or outside
of subscriber premises. However, upon request from the subscriber, the
company must remove aerial cable or wiring from only the exterior of
the customer's property.
§ A165-37 WATER § A165-40
160:583
§ A165-40. Filing of maps, plans and schedules.
The company will file with the Borough true and accurate copies of asbuilt
maps and schedules of any major construction. This provision is not
intended to waive or alter the filing of any maps, plans or schedules as
required for permits or any approvals from the Borough.
§ A165-41. Enforcement and termination of franchise.
A. Notice of violation. In the event the Borough believes the grantee has
not complied with the terms of this ordinance, it shall notify the grantee
in writing, by certified or registered mail, of the exact nature of the
alleged noncompliance.
B. Grantee's right to cure or respond. The grantee shall have 30 days from
receipt of the notice described in Subsection A to respond to the
Borough contesting the assertion of noncompliance, and to cure such
default or, in the event that by the nature of default, such default cannot
be cured within the thirty-day period, request permission from the
Borough for additional time in which to take reasonable steps to
remedy such default, and such permission shall not be unreasonably
withheld. In the event the grantee contests the assertion of
noncompliance in a timely manner, then the time specified to cure the
alleged default shall be stayed or tolled pending a hearing before the
Borough Council. In the event the Borough Council affirms the
assertion of noncompliance following a hearing affording the grantee
the opportunity to be heard, then the grantee shall have 30 days within
which to cure such default.
C. Force majeure. If for any reason of force majeure either party is unable
in whole or in part to carry out its obligations hereunder, said party
shall not be deemed in violation or default during the continuance of
such inability. Unless further limited elsewhere in this ordinance, the
term "force majeure" as used herein shall have the following meaning:
strikes; acts of God; acts of public enemies; orders of any kind of the
government, of the United States of America or of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania or any of their departments, agencies, political
subdivisions or officials, or any civil or military authority; insurrections;
riots; epidemics; landslides; lightning; earthquakes; fires; hurricanes;
volcanic activity; storms; entire failure of utilities; or any other cause or
event not reasonably within the control of the party affected.
D. Cancellation of franchise.
(1) In addition to all other rights and powers pertaining to the Borough
by virtue of this ordinance or otherwise, the Borough reserves the
right to terminate and cancel the franchise hereby granted and all
rights and privileges of the company hereunder in the event that
the company:
§ A165-40 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-41
160:584
§ A165-42. When effective.
This ordinance and the rights granted to the company shall become
effective upon execution of a contract between Glenolden Borough and the
franchisee, binding both parties to abide by all conditions of this ordinance.
§ A165-43. Liability and insurance requirements.
(a) Violates any material provision of this ordinance or any rule,
order or determination of the Borough or Borough Council
made pursuant to this ordinance.
(b) Becomes insolvent or unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is
adjudged as bankrupt.
(c) Violates any federal or Pennsylvania law or regulation .
(2) Such termination and cancellation shall be by written notice to the
company from the Borough Council, provided the provisions of
§ 165-41 herein have been followed, and shall in no way affect any
of the Borough's rights under this franchise or any provision of law.
A. The company shall pay and by its acceptance of this franchise the
company specifically agrees that it will pay all damages and penalties
which the Borough may legally be required to pay as a result of
granting the franchise. These damages or penalties shall include, but
shall not be limited to, damages arising out of the installation, operation
or maintenance of the cable system authorized herein, whether or not
any act or omission complained of is authorized, allowed or prohibited
by this ordinance.
B. The company shall pay and by its acceptance of this franchise
specifically agrees that it will pay all expenses incurred by the Borough
in defending itself with regard to all damages and penalties mentioned
in Subsection A above. These expenses shall include all out-of-pocket
expenses such as reasonable attorneys' fees and shall also include the
reasonable value of any services rendered by the Borough Solicitor or
his assistants or any employees of the Borough.
C. The company shall maintain and by its acceptance of this franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain throughout the terms of this
franchise liability insurance insuring the Borough and the company
with regard to all damages mentioned in Subsection A above in the
minimum amounts of:
(1) The company shall provide evidence of workmen's compensation
and vehicle insurance from a carrier with an A.M. Best rating of "A"
or better.
(2) Comprehensive general liability insurance shall be written on an
occurrence basis with a combined single limit of no less than
$1,000,000 for bodily injury, property damage and personal injury.
§ A165-41 WATER § A165-43
160:585
§ A165-44. Agreement.
The company shall:
D. The Company shall maintain and by its acceptance of this franchise
specifically agrees that it will maintain through the term of this
franchise a faithful performance bond running to the Borough in the
penal sum of $25,000 conditioned that the company shall well and truly
observe, fulfill and perform each term and condition of this ordinance
and that, in case of any breach of condition of the bond, the amount
thereof shall be recoverable from the principal and surety thereof by
the Borough for all damages resulting from the failure of the company
to well and faithfully observe and perform any provision of this
ordinance.
E. The insurance policy and bond obtained by the company in compliance
with this section must be written by an insurance company with an A.M.
Best rating of "A" or better and shall be approved by the Borough
Council and a certificate of insurance as evidence of the company's
insurance policy and the performance bond, including written evidence
of the payment of required premiums, shall be filed and maintained
with the Borough Manager/Secretary during the term of this ordinance.
F. All expenses of the above-noted insurance and bond shall be paid by the
company.
A. Provide each school designated by the Borough, fire station, public
library and Borough building, and such public auditoriums and
institutions as are requested by the Borough with a single drop and
basic service without charge. Additional drops and service will be
charged to the facility by the company at cost to the company of time
and material only.
B. Comply with the present and future rules and regulations of the FCC in
connection with and relating to the construction, operation and
maintenance of its cable system.
C. Education access channel. The company shall maintain one specially
designated channel for use by the Interboro School District and provide
at no cost a character generator for its exclusive use.
D. Local government access channel. The company shall maintain one
specially designated channel for Glenolden Borough municipal use at
the Borough Building or other place the Borough may designate and
provide at no cost a character generator and television monitor for their
exclusive use.
E. Public access/leased access channel. The company shall maintain at
least one specially designated, noncommercial public access/leased
access channel available on a first-come, nondiscriminatory basis. In
addition, other portions of its non-broadcast bandwidth, including
unused portions of the specially designated channels, shall be available
§ A165-43 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-44
160:586
§ A165-45. Installation of signal distribution facilities.
The company shall make cable service available, when permitted by the
property owner, to all residents in private housing in the Borough subject to
all provisions of this ordinance.
§ A165-46. Requests for special service.
The company must obtain a permit from the Borough to provide segments
of subscribers any specialized service that will not be available to all
subscribers. All requests shall demonstrate that the service is not contrary
to the public interest and will not affect the company's ability to deliver
service to other users and subscribers.
§ A165-47. Regulations of programming.
for leased uses. On at least one of the public access/leased channels,
priority shall be given to part-time users.
F. At no time shall the company monitor the viewing habits of its
customers without the express permission of said customers. Pursuant
to the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, the Cable Television
Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996 hereinafter referred to as the "Cable
Act," all personally identifiable information is used solely for the normal
business purpose of offering and rendering cable television service to
the customer. The company will not disclose personally identifiable
information without permission of the customer.
G. Make its best effort to carry on its system the signals of all stations
significantly viewed in Delaware County, Pennsylvania, these to include
all local network and education VHF stations and local UHF stations,
and in addition, no less than two distant commercial stations.
H. Continue to provide, without charge to the Borough, the company's
high-speed Internet access service at up to five locations within the
Borough Building. Such locations shall be determined by the Borough
Manager/Secretary.
I. Supply and install, at no cost to the customer, a closed-captioned device
when requested by the hearing impaired.
A. The Borough shall not prohibit or limit any program or any class or type
of program or otherwise control the communications or signals
transmitted by the company or impose discriminatory or preferential
fees in any manner that would tend to encourage or discourage
programming of any particular nature, directly or indirectly, and shall
not promulgate any regulation that would interfere with the right of
free speech by means of the company's provision of cable television
services.
§ A165-44 WATER § A165-47
160:587
§ A165-48. Continuation of service.
In the event of expiration, cancellation or transfer of the franchise, the
company shall be required to continue to operate the system until an
orderly change of operation is effectuated, and shall be subject to an
accounting for net earnings or losses during this interim period.
§ A165-49. Validity of franchise.
§ A165-50. Indemnification.
B. The company shall not prohibit or limit any program or class or type of
program presented over a leased channel or any channel made
available for public access or educational purposes.
A. The company was represented throughout the negotiations of the
franchise by its own attorneys and has had opportunity to consult with
its own attorneys about its rights and obligations regarding the
franchise. In consideration of the grant of the franchise to the company,
the company hereby waives any claim which it may have with respect to
the issuance of and/or the terms and conditions of the franchise
ordinance. In consideration of the grant of the franchise to the
company, the company also releases the Borough and any of its elected
officials, employees, representatives, agents, servants, including
attorneys, from any claims it may have, known or unknown; including,
without limitation, claims arising under Pennsylvania Law, the Cable
Act, the ordinance and Charter of the Borough of Glenolden and/or the
requirements of federal, state or municipal law, including the
Constitutions of the United States and of Pennsylvania. However, the
foregoing release shall not apply to any claims which the company may
have with respect to the terms and conditions of this ordinance where
substantially the same terms and conditions of other cable television
franchises have been held invalid by a binding and final judgment of the
United States or Pennsylvania Supreme Courts.
B. The company shall compensate the Borough Solicitor reasonable
attorney's fees for services rendered on behalf of the Borough in
connection with this ordinance up to a maximum of $5,000.
A. The Company shall indemnify and hold the Borough and its agents
harmless at all times during the term of this franchise from any and all
claims alleged to be caused by the Company's construction, installation,
operation or maintenance of any structure, equipment, wire or cable
authorized to be installed pursuant to the franchise or in the exercise of
any of its rights under this franchise. Upon receipt of notice in writing
from the Borough, the company shall at its own expense defend any
such actions or proceedings. Indemnified expenses shall include,
without limitation, all out-of-pocket expenses, such as reasonable
attorneys' fees; and
§ A165-47 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-50
160:588
(1) Requests for relief arising out of any claim for invasion of the right
of privacy for defamation of any person, firm or corporation; for the
violation of infringement of any copyright, trademark, trade name,
service mark or patent; or of any other right of any person or
corporation, excluding claims arising out of or relating to the
Borough's own programming and leased access; and
(2) Any and all claims arising out of the company's failure to comply
with the provisions of this franchise ordinance or any federal, state
or local law, ordinance or regulation applicable to the company or
the CATV System; and
(3) Any and all claims which the company may now or hereafter have
or claim to have against the Borough, its servants, agents,
attorneys, representatives, employees or officials, due to or arising
out of damage to any of the company's property or equipment,
including, without limitations, the resulting or consequential loss of
income, injury to reputation, or any other resulting or
consequential damages of any kind, caused by or resulting from
negligent acts or omissions of the Borough or any of its servants,
agents, attorneys, representatives, employees or officials; and
(4) Any and all disputes arising out of a claim wherein damages or
other relief is sought as a result of the Borough's cable
communications franchising procedure or as a result of the renewal
of the cable communications franchise, or as a result of the
Borough's award or failure to award a franchise to any other
person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity.
B. If suit be brought or threatened against the Borough, either
independently or jointly with the company, arising out of the company's
installation, construction, operation or maintenance of the cable
television system, or with any other person or municipality, the
company, upon notice given by the Borough, shall defend the Borough
at the cost of the company. If final judgment is obtained against the
Borough, either independently or jointly with the company or any other
defendants, the company shall indemnify the Borough and pay such
judgment with all costs and satisfy and discharge the same.
C. In order for the Borough to assert its rights to be indemnified, defended
or held harmless, the Borough must:
(1) Promptly notify the company of any claim or legal proceeding
which give rise to such right;
(2) The Borough shall afford the company the opportunity to
participate in and fully control any compromise, settlement or
other resolution or disposition of such claim or proceeding, unless,
however, the Borough, in its sole discretion, determines that its
interests cannot be represented in good faith by the company; and
§ A165-50 WATER § A165-50
160:589
(3) The Borough shall fully cooperate with the reasonable requests of
the company in its participation in, and control, compromise,
settlement or resolution or other disposition of such claim or
proceeding subject to Subsection C(2) above.
D. The Borough reserves the right to cooperate with the company and
participate in the defense of any litigation either through intervention
or otherwise. The company shall pay upon receipt of written demand
from the Borough all expenses incurred by the Borough in defending
itself with regard to any matters in this section. These expenses shall
include, but not be limited to, attorneys' fees and the reasonable value
of services (as determined by the Borough) rendered by the Borough or
any of its employees, officials, attorneys, servants, agents or
representatives.
E. The Borough is in no manner or means waiving any governmental
immunity it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials, servants,
attorneys, representatives and/or employees .
F. The company shall make no settlement in any matter identified above
without the Borough's written consent, which shall not be unreasonably
withheld. Failure to inform the Borough of settlement shall constitute a
breach of this franchise ordinance and the Borough may seek any
redress available to it against the company.
G. If the Borough awards any additional communications franchise in any
future franchise process to a firm other than the company, then the
company agrees that it will not bring, or cause to be brought, any
action, suit or other proceeding claiming damages, or seeking any other
relief against the Borough, its elected officials, officers, boards,
commissions, employees, representatives, servants, agents or attorneys
for any award of a franchise made in conformity with this ordinance,
Pennsylvania Law, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, Cable
Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992 and the
Telecommunications Act of 1996.
H. All rights of the Borough pursuant to indemnification, insurance, letter
of credit or performance bond(s), as provided for by this ordinance, are
in addition to all other rights the Borough may have under this
ordinance or any other ordinance, rule, regulation or law.
I. The Borough's exercise of or failure to exercise any rights pursuant to
any section of this ordinance shall not affect in any way the right of the
Borough subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other right of
the Borough under this ordinance or any other ordinance, rule,
regulation or law.
J. It is the purpose of this section to provide maximum indemnification to
the Borough under the terms and conditions expressed and, in the
event of a dispute, this section shall be construed (to the greatest extent
permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the Borough by
the company.
§ A165-50 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-51
160:590
§ A165-51. Special provisions.
In connection with its cable services and the terms and conditions of this
ordinance, the company shall, within 60 days after the effective date of this
ordinance, provide the Borough a one-time franchise grant in the amount of
$2,500.
§ A165-52. Amendment; severability.
§ A165-53. Terms and definitions.
For the purpose of this ordinance, all terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meanings set forth in the Cable Act unless the
context clearly indicates that another meaning is intended.
A. To the extent that the Federal Communications Commission shall
terminate controls in any area pertinent to this ordinance, this
ordinance may be amended by the Borough Council with the consent of
the company.
B. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or portion of this
ordinance is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court
of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate,
distinct and independent provision, and such holdings shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions hereof.
§ A165-51 WATER § A165-53
160:591
Chapter A166
PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Affirmative action — See Ch. 4.
Drug-free workplace policy — See Ch. 11.
Retirement benefits and pensions — See Ch.
31.
Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 34.
Smoking policy — See Ch. 35.
Social Security — See Ch. 36.
§ A165-53 GLENOLDEN CODE § A165-53
A166:592
ARTICLE I
Rules and Regulations for Maintenance Employees
[Adopted 2-10-1983 by Res. No. 3-83]
§ A166-1. Hours; lunch; overtime; holidays, sick days and personal
days.
§ A166-2. Clothing.
§ A166-3. Street and safety equipment.
Warning signals and barricades must be used while in the process of doing
any work in the street or any work that presents a hazardous condition.
§ A166-4. Tools and equipment.
A. Hours shall be as follows: 7:30 a.m. to 4:00 p.m.; five days a week, eight
hours per day, forty-hour week.
B. Lunch shall be as follows: 12:00 noon to 12:30 p.m.; 1/2 hour.
C. Overtime. Overtime shall be paid for over eight hours per day and over
40 hours per week.
D. Holidays, sick time and personal days shall be as follows:
(1) Ten holidays as per posted yearly schedule.
(2) Three personal days, with Superintendent's approval.
(3) Twelve sick days per year, at one day per month, accumulative to
36 days (doctor's certificate mandatory after being off work three
consecutive days).
A. Steel-toe shoes must be worn (provided by individual employee).
B. Hard hats must be worn (provided by employer).
C. Shorts and/or cut-offs may not be worn at any time.
D. Shirts must be worn at all times.
E. T-shirts will be acceptable during the hot weather.
A. All tools and equipment must be cleaned and stored at the end of the
work shift.
B. Borough vehicles and/or equipment are not to leave the Borough unless
on Borough business.
C. Permission to use Borough vehicles and/or equipment must be a
Council decision.
§ A166-1 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-5
A166:593
§ A166-5. Work log.
A daily work log must be maintained at all times.
§ A166-6. Termination of employment.
Sick time and personal days are not wages on termination of employment.
§ A166-7. Abuse of privileges.
Abuse of privileges are subject to disciplinary action.
§ A166-5 GLENOLDEN CODE § A166-7
A166:594
ARTICLE II
Employment of Nonuniformed Personnel
[Adopted 2-10-1983 by Res. No. 4-83]
§ A166-8. Appointment by Borough Council; prorating of salary.
§ A166-9. Hours of employment; wage description; premium time.
A. Appointment.
(1) The Borough Council may appoint and employ a person to be
known as "Borough Secretary," whose salary shall be determined at
the start of his or her employment.
(2) The Borough Council may appoint and employ up to four persons to
be known as "clerks," whose salaries shall be determined at the
start of their employment. [Amended 1-6-1986 by Res. No.
3-86]
(3) The Borough Council may appoint and employ one person to be
known as the "Code Enforcement Officer," whose salary shall be
determined at the start of his or her employment.
(4) The Borough Council may appoint and employ up to four persons to
be known as "maintenance men" for the Borough of Glenolden. One
of these persons shall be designated as "Superintendent;" one
person shall be designated "First Assistant Superintendent;" and
the third and fourth persons shall be designated as "general
maintenance persons." The salaries for these four persons shall be
determined at the start of their employment.
(5) The Borough Council may employ part-time persons for any
necessary period of time, at the discretion of the Borough Council.
The salaries of said persons shall be established by the Borough
Council, but shall not be less than the federal minimum wage. Parttime
employees will receive no benefits other than their salaries.
[Amended 1-6-1986 by Res. No. 3-86]
B. The yearly salary for each of the above positions is to be prorated by the
hour in § A166-9A.
A. With regard to the positions designated in § A166-8 above, the hours of
employment shall be as set forth below:
(1) Hours of employment.
(a) Code Enforcement Officer: 36 hours.
(b) Secretary and clerks: 35 hours.
(c) Maintenance Department: 40 hours.
§ A166-8 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-9
A166:595
§ A166-10. Benefits.
In addition to the compensation set forth in § A166-9 above, all full-time
nonuniformed employees will be entitled to:
B. Wage description. Straight-time pay will be paid for the first eight hours
of work per day, and time and a half shall be paid for hours worked after
the first eight hours in any given day.
C. In addition to regular holiday pay, premium time at the rate of 1 1/2
times the normal hourly rate shall be paid for work performed on a paid
holiday.
A. Vacation time:
(1) One week after one year of service (including the probationary
period);
(2) Two weeks for employees with two through 10 years of service.
(3) Three weeks for employees with 11 through 20 years of service.
(4) Four weeks after 20 years of service. Four weeks is the maximum
vacation period for any full-time nonuniformed employee of the
Borough of Glenolden.
B. Holidays: as determined by Borough Council.
C. Personal days: as determined by Borough Council.
D. Sick time: 12 days per year up to a maximum of 36 accumulated days. A
doctor's certificate is mandatory for employees who miss work due to
illness for more than three days.
E. Sick days and personal days: Employees will not be compensated for
unused sick days and/or personal days upon termination of their
employment with the Borough.
F. Hospitalization: Nonuniformed full-time employees of the Borough will
be entitled to Blue Cross, Blue Shield, Major Medical, dental, vision and
prescription plans as selected by Borough Council.
G. Death benefit. Each eligible employee will be covered by a death benefit
of $10,000, with the premium paid by the Borough. The Borough shall
retain ownership of the policy. At retirement, an employee may elect to
continue the policy by agreeing to pay the designated premium.
§ A166-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § A166-10
A166:596
ARTICLE III
Sexual Harassment
[Adopted 3-16-1999 by Res. No. 3-99, approved 3-16-1999]
§ A166-11. Purpose; applicability.
§ A166-12. Policy.
§ A166-13. Definitions.
A. All employees should be able to enjoy a work environment free from all
forms of discrimination, including sexual harassment.
B. Sexual harassment is a form of misconduct that undermines the
integrity of employment relationships. No employee, either male of
female, should be subject to unsolicited and unwelcome sexual
overtures or conduct, either verbal or physical.
C. Sexual harassment does not refer to occasional compliments of a
socially acceptable nature. It refers to behavior that is not welcome,
that is personally offensive, that lowers morale and that, therefore,
interferes with work effectiveness.
A. Harassment on the basis of sex is a discriminatory practice which
violates Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. It is the policy of the
Borough of Glenolden that no person shall threaten or insinuate, either
explicitly or implicitly, that an employee's refusal to submit to sexual
advances will adversely affect the employee's employment, evaluation,
wages, advancement, assigned duties, shifts or any other condition of
employment or career development.
B. It is the policy of the Borough of Glenolden that all employees are
entitled to work in an environment free from all forms of illegal
discrimination, including that which is based upon a person's sex. Aside
from being illegal, sexual harassment undermines the integrity of
individual work relationships and damages the morale of the entire
workforce. Accordingly, any practice or activity which constitutes
sexual harassment is strictly forbidden within the Borough of
Glenolden's workplaces.
A. "Sexual harassment" is defined as any repeated, deliberate, unsolicited
and unwelcome comments, gestures, conduct or physical contact of a
sexual nature.
(1) To which an employee is forced to acquiesce as a condition of the
employee's receipt of any benefit, including but not limited to
hiring, compensation, continuation of employment, promotion or
advancement; or
§ A166-11 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-13
A166:597
§ A166-14. Procedure for filing and resolving complaints.
(2) Which has the purpose or effect of unreasonably interfering with an
employee's work performance or creating an intimidating, hostile
or offensive work environment.
B. Any employee who believes that he or she has been the subject of
sexual harassment should report the alleged charge immediately in
accordance with the following procedure. (All information disclosed in
the procedure will be held in strictest confidence and will only be
disclosed on a need-to-know basis in order to investigate and resolve
the matter.)
A. The individual alleging sexual harassment will report the incident to the
Borough Manager/Secretary of the Borough of Glenolden and will be
interviewed to discuss the nature of the allegations.
B. If accusations are made to any other person, the matter must be
immediately directed to the Borough Manager/Secretary of the
Borough of Glenolden. The individual alleging sexual harassment will
be informed that in order to pursue the complaint he/she must complete
a form specifically outlining the nature of the complaint. If the
complainant refuses to complete the form, the matter cannot be further
investigated by the Borough Manger/Secretary unless circumstances
clearly indicate otherwise. Upon receipt of the written complaint, the
Borough Manager/Secretary, the Solicitor and the President of the
Council are to be notified.
C. Within 48 hours after receiving the complaint in writing, the alleged
harasser will be called to the Borough Manager/Secretary, given a copy
of the completed complaint and will be informed of the seriousness of
the allegations. The Borough Manager/Secretary will review with the
alleged harasser the complete policy and indicate that a charge of
sexual harassment has been made. The alleged harasser will then have
the opportunity to refute the allegation by responding to the complaint
form.
D. The Borough Manager/Secretary will meet with the alleged harasser
and discuss the seriousness of the allegation. If the evidence warrants
it, the alleged harasser will be suspended without pay for a period not
to exceed two weeks, pending the complete investigation.
E. During the two-week suspension period, a fact-finding conference will
convene comprised of an impartial panel consisting of the Borough
Manger/Secretary of the Borough of Glenolden, the President of
Council of the Borough of Glenolden and the Solicitor. The
determination of the action to be taken will be based on the facts on a
case-by-case basis, including termination.
F. During the fact-finding conference, any investigative reports of the
Borough Manager/Secretary and/or Solicitor of the Borough of
§ A166-13 GLENOLDEN CODE § A166-14
A166:598
§ A166-15. Publication.
This policy shall be included in every employee's first paycheck. Current
employees shall sign a copy of this policy with 30 days of distribution.
Further, each new employee shall receive and sign a copy of the policy prior
to beginning employment.
Glenolden will be presented. The accused employee shall be entitled to
attend the fact-finding conference and testify in his or her own behalf
and shall be entitled to confront and cross-examine the employee who
filed the complaint. The accused employee shall also be empowered to
call witnesses in his or her own behalf and to introduce evidence which
bears upon the issues presented by the complaint and the investigative
report. Likewise, the complainant is entitled to present a list of
witnesses to testify in his or her own behalf and to introduce evidence
which bears upon the issues presented by the complaint and
investigative report.
G. The Borough Manager/Secretary and/or Solicitor will document the
allegation, findings and actions taken during the fact-finding
conference. Such documentation will be retained by the Borough
Manager/Secretary in a separate file from the normal personnel files of
the individuals involved. Should either of the parties request it, a copy
of the above documentation shall be placed in his or her personnel file.
H. If allegations prove not to constitute sexual harassment, the alleged
harasser will return to work with pay retroactive to day of suspension.
False accusations will result in severe disciplinary action up to and
including termination.
I. Both the charging party and the accused employee will be entitled to
notice of the outcome and decision of the fact-finding conference and
investigation.
J. No person filing the complaint under this executive regulation shall be
subjected to retribution for doing so unless it is discovered that such
accusations were false and may result in severe disciplinary action up
to and including termination.
§ A166-14 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-15
A166:599

ARTICLE IV
Hiring Part-Time Police Officers
[Adopted 9-18-2001 by Res. No. 4-2001]
§ A166-16. Civil Service Commission assistance.
The Glenolden Civil Service Commission shall assist in the hiring process
of part-time officers similar to but as modified in the attached policy and
attached rules and regulations.115
§ A166-17. Civil service nonapplicability.
Successful candidates hired as part-time officers would not be covered by
civil service tenure, nor are they covered by any civil service acts.
§ A166-18. Waivers.
Candidates would be required to sign a waiver (returned with application)
declaring that they understand and accept the fact that they would be
casual employees and do not have civil service coverage as a part-time
police officer.
§ A166-19. Procedures; qualifications.
Attached hereto are the procedures, qualifications and examinations and
investigations policy, which will be followed in the hiring process for parttime
police officers.
115. Editor's Note: Said policy, rules and regulations are on file in the Borough offices.
§ A166-16 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-19
A166:601

ARTICLE V
Affirmative Action
[Adopted 7-21-1998 by Res. No. 6-98, approved 7-21-1998]
§ A166-20. Adoption of program.
A. The Borough Manager shall assume the responsibility of coordinating
all implementing activities as Affirmative Action Officer.
B. Said Borough Manager shall study periodically all existing job
descriptions, required job classifications, characteristics of employees
filling said positions and salary guides for any discrimination,
inadvertent or otherwise, that might exist.
C. It shall be the policy of the Council for the Borough of Glenolden not to
discriminate on the basis of race, color, religious creed, national origin,
sex, disability or age in its programs, activities or employment as
employed by Title VI, Title IX, Section 504, and the Americans With
Disabilities Act (ADA).
D. In accordance with the existing state and federal laws, the Borough of
Glenolden will employ qualified personnel and otherwise qualified
disabled persons for all positions without regard to race, creed, color,
sex, age, religion, national origin or disability. Selection of candidates
for positions will be made upon the basis of demonstrated capability,
competence and appropriate experience.
§ A166-20 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-20
A166:603

ARTICLE VI
Drug-Free Workplace Policy
[Adopted 7-21-1998 by Res. No. 7-98, approved 7-21-1998]
§ A166-21. Definitions.
As used in this resolution, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CONVICTION — Finding of guilt (including a plea of nolo contendere) or
imposition of sentence, or both, by any judicial body charged with the
responsibility to determine violations of the federal or state criminal drug
statute. An employee convicted of delivery of a controlled substance or
convicted of possession of a controlled substance shall be terminated from
his/her employment with the Borough.
CRIMINAL DRUG STATUTE — A federal or nonfederal criminal statute
involving the manufacture, distribution, dispensing, use or possession of
any controlled substance.
DRUG-FREE WORKPLACE — The site for the performance of work at which
employees are prohibited from engaging in the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, possession or use of a controlled substance.
DRUGS — For purposes of this policy, "drugs" shall be defined as those
outlined in the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and Cosmetic Act.116
§ A166-22. Delegation of responsibility.
A. A statement notifying employees that the unlawful manufacture,
distribution, dispensing, possessing or use of a controlled substance is
prohibited in the employees' workplace shall be provided by the
Borough Manager and shall specify the actions that will be taken
against the employee for violation of this policy.
B. The Council requires that each employee notify the Borough of any
criminal conviction for a violation occurring in the workplace no later
than five days after such conviction.
C. The Council shall be responsible for taking one of the following actions
within 30 days of receiving notice with respect to any convicted
employee:
(1) The Council shall take appropriate personnel action against such
an employee, up to and including termination; and
(2) Require the employee to participate satisfactorily in a drug abuse
assistance or rehabilitation program approved for such purposes
by a federal, state or local health, law enforcement or other
appropriate agency.
116. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 780-102.
§ A166-21 PERSONNEL AND EMPLOYMENT POLICIES § A166-22
A166:605
D. In establishing a drug-free awareness program, the Borough Manager
shall inform employees about:
(1) The dangers of drug abuse in the workplace;
(2) The Borough's policy of maintaining a drug-free workplace;
(3) The availability of drug counseling, drug rehabilitation and
employee assistance programs; and
(4) The penalties that may be imposed upon employees for drug abuse
violations occurring in the workplace.
E. The Borough shall make a good faith effort to continue to maintain a
drug-free workplace through the implementation of this policy.
§ A166-22 GLENOLDEN CODE § A166-22
A166:606
Chapter A167
INVESTMENT POLICY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Investments — See Ch. 17. Retirement benefits and pensions — See Ch.
31.
§ A166-22 INVESTMENT POLICY § A166-22
A167:607

ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ A167-1. Purpose.
The purpose of the Borough of Glenolden Trust Fund Investment Policy
("policy") is to define and set forth the policies, objectives and guidelines
for the oversight and monitoring of investment assets of the Police and Civil
Employees Pension Funds.
§ A167-2. Background.
§ A167-3. Responsibilities.
A. The Borough of Glenolden has two separate pension plans: the Police
Pension Fund ("Police Fund") and Civil Employees Pension Fund ("Civil
Fund"), established on November 12, 1945. The investments of the two
Borough-administered pension plans ("plans") are monitored by the
Borough Pension Committee ("Pension Board") members, under the
direction of Borough Council ("Council"). Members of the Pension
Board are appointed by Council. The plans are separately governed by
the Pension Board as set forth by various Acts of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, including but not limited to Act 205 (known as the
"Municipal Pension Plan Funding Standard and Recovery Act"117);
Chapter 73, relating to fiduciary investments, of the Act of June 30,
1972, P.L. 508, No. 164, (known as the "Probate, Estates and
Fiduciaries Code"118); and other laws as may be amended from time to
time.
B. As of December 31, 1997, the two Borough-administered pension plans
cover employees in the following manner:
Active Retired
Police 7 5
Civil 7 4
Total 14 9
A. The Pension Board has responsibility for the following with respect to
investment policy:
(1) Establishing overall financial objectives and an investment policy.
(2) Selecting one or more qualified investment managers [as defined
by Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)] or mutual
funds ["investment manger(s)"].
(3) Monitoring performance of fund managers to assure that objectives
are met and that policy and guidelines are followed.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 895.101 et seq.
118. Editor's Note: See 20 Pa. C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ A167-1 INVESTMENT POLICY § A167-3
A167:609
§ A167-4. Objectives.
(4) Taking appropriate action if objectives are not met or if policy and
guidelines are not followed.
B. The investment manager(s) will be responsible for asset management
including the investment strategy and security section.
A. The overall objectives of the combined plan assets are:
(1) To meet all objectives for the payment of all future benefits to its
retirees, beneficiaries, and other plan participants.
(2) To enhance, as well as preserve, the plan assets.
(3) To comply with all legislation affecting these plans.
B. For competitive purposes, the Pension Board will evaluate results over
a full market cycle (generally three to five years), and these results shall
be considered relative to funds with comparable objectives. Total return
shall be measured by the performance of all assets, whether invested in
equity or fixed income securities or liquid reserves, and will include
interest as well as realized and unrealized investment gains and losses.
C. Performance objectives will include, but will not be limited to, the
following criteria:
(1) Primarily, the total return of the entire fund will be expected to
generate a premium over current actuarial assumptions.
(2) Secondarily, the United States equity portion of the account will be
expected to generate a premium over and above the S&P 500
composite index (with dividends reinvested). The United States
fixed income portion of the account will be expected to generate
returns equal to or greater than the Shearson Lehman
Intermediate Government/Corporate Bond Index.
§ A167-3 GLENOLDEN CODE § A167-4
A167:610
ARTICLE II
Investment Guidelines
§ A167-5. Asset allocations
§ A167-6. Asset type.
A. Asset mix defines the distribution of assets managed by the investment
manager(s) according to the percent of the portfolio invested in equity
and fixed income securities and liquid reserves.
B. Method of allocation.
(1) The Pension Board delegates the function of day-to-day (tactical)
asset allocation to the investment manager(s) to allocate the plan
assets among equities (common stock), fixed income (bonds) and
liquid reserves (cash). In doing so, the investment manager(s)
should strive to both preserve principal and achieve long-term
appreciation of the plan assets. The Pension Board understands
that varying overall market conditions will, and should, cause the
investment manager(s) to place greater emphasis on either the
preservation of principal or capital appreciation at certain times. It
is the philosophy of the Pension Board that the following long-term
strategic asset allocation should be maintained:
(a) Police:
[1] Sixty percent equity.
[2] Forty percent fixed income.
(b) Civil:
[1] Sixty percent equity.
[2] Forty percent fixed income.
(2) The equity portion of any of the plans should not be allowed to
exceed 70% of the plan assets.
A. In order to provide the investment manager(s) with freedom to invest in
various types of assets, the following list of assets are expressly
approved:
Equity Cash Equivalents
Common stocks United States treasury bills
Convertible securities Commercial paper repurchase
agreements
Fixed Cash Equivalents
Preferred stocks Certificates of deposit
Corporate bonds Money market funds
§ A167-5 INVESTMENT POLICY § A167-6
A167:611
§ A167-7. Diversification.
In order to minimize the risk of large losses in individual security positions,
the funds will be constructed by the investment manager(s) to attain
prudent diversification in equity, fixed income and liquid reserve
investments. The following guidelines apply:
United States Government
securities
B. Assets selected for the portfolios must have a readily ascertainable
market value and must be readily marketable.
A. Equity.
(1) The manager(s) should maintain the equity portion of the portfolio
at a risk level roughly equivalent to that of the equity market as a
whole. Equity holdings may be selected from the New York,
American and Regional Stock Exchanges or the NASDAQ markets.
These holdings must represent companies meeting a minimum
capitalization requirement of $500mm with high market liquidity.
The manager(s) is prohibited from investing in private placements,
letter stock, and options (with the exception of writing covered
calls) or from engaging in short sales, margin transactions or other
specialized investment activities. It is expected that no assets will
be invested in securities whose issuers have filed a petition for
bankruptcy.
(2) The above guidelines give the manager(s) full responsibility for
security selection and diversification, subject to a maximum 10%
commitment of the funds market value for an individual security
and 20% for a particular industry. The manager(s) also will have full
discretion over turnover and the allocation of equity holdings
among selected securities and industry groups, within the limits
described above.
B. Fixed income.
(1) Investments in securities of a single issuer (with the exception of
the United States Government and its agencies) must not exceed
5% of the fund market value.
(2) Only corporate debt issues that meet or exceed a credit rating of A
from Standard & Poor's and/or an A rating from Moody's may be
purchased.
(3) Preferred stocks must be rated A or better by Moody's and/or
Standard & Poor's at the time of purchase.
(4) The manager(s) is prohibited from investing in private placements
and from speculating in fixed income or interest rate futures.
§ A167-6 GLENOLDEN CODE § A167-7
A167:612
§ A167-8. Pension fund operations.
The pension fund currently uses Legg Mason as custodian of fund assets.
The custodian provides the following services:
Within the above restrictions, the manager(s) has complete control
over the timing and selection of fixed income securities.
C. Cash and equivalents. All such assets must represent maturities of one
year or less at time of purchase. Commercial paper assets must be
rated A-1 or P-1 by Standard & Poor's and Moody's, respectively. The
manager(s) may not purchase short-term financial instruments
considered to contain speculative characteristics (uncertainty of
principal and/or interest). The manager(s) may not invest more than 5%
of the plan's market value in the obligation of a single issuer, with the
exception of the United States Government and its agencies.
Uninvested cash reserves should be kept to minimum levels. Within the
limitations mentioned above, the manager(s) has complete authority to
allocate and select short-term cash and equivalent securities. It is the
general practice of the plans to keep uninvested cash in a money
market fund.
D. Other assets. The manager(s) will not purchase assets other than those
mentioned above without written consent. The manager(s) is strictly
prohibited from investing in options or futures contracts (except within
the above guidelines). Securities of foreign companies traded on
foreign stock exchanges may be purchased only with written
permission from the Pension Board. Securities of foreign companies
traded as American depository receipts (ADRs) are as permissible as
any other United States security mentioned above. Investments not
specifically addressed by this statement are forbidden without written
consent from the Pension Board. All assets must have a readily
ascertainable market value.
A. Hold all securities delivered to it, and to this end is authorized to
register them in the name of the nominee, hold them in bearer form or
book entry form or to deposit them in a depository or clearing
corporation.
B. Buy, sell, receive or deliver securities as directed.
C. Collect all income payable on the securities held by it. Dividends and
capital gains will be directly reinvested into specified mutual funds.
D. Make disbursements and pay benefits as directed.
E. Maintain a complete set of records of securities held, including all
purchases and sales thereof.
F. Prepare and distribute such other order statements as may be agreed
upon with the Pension Board.
§ A167-7 INVESTMENT POLICY § A167-9
A167:613
§ A167-9. Communications.
A. The funds expect an open and constant line of communication between
the Pension Board and Legg Mason. The frequency of the
communication between the parties is key to the appropriate
management of the fund. The Pension Board assumes the responsibility
of reporting to Legg Mason any significant changes in the assessment
of the income requirement, risk-taking capabilities or other vital
characteristics concerning the management of the fund.
B. Recognizing the dynamic nature of the underlying markets and the
securities in which the fund is investing, it will be assumed that the
responsibility of Legg Mason is to report to the Pension Board any
suggestions or alterations in these guidelines or specific contract
considerations which may be desirable for the achievement of greater
satisfactory investment results. Revisions will be considered from time
to time.
C. To aid the communications process, Legg Mason will be required to
report to the Pension Board. The reports shall include:
(1) A quarterly summary of all transactions.
(2) A quarterly statement of asset values at cost and market.
(3) Any explanation of contemplated major shifts in investment
strategy or manager style before implementation as to the fund
portfolios.
(4) An explanation of major changes in organization of the personnel
responsible for the development/management of the advisor's
investment policy and/or associated with the fund's account.
D. In addition to these written reports, Legg Mason is obligated to make
periodic personal appearances before the Pension Board.
§ A167-9 GLENOLDEN CODE § A167-9
A167:614
ARTICLE III
Performance Review; Voting
§ A167-10. Policy performance review.
§ A167-11. Proxy voting.
The Pension Board has chosen mutual funds for the investments of the
plans. Therefore, the mutual fund manager will be responsible for proxy
voting.
A. This Investment Policy Statement will be reviewed by the Pension Board
on an annual basis, but can be modified by the Pension Board at any
time.
B. Monthly, the Pension Board will be provided with a portfolio status
report by Legg Mason. The Trustees will meet with Legg Mason
annually, at a minimum. The investment manager(s) will make
presentations that consist of:
(1) Past and prospective changes in portfolio structure.
(2) Past and prospective changes in investment philosophy and
investment strategy.
(3) Historical performance against the objectives set forth in this
document.
(4) Economic market analyses.
(5) Mutual fund activity.
(6) Portfolio appraisals and specific security listings.
C. Additionally, the Pension Board will review investment results quarterly.
The review of the investment results will focus on:
(1) Adherence to investment policies and guidelines.
(2) Comparison of results against funds using similar strategies (in
terms of the stock/bond ratio, diversification, income and
volatility).
(3) Comparison of equity, fixed-income and other investment vehicle
results against similarly structured funds.
§ A167-10 INVESTMENT POLICY § A167-11
A167:615
Chapter A168
OVERHEAD SIGNS AND BANNERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 138.
§ A168-1. Applicability.
The provisions of this resolution shall apply to all overhead signs and
banners in Glenolden Borough, and duly issued permits shall constitute the
inclusion of the permitted sign under the provisions of this resolution.
§ A168-2. Issuance of permits.
Permits for overhead signs and banners shall be issued by the Borough
Zoning Officer only in accord with this resolution and all applicable zoning
requirements.
§ A168-3. Sign standards and regulations.
As required by Department119 policy, overhead signs and banners shall
conform to the following, and permits for such signs shall include the
information necessary to document compliance with the same:
A. Location: SR number and segment/offset.
B. Vertical clearance above the roadway: minimum of 17 feet six inches.
C. Size of banner: as specified on permit.
D. Description of activity: must constitute a national, state, regional or
local function or nonprofit activity sponsored by a political subdivision
or agency thereof, or nonprofit organization recognized by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
E. Message: no more than 20% of the message shall relate to naming or
advertising a commercial product, enterprise, business or company
regardless of whether such entity is sponsoring the activity or banner
installation.
F. Duration of display: approximate dates of installation or removal; not to
exceed 21 days.
G. The banner will be removed within five days or less from the ending
date of the event for which the banner was displayed.
119. Editor's Note: References to "Department" refer to the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
§ A167-11 GLENOLDEN CODE § A168-3
A168:616
§ A168-4. Adherence to requirements.
The dates of installation, duration and removal, as well as the size, the
message, the event and/or the organization will vary, but in all cases the
requirements of this resolution will be satisfied.
§ A168-5. Filing of permits with Department of Transportation.
Upon the issuance of any permit pursuant to this resolution, the Borough
Zoning Officer shall promptly forward a copy of the permit to the District
Office of the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
§ A168-6. Responsibility of applicant; liability for damages.
By applying for a permit, the applicant assumes full responsibility for
erecting, maintaining and removing any such sign or banner and all liability
for damages occurring to any person or property arising from any act of
omission associated with the sign or banner, and a statement to that effect
shall be included on the application for the permit.
Chapter A169
(RESERVED)
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2022
1-8-2005 Sewers: fat, oils and
grease
Ch. 135, Art. V
Ord. No.
2023
12-28-2004 Sewer rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2024
12-28-2004 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
H. The banner shall be installed under the supervision and control of the
Borough on permanent cables at locations approved by and in accord
with specifications provided by the Borough.
I. Traffic control shall be performed in accord with the most current
Department Publication 203.
§ A168-3 OVERHEAD SIGNS AND BANNERS § DL-1
A168:617
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2025
12-28-2004 2005 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2026
12-28-2004 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2027
12-28-2004 Public health
amendment
NCM
Ord. No.
2028
12-28-2004 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2029
12-28-2004 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 93
Ord. No.
2030
2-15-2005 Emergency and
municipal services tax
Ch. 148, Art. V
Ord. No.
2031
2-15-2005 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 93
Ord. No.
2032
3-15-2005 Stormwater
management
See Ch. 143A
Ord. No.
2033
5-24-2005 Smoking policy Ch. 35
Ord. No.
2034
12-20-2005 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2035
12-20-2005 Sewer rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2036
12-20-2005 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2037
12-20-2005 2006 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2038
12-20-2005 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2039
General obligation
note
NCM
Ord. No.
2040
9-19-2006 Parks and Recreation
Board
Ch. 24
Ord. No.
2041
12-19-2006 2007 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2042
12-19-2006 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2043
12-19-2006 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
§ DL-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § DL-1
A168:618
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2044
12-19-2006 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2045
12-19-2006 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2046
5-22-2007 Sex offender residency
restrictions
Ch. 136
Ord. No.
2047
General obligation
note
NCM
Ord. No.
2048
9-18-2007 Loitering Ch. 106
Ord. No.
2049
9-18-2007 Retirement benefits
and pensions:
nonuniformed full-time
employees pension
fund amendment
Ch. 31, Part 1
Ord. No.
2050 11-20-2007
Local services tax Ch. 148, Art. V
Ord. No.
2051
12-18-2007 2008 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2052
12-18-2007 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2053
12-18-2007 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2054
12-18-2007 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2055
12-18-2007 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2056
General obligation
note
NCM
Ord. No.
2057
5-20-2008 Parks amendment Ch. 118
Ord. No.
2058
5-20-2008 Zoning amendment Ch. 162
Ord. No.
2059
5-20-2008 Dumpsters and
containers
Ch. 68A
§ DL-1 OVERHEAD SIGNS AND BANNERS § DL-1
A168:619
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2060
5-20-2008 Streets and sidewalks:
building materials in
highway amendment;
sidewalk construction
amendment; utility
installations
amendment; sidewalk
installation by
property owners
amendment; openings
in state highway
extensions
amendment;
excavations in streets
amendment
Ch. 144, Arts. I, II,
III, IV, V and VII
Ord. No.
2061
11-18-2008 Access to public
records
Ch. 30, Art. I
Ord. No.
2062
12-16-2008 2009 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2063
12-16-2008 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2064
12-16-2008 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2065
12-16-2008 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2066
12-16-2008 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2067
11-17-2009 Peddling and soliciting
amendment
Ch. 124
Ord. No.
2068
11-17-2009 Zoning amendment Ch. 162
Ord. No.
2069
11-17-2009 Streets and sidewalks:
sidewalk construction
amendment
Ch. 144, Art. II
Ord. No.
2070
12-15-2009 2010 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2071
12-15-2009 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2072
12-15-2009 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
§ DL-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § DL-1
A168:620
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2073
12-15-2009 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2074
12-15-2009 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2075
7-20-2010 Retirement benefits
and pensions: Police
Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31, Part 3
Ord. No.
2076
12-21-2010 2011 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2077
12-21-2010 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2078
12-21-2010 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2079
12-21-2010 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2080
12-21-2010 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2081
8-16-2011 Housing standards
amendment
Ch. 93
Ord. No.
2082
10-18-2011 General obligation
note
NCM
Ord. No.
2083
12-20-2011 2012 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2084
12-20-2011 Per capita tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. II
Ord. No.
2085
12-20-2011 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2086
12-20-2011 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2087
12-20-2011 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2088
5-15-2012 Wastewater treatment Ch. 159
Ord. No.
2089
10-16-2012 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
2090
11-20-2012 Floodplain
management
Superseded by Ord.
No. 2105
Ord. No.
2091
12-18-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
§ DL-1 OVERHEAD SIGNS AND BANNERS § DL-1
A168:621
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2092
12-18-2012 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2093
12-18-2012 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2094
12-18-2012 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2095
3-19-2013 Parking amendment Ch. 117
Ord. No.
2096
12-17-2013 2014 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2097
12-17-2013 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2098
12-17-2013 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2099
12-17-2013 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2100
12-16-2014 2015 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2101
12-16-2014 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2102
12-16-2014 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2103
12-16-2014 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2104
2-17-2015 RCN Telecom Services
of Philadelphia cable
television franchise
amendment
Ch. A165, Art. II
Ord. No.
2105
8-18-2015 Floodplain
management
Ch. 84
Ord. No.
2106
12-15-2015 2016 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2107
12-15-2015 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2108
12-15-2015 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2109
12-15-2015 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
§ DL-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § DL-1
A168:622
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2110
5-17-2016 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: municipal solid
waste amendment
Ch. 86, Art. V
Ord. No.
2111
12-20-2016 2017 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2112
12-20-2016 Realty transfer tax
reenactment
See Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2113
12-20-2016 Municipal garbage
collection amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2114
12-20-2016 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2115
2-21-2017 Retirement pensions
and benefits: Police
Pension Fund
amendment
Ch. 31, Part 3
Ord. No.
2116
9-19-2017 Fences amendment Ch. 71
Ord. No.
2117
11-21-2017 Intermunicipal
agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
2118
12-19-2017 2018 tax rate NCM
Ord. No.
2119
12-19-2017 Taxation: realty
transfer tax
amendment
Ch. 148, Art. I
Ord. No.
2120
12-19-2017 Garbage, rubbish and
refuse: municipal
garbage collection
amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2121
12-19-2017 Sewers: rents and
charges amendment
Ch. 135, Art. IV
Ord. No.
2122
2-20-2018 Intermunicipal
Agreement
NCM
Ord. No.
545-2018
8-21-2018 Noise Amendment Ch. 109
Ord. No.
581-2018
8-21-2018 Brush, Grass and
Weeds Amendment
Ch. 51
Ord. No.
2123
11-20-2018 Retirement Benefits
and Pensions: Police
Pension Fund
Amendment
Ch. 31, Pt. 3
§ DL-1 OVERHEAD SIGNS AND BANNERS § DL-1
A168:623
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
Ord. No.
2124
12-18-2018 2019 Tax Rate NCM
Ord. No.
2125
12-18-2018 2019 Tax Levy NCM
Ord. No.
2126
12-18-2018 Garbage, Rubbish and
Refuse: Municipal
Garbage Collection
Amendment
Ch. 86, Art. I
Ord. No.
2127
12-18-2018 Sewers Amendment Ch. 135
Ord. No.
2128
1-15-2019 Parking Amendment Ch. 117
Ord. No.
2129
1-15-2019 Animals: Dog Control
Amendment
Ch. 43, Art. I
Enactment
Adoption
Date Subject DispositionSupp. No.
Ord. No.
2130
4-19-2019 Duties of Firemen
Amendment
Ch. 14 17
Ord. No.
2131
11-19-2019 Certificates of
Occupancy
Ch. 61 17
Ord. No.
2132
12-17-2019 Tax Rate NCM 17
Ord. No.
2133
12-17-2019 Tax Levy NCM 17
Ord. No.
2134
12-17-2019 Garbage, Rubbish
and Refuse
Amendment
Ch. 86 17
Ord. No.
2135
12-17-2019 Sewers Amendment Ch. 135 17
§ DL-1 GLENOLDEN CODE § DL-1
A168:624