PART I: ADMINISTRATIVE LEGISLATION
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 725]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 3301.5(a) to (d) of the Borough Code [53 P.S.
§ 48301.5(a) to (d)], the codification of a complete body of legislation for
the Borough of Girard, County of Erie, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
revised, codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by
General Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 425, together with an
Appendix, are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single
ordinance of the Borough of Girard, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the Borough of Girard," hereinafter referred to
as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of
the prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued
in full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by
the Borough Council of the Borough of Girard, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Girard which is not in conflict with the
provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 9-17-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 GIRARD CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
S. Any legislation pertaining to telephone, gas, electric and cable
franchise agreements.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code.1 These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6B, the parts and sections that were added,
amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code by a
footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: [Amended (added, deleted) 1-21-2013 by Ord. No.
725]. Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.
C. Outdated statutory references have been updated accordingly.
D. Nomenclature. Throughout the Code, references to the following
agencies or officials have been updated as indicated:
(1) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" and "District Justice"
are changed to "Magisterial District Judge."
(2) "Department of Environmental Resources" and "DER" are changed
to "Department of Environmental Protection" and "DEP."
(3) "Department of Community Affairs" and "DCA" are changed to
"Department of Community and Economic Development" and
"DCED."
(4) "Soil Conservation Service" and "SCS" are changed to "Natural
Resources Conservation Service" and "NRCS."
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
§ 1-6 GIRARD CODE § 1-9
1:6
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code, or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after January 21, 2013.
§ 1-14 GIRARD CODE § 1-15
1:8
Chapter 12
CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
§ 12-1. Establishment.
There is hereby established a Commission to be known as the "Girard
Borough Civil Service Commission."
§ 12-2. Appointment of members; terms of office; vacancies.
The Commission shall consist of three Commissioners who shall be qualified
electors of the Borough and shall be appointed by the Borough Council
initially to serve for the terms of two, four, and six years and, as terms
thereafter expire, shall be appointed for terms of six years. Any vacancy
occurring on the Commission for any reason whatsoever shall be filled by
the Borough Council for the unexpired term within the period of 30 days
after such vacancy occurs.
§ 12-3. Oath or affirmation required; compensation.
Each member of the Commission, before entering upon the discharge of
the duties of his office, shall take an oath or affirmation to support the
Constitution of the United States and of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and to perform his official duties with fidelity, together with such loyalty
oath as is required and prescribed by law. The Civil Service Commissioners
shall receive no compensation.
§ 12-4. Incompatible offices.
No Commissioners shall at the same time hold an elective or appointed
office under the United States government, the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or any political subdivision of the commonwealth, except that
one member of the Commission may be a member of the Council of the
Borough, and one may be a member of the teaching profession.
§ 12-5. Organization; officers; meetings; quorum.
The Commission first appointed shall organize within 10 days of its
appointment and shall elect one of its members as the Chairman and one
as Secretary. The Commission shall thereafter meet and organize on the
first Monday of February of each even-numbered year. The Secretary of
the Commission shall give each Commissioner 24 hours' notice in writing
of each and every meeting of the Commission. Two members of the
Commission shall constitute a quorum, and no action of the Commission
shall be valid unless it shall have the concurrence of at least two members.
§ 12-6. Rules and regulations.
The Commission shall have power to prescribe, amend and enforce rules
and regulations for carrying into effect its duties. Before any such rules and
§ 1-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 12-6
1:9
regulations are enforced, the same shall be first approved by the Council of
the Borough. When such rules and regulations have been so approved, they
shall not be annulled, amended or added to without the approval of the said
Council. All rules and regulations and modifications thereof shall be made
available for public inspection.
Chapter 23
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
§ 23-1. Recognition.
The Girard Borough Firemen's Relief Association, heretofore incorporated,
shall be the official relief fund association of the Fire Department and fire
companies of the Borough and by virtue hereof shall have full recognition
as such for all purposes.
§ 23-2. Appropriations.
There is hereby appropriated to the said Girard Borough Firemen's Relief
Association all moneys or payments hereafter paid to the Borough by the
State Treasurer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in accordance with
any law of the commonwealth now enacted or hereafter to be enacted for
or on account of firemen's relief, and the Borough Treasurer is hereby
authorized to pay such moneys or payments, when received, to the said
Girard Borough Firemen's Relief Association.
Chapter 27
HEALTH ADMINISTRATION
§ 27-1. Jurisdiction granted to County Department of Health.
It is declared to be the intention and desire of the Borough of Girard to
forthwith become subject to the jurisdiction of the Erie County Department
of Health.
Chapter 39
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Pensions — See Ch. 44. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 75.
§ 12-6 GIRARD CODE § 27-1
1:10
ARTICLE I
Independent Auditor
[Adopted 10-14-1963 by Ord. No. 3512 (Ch. I, Part 1, Secs. 4 and 5,
of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 39-1. Appointment; duties.
Before the commencement of the next fiscal year, and annually thereafter,
Council shall, by resolution, appoint a certified public accountant, or a firm
of certified public accountants, to audit the accounts and other evidences
of financial transactions of the Borough and Borough officers for the fiscal
year then closing and to submit such an audit report to Council.
§ 39-2. Compensation; powers.
Such accountant or accountants shall receive such compensation as may be
agreed upon with Council at the time of their appointment. They shall have
all the powers of elected auditors and be subject to the same penalties.
2. Editor's Note: Section 3 of Ord. No. 351 abolished the office of elected auditor in
accordance with the provisions of Act No. 116; Section 4 repealed all inconsistent
ordinances and parts of ordinances.
§ 39-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-2
1:11

ARTICLE II
Borough Manager
[Adopted 2-5-1979 by Ord. No. 506 (Ch. I, Part 1, Secs. 6 through
9.4, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 39-3. Creation of office.
The office of Borough Manager is created by the Borough of Girard.
§ 39-4. Appointment; removal; annual evaluation.
§ 39-5. Qualifications. [Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of executive and
administrative abilities, with special reference to the duties of the office
as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident of the Borough
or of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania at the time of appointment, but,
within 90 days of tenure of office, he/she must be seeking residence in
the Borough. Residence in the Borough must be made within 180 days of
tenure.
§ 39-6. Bond.
Before entering upon his duties, the Manager shall give a bond to the
Borough with a bonding company as surety, to be approved by the Council,
in the sum to be set by Council annually, conditioned upon the faithful
performance of his duties, the premium for said bond to be paid by the
Borough.
§ 39-7. Compensation. [Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
The salary of the Borough Manager shall be fixed from time to time by
resolution of Council, and this salary is to be based on the new findings of
the yearly evaluation.
§ 39-8. Powers and duties. [Amended 10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 598]
A. The Manager shall be appointed for an indefinite term by a majority of
all members of Council. The Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the
Council, and he may be removed at any time by a majority vote of all its
members. At least 30 days before such removal is to become effective,
the Council shall furnish the Manager with a written statement setting
forth its intention to remove him.
B. The Borough Manager shall have a yearly evaluation; first evaluation
after a six-month probation period, then yearly thereafter. President of
Council shall do the evaluation after input from all Council members.
All members must sign the finished evaluation. [Added 11-11-1997 by
Ord. No. 662]
§ 39-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-8
1:13
A. The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough
and shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and
efficient administration of the affairs of the Borough placed in his/her
charge. The powers and duties of the administration of all Borough
business shall be vested in the Manager, unless expressly imposed or
conferred by statute or ordinance upon other Borough officers.
[Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
B. Subject to recall by ordinance of Council, the powers and duties of the
Borough Manager shall include the following:
(1) To supervise and to be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, including business, streets, water, sewer and
electrical.
(2) Prior to appointing municipal department heads or hiring,
removing or suspending for more than five days any Borough
employee, the Manager shall first obtain the consent of a majority
of the Borough Council.
(3) To fix wages and salaries of all personnel under his supervision,
within a range previously determined by Council.
(4) To prepare and submit to Council, before the close of each fiscal
year, a budget for the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget
message. In preparing the budget, the Manager, or an officer
designated by him, shall obtain from the head of each department,
agency or board, or any qualified officer thereof, estimates of
revenues and expenditures and such other supporting data as is
required. The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise
them before submitting the budget to the Council.
(5) To be responsible for the administration of the budget after its
adoption by the Council.
(6) To develop, in conjunction with the preparation of the yearly
budget, long-range fiscal plans for the municipality, such plans to
be presented annually to the Council for its review and adoption.
(7) To hold such other municipal office and to head such municipal
department as the Council may from time to time direct with no
further compensation. [Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
(8) To attend all meetings of Council unless so otherwise directed, with
no further compensation, with the right to take part in the
discussion. The Manager shall receive notice of all special meetings
of Council. [Amended 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
(9) To prepare the agenda for each meeting of Council and supply facts
pertinent thereto.
(10) To keep the Council informed as to the conduct of Borough affairs;
to submit periodic reports on the condition of the Borough finances
§ 39-8 GIRARD CODE § 39-8
1:14
§ 39-9. Procedural limitations on Council. [Amended 10-21-1991 by
Ord. No. 598; 11-11-1997 by Ord. No. 662]
Other than for the purposes of inquiry, either verbal or documented, the
Council or any of its members or any Council committee or its members
shall deal with the administrative service solely through the Borough
Manager, and neither the Council nor any of its members, nor any Council
committee or its members, shall give orders publicly or privately to any
subordinate of the Manager.
and such other reports as the Council requests; and to make such
recommendations to the Council as he deems advisable.
(11) To submit to Council, as soon as possible after the close of the fiscal
year, a complete report on the finances and the administrative
activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
(12) To see that the provisions of all franchises, leases, permits and
privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
(13) To employ, by and with the approval of Council, experts and
consultants to perform work and to advise in connection with any of
the functions of the Borough.
(14) To attend to the letting of contracts in due form of law. The
Manager shall supervise the performance and faithful execution of
the same, except insofar as such duties are expressly imposed by
statute upon some other Borough officer.
(15) To see that all money owed the Borough is promptly paid and that
proper proceedings are taken for the security and collection of all
the Borough's claims.
(16) To serve as purchasing officer of the Borough and to purchase, in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, all supplies
and equipment for the agencies, boards, departments, and other
offices of the Borough. The Manager shall keep an account of all
purchases and shall, from time to time or when directed by Council,
make a full written report thereof. He shall also issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
procurement of all municipal supplies and equipment.
(17) To investigate and dispose of, or to designate an officer to
investigate and dispose of, all complaints regarding Borough
services, and to report to the Council thereon. All complaints
regarding Borough services shall be referred to the office of the
Manager.
(18) To enforce the ordinances and regulations of the Borough.
§ 39-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-10
1:15
§ 39-10. Disability or absence. [Amended 10-21-1991 by Ord. No.
598]
In the event and due to illness or absence of the Borough Manager from the
Borough, the Borough Council, by a vote of a majority of all the members,
shall elect one person to fill said office during such illness or absence.
§ 39-11. Additional duties. [Added 3-15-1999 by Ord. No. 667]
The office of the Borough Manager shall also include the duties,
responsibilities and designation of the Borough Secretary/Treasurer as
provided under the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 46104 (Treasurer) and 53 P.S.
§ 46106 (Secretary).
§ 39-10 GIRARD CODE § 39-11
1:16
Chapter 44
PENSIONS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39. Salaries and compensation — See Ch. 75.
§ 39-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 39-11
1:17

ARTICLE I
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 5-7-1979 by Ord. No. 508 (Ch. I, Part 6A, of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 44-1. Establishment.
The Police Pension Plan is hereby established pursuant to the Act of May 29,
1956, P.L. 1804, as amended (53 P.S. § 767 et seq.). Such fund shall be under
the direction of the Council of the Borough of Girard and shall be applied
under such regulations as Council may prescribe.
§ 44-2. Eligibility.
Each full-time policeman now or hereafter employed by Girard shall be
eligible to participate and shall be a participant in the Police Pension Plan.
§ 44-3. Age and service requirements. [Amended 10-18-1993 by
Ord. No. 625]
§ 44-4. Contribution rate. [Amended 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 625;
5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 681]
Under Act 30,4 members shall pay into the pension fund, monthly, an
amount equal to and not less than 5% nor more than 8% of monthly
compensation. The Borough Council, on an annual basis, by ordinance or
resolution, may reduce or eliminate payments into the fund by members.
§ 44-5. Retirement or pension benefits. [Amended 7-16-1984 by
Ord. No. 542; 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 625; 12-16-1996 by Ord. No.
656]
A. Each participant who has been in the employ of the Borough of Girard
as a police officer for 25 years in the aggregate and who has attained
the age of 50 years may retire and shall, upon his actual retirement
from his employment with the Borough of Girard, be entitled to receive
pension or retirement benefits as are hereinafter provided.
B. Military service. The Police Pension Plan may provide full service credit
for each year of military service or fraction thereof, not to exceed five
years, to any member of the police force who was not employed by the
political subdivision prior to such military service. The amount due for
the purchase of credit for military service other than intervening
military service shall be computed by using the formula found in
Section 4 of Act 600.3 [Added 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 682]
A. The pension or retirement benefits shall be payable during the balance
of the participant's life following actual retirement and after fulfillment
3. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
4. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 44-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-5
1:19
of the age and service requirements set forth above. The monthly
benefit shall be a sum equal to 1/2 of the average total monthly
compensation of the participant during the last 36 months of his
employment.
B. Service increments. Longevity payment may be provided to retired
officers for each completed year of service in excess of 25 years. The
total service increment may not exceed $100 per month. The amount of
each year's service increment must be established by resolution or
ordinance. [Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 682]
C. Cost-of-living increases. A cost-of-living increase in the amount of 2% in
the base pension will be granted for a maximum of 15 years for present
and retired officers, provided that four requirements are met:
[Amended 6-16-2003 by Ord. No. 682]
(1) The cost-of-living increase does not exceed the percentage increase
in the consumer price index of the year in which the member last
worked;
(2) The total police pension benefits do not exceed 75% of the officer's
salary for computing retirement benefits;
(3) The retired officer's total cost-of-living increase does not exceed
30%;
(4) A cost-of-living increase would not impair the actuarial soundness
of the pension plan.
D. Unused employee pension contributions will be provided to the estate
of the retired officer upon death of both the officer and his/her spouse.
This does not include accrued interest which remains with the pension
system and only includes employee contributions.
E. Service-related disability benefit. [Amended 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
681]
(1) Act 305 establishes a monthly service-related disability benefit of
no less than 50% of the officer's salary at the time disability was
incurred, provided that any member who receives benefits for the
same injuries under the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C. § 301 et seq.)
shall have his disability benefits offset or reduced by the amount of
such benefits. This benefit is not applicable retroactively to officers
who have already been honorably discharged with a serviceconnected
disability benefit which is less than 50%.
(2) Under Act 30, pensions for families of members killed in the line of
service are fixed at 100% of the officer's salary, based on the final
average (last 36 months) salary at the time of death. In addition,
5. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 44-5 GIRARD CODE § 44-5
1:20
§ 44-6. Widow benefits. [Amended 9-15-1997 by Ord. No. 661]
§ 44-7. Dependent children benefits. [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No.
681]
Under Act 30,7 after the death of a surviving spouse, an officer's surviving
child or children can receive the fifty-percent-or-greater benefit until age
18 or, if attending college, until the age of 23. Act 30 defines "attending
college" as being enrolled in an institution of higher learning and carrying
a minimum course load of seven credits per semester. This benefit may also
be granted to currently surviving dependent child(ren) if the police officer
parent died prior to the effective date of the Act.
§ 44-8. Vesting. [Amended 7-16-1984 by Ord. No. 542]
this amendment is not available retroactively for the family of an
officer who was killed in the line of duty.
A. In the event of death of a member who was receiving a pension or
disability benefit or who had qualified for a retirement or pension
benefit but had not retired, his widow shall be entitled to receive a
pension equal to 50% of the pension the member was receiving or
would have been receiving had he been retired at the time of his death.
The entitlement of the widow shall terminate upon her death or
remarriage.
B. Act 306 sets a minimum survivor benefit of no less than 50% of the
pension which the member was receiving or would have received had
he been retired at the time of his death. Act 30 eliminates the marriage
penalty in that a surviving spouse who remarries does not lose the
survivor benefit; it continues on until the death of the surviving spouse.
The amendment expressly states that benefits currently granted to
surviving spouses whose police officer spouse died on or before the
effective date of the Act and who were not remarried as of April 17,
2002, may receive an increased survivor benefit. [Added 5-19-2003
by Ord. No. 681]
A. Girard Borough shall be the owner of all monies or property paid into
the fund or annuities or policies purchased from insurance companies
hereunder and the owner and designated beneficiary of any insurance
and retirement income contracts acquired hereunder.
B. Any participant who, before completing superannuation retirement age
and service requirements but after having completed 12 years of total
service, for any reason, ceases to be employed as a full-time police
officer shall be entitled to vest his retirement benefits by filing with the
Council, within 90 days of the date he ceases to be a full-time police
officer, a written notice of his intention to vest. Upon reaching the date
6. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
7. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 44-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-8
1:21
§ 44-9. Prior pension assets and benefits.
All contracts, agreements or funds held for the purpose of providing
pension, annuities or retirement income, or any of them, on any policeman
who shall be a participant in the program herein established shall be and
hereby are transferred and assigned to the fund herein created. After
such transfer, the police pension fund shall assume the liability, if any,
of continuing the payment of pensions to members of the police force
retired prior to such transfer in accordance with the laws and regulations
under which such members where retired. Any pension payments to any
participant under the Girard Borough Non-Uniform Employees Pension Plan
shall be offset against the pension payable to such participant under the
Police Pension Plan.
§ 44-10. Administration.
The police pension fund herein provided for shall be administered by
trustees under a pension trust agreement exhibited and hereby
incorporated by reference. To said trustees shall be paid all sums received
from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania on account of tax on premiums
of foreign casualty insurance companies or other state funds for police
which would have been his superannuation retirement date if he had
continued to be employed as a full-time police officer, he shall be
paid a partial superannuation retirement allowance, determined by
applying the percentage his years of service bears to the years of
service which he would have rendered had he continued to work until
his superannuation retirement date to the gross pension, using,
however, the monthly average salary during the appropriate period
prior to his termination of employment.
C. Each participant who has not qualified for vesting, or who has not
elected to vest his benefits as provided under Subsection B of this
section, shall be entitled in the event of termination or discontinuance
of his employment for reasons other than retirement or death to have
returned to him the total amount of all such monies paid by him into the
pension fund, with interest at the rate of 6% per annum. If such
termination or discontinuance of employment is due to death, such
refund of money shall be paid to the participant's designated
beneficiary or, in the absence thereof, to his estate.
D. Under Act 30,8 if an officer dies prior to vesting his/her pension, the
surviving spouse or, if the spouse is deceased, any child or children
under the age of 18, or age 23 if attending college, is entitled to 100% of
the officer's contributions, together with any interest thereon, unless
the officer has designated another beneficiary. This benefit is not
available for survivors of an officer who died prior to April 17, 2002.
[Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 681]
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
§ 44-8 GIRARD CODE § 44-10
1:22
pensions, all payments which may be made from time to time by police
officers, all sums which may be contributed by the Borough and all other
amounts which may lawfully form a part of such a trust.
§ 44-11. Execution of trust agreement.
Authority is hereby conferred upon the Mayor and Secretary to enter into
and execute on behalf of the Borough of Girard the pension trust agreement
exhibited and hereby incorporated by reference. Council is further
authorized to provide for the payment to the trustees of such monies
from the general funds of the Borough as may be necessary to carry
out the purposes of the trust in the event that monies received from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and other sources are insufficient.
§ 44-12. Military leave. [Added 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 681]
Any employee who is a member of a retirement system at the time he is
granted a military leave of absence is entitled to exercise any one of the
following options:
A. An employee can continue to make regular payments into the pension
fund during the period of his military leave of absence. The amount of
such payments shall be the same as they would have been had the
employee not been granted military leave of absence, but had instead
remained actively employed. The time of making such payment must be
mutually agreed upon by the employee and the pension fund of which
he is a member, but in no event may be less frequent than semiannually.
The employer must make its contributions on the same basis as is used
to compute the employee's contributions. In this case, his retirement
rights must be determined on the basis that he was in the active,
continuous, and uninterrupted employ of his employer for the period
during which he was on military leave of absence.
B. The employee may discontinue making payments into the fund during
the period of his military leave of absence. In such event, the employer
must also discontinue making its contributions during this period. In
this case, retirement rights must be determined by completely
disregarding the period of his military leave of absence for all purposes.
C. In exercising the first option (Subsection A of this section), the
employee must, within 60 days of commencing military service, notify
the Borough Manager of his or her desire to do so. Any employee who
does not exercise the first option (Subsection A) will be deemed to have
exercised the second option (Subsection B of this section).
D. Any employee who has exercised the second option (Subsection B) but
who, upon the expiration of his military leave of absence, resumes
employment and desires to receive the benefits of the first option
(Subsection A) shall have the right to receive such benefits if he:
§ 44-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 44-12
1:23
(1) Gives written notice to the Borough Manager, within six months
after he returns to his employment, of his desire to receive the
benefits of the first option (Subsection A); or
(2) Pays into the retirement fund an amount equal to the total
payments he would have made had he exercised the first option
(Subsection A).
E. Act 6009 further provides that police officers employed for at least six
months with the Police Department must be given credit for pension
purposes for time spent on military leave if he or she returns to the
Department within six months after the end of such service.
(1) Act 600, which applies to municipal police officers only, predates
the Pennsylvania Military Code,10 which applies to all Pennsylvania
public and private employers.
(2) Although there is no case law directly on point, presumably Act 600
does not exempt police officers from requirements of the Military
Code that pension contributions be made in order for military leave
time to be counted toward years of service for pension calculation
purposes.
9. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 767 et seq.
10.Editor's Note: See 51 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 44-12 GIRARD CODE § 44-12
1:24
Chapter 50
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 50-1. Establishment.
A Planning Commission consisting of five members is hereby created and
established for the Borough of Girard, Erie County, Pennsylvania, pursuant
to the provisions of Article II, Section 201, of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, as established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L.
805, No. 247, as amended and reenacted.11
§ 50-2. Composition; terms of office.
The Planning Commission shall be comprised of five members who shall be
appointed for terms of office of four years, or until a successor is appointed
and qualified, except that the terms of office for three of the original
members shall be fixed at one year, two years and three years, respectively,
and the terms of office for two of the original members shall be fixed at
four years, to be established on a series of overlapping terms with one term
expiring each year, except for one year in which two terms shall expire.
§ 50-3. Powers and duties.
The Planning Commission shall have all the powers and duties conferred
and imposed upon it as set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, established by the Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, as amended
and reenacted.12
Chapter 54
POLICE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Pension Plan — See Ch. 44, Art. I.
11.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10201.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 44-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 54-1
1:25
§ 54-1. Establishment; Chief of Police.
A Police Department is hereby established in and for the Borough of Girard.
The Chief of Police shall be the chief executive officer of the Police
Department. He shall, under the direction of the Mayor, be in charge of the
police force and shall have supervision over its members in the exercise of
their powers, duties and authority.
§ 54-2. Subordinate classifications.
Subordinate to the Chief of Police, in the Police Department, the
classifications of Captain, Lieutenant, Sergeant and patrolman are hereby
established, to be filled from time to time by Council as deemed necessary.
The number of persons, if any, to serve as patrolmen on a full-time and/or
part-time basis, and the compensation of each, shall be determined by the
Borough Council from time to time.
§ 54-3. Authority of Mayor to appoint special police in emergencies.
Nothing herein shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint special
policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 63
RECORDS, OPEN
§ 63-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this policy is to assure compliance with Act 3 of 2008,
the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq., as amended;
to provide access to public records of Girard Borough; to preserve the
integrity of Girard Borough's records; and to minimize the financial impact
to the residents of the Borough regarding the resources utilized in the
receipt and processing of public record requests and the retrieval and
copying of public records.
§ 63-2. Open Records Officer; procedures.
It is the policy of the Borough to require the presence of a designated
employee when public records are examined and inspected and to charge
reasonable fees for duplication of public records of the Borough. Girard
Borough designates the Borough Manager as the Open Records Officer,
responsible for assuring compliance with the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know
Law, in accordance with the following guidelines:
A. The Borough Manager may designate certain office staff employee(s) to
process public record requests.
B. The Borough Manager is responsible for minimizing, where possible,
the financial impact to the Borough regarding the resources utilized in
§ 54-1 GIRARD CODE § 63-2
1:26
the receipt and processing of public record requests and the retrieval
and copying of public records.
C. All requests for public records of the Borough under this policy shall be
specific in identifying and describing each public record requested. In
no case shall the Borough be required to create a public record which
does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public
record in a manner in which the Borough does not currently compile,
maintain, format or organize the public record. All requests for public
records shall be submitted in writing and include the date of the
request; requestor's name, address, and telephone number;
certification of United States residency; signature of requestor; and, if
duplication is requested, appropriate payment.
D. The Open Records Officer employee shall make a good faith effort to
determine whether each record requested is a public record.
E. The Borough shall facilitate a reasonable response to a request for
Girard Borough's public records. In no case is the Borough expected to
provide extraordinary staff to respond to the request, but will respond
in a manner consistent with the Borough's administrative
responsibilities and consistent with the requirements of the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law.
F. The Open Records Officer shall respond to the requester within five
business days from the date of receipt of the written request. If the
Borough does not respond within five business days of receipt thereof,
the request is deemed denied, subject to Subsection K hereafter in the
event of a review.
G. The response provided by the Borough shall consist of approval for
access to the public record; review of the request; or denial of access to
the record requested.
H. If access to the public record requested is approved, the public record
shall be available for access during the regular business hours of the
Borough. The Open Records Officer shall cooperate fully with the
requester, while also taking reasonable measures to protect Borough
public records from the possibility of theft and/or modification. The
presence of a designated office staff employee is required when public
records are examined and inspected.
I. Fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by the
Commonwealth Office of Open Records. The Borough may, at its
discretion, waive fees.
J. In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted under
this policy is expected to exceed $100, the Open Records Officer shall
obtain from the requester the expected cost in advance of fulfilling the
request to avoid unwarranted expense of Borough resources.
K. Review of requests.
§ 63-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 63-2
1:27
(1) If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the
Borough shall be in writing and include the reason for the review
and the expected response date, which shall be within 30 days of
the notice of review. If the Borough does not respond within 30
days thereof, the request is deemed denied. Review of the request
is limited to situations where:
(a) The record requested contains information which is subject to
access, as well as information which is not subject to access
that must be redacted prior to a grant of access. The redacted
information is considered a denial as to that information;
(b) The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
(c) A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations;
(d) A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record
requested is a public record;
(e) The requester has failed to comply with the Borough's policy
and procedure requirements;
(f) The requester refuses to pay the applicable fees; or
(g) The extent or nature of the request precludes a response
within the required time period.
(2) Upon a determination that one of the factors listed above applies,
the Borough shall send written notice to the requester within five
business days of receipt of the request for access. The notice shall
include a statement notifying the requester that the request for
access is being reviewed, the reason for the review, a reasonable
date that a response is expected to be provided and an estimate of
applicable fees owed when the record becomes available. If the
date that a response is expected to be provided is in excess of 30
days, following the five business days allowed for, the request for
access shall be deemed denied unless the requester has agreed in
writing to an extension to the date specified in the notice. If the
requester agrees to the extension, the request shall be deemed
denied on the day following the date specified in the notice if the
agency has not provided a response by that date.
L. If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by the
Borough shall be in writing as indicated on the form attached hereto
entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate Girard Borough
Records."13
M. If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requester may file an
appeal with the Commonwealth Office of Open Records within 15
13.Editor's Note: Said form is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 63-2 GIRARD CODE § 63-2
1:28
Chapter 68
RECREATION BOARD
§ 68-1. Establishment.
A Recreation Board is hereby established with power and authority to
provide, improve, equip, operate, maintain and regulate parks,
playgrounds, swimming pools and other recreation places within the
Borough limits or in adjacent townships.
§ 68-2. Appointment of members; terms. [Amended 12-16-1968 by
Ord. No. 383]
Such Board shall consist of seven members, all to be appointed by the
Borough Council for terms of five years upon recommendation of the
Recreation Board. Five of the members so appointed shall be chosen at
large. One shall represent the Borough Council and one the Girard School
District.
§ 68-3. Compensation; officers.
The members of the Board shall serve without pay. They shall elect their
own Chairman and Secretary and select all other necessary officers and
employ such persons as may be required for their purposes.
§ 68-4. Operations subject to approval by Council; expenses.
The location and establishment of recreation places and the number and
salaries of employes shall be subject, however, to approval of Council. All
expenses incurred in connection with acquisition, equipment and operation
of such recreation places shall be payable from the Borough Treasury on
order of the Council.
business days of the mailing date of the Borough's notice of denial, or
within 15 days of a deemed denial. The appeal shall state the grounds
upon which the requester asserts that the record is a public record and
shall address any grounds stated by the agency for delaying or denying
the request.
N. Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the
appeals officer, the requester or Borough may file a petition for review
or other document as required by rule of court with the Court of
Common Pleas for Erie County. The decision of the Court shall contain
findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the evidence as a
whole. The decision shall clearly and concisely explain the rationale for
the decision. A petition for review under this section shall stay the
release of documents until a decision is issued.
O. This policy shall be available for review at the Borough office.
§ 63-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 68-4
1:29
Chapter 75
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Officers and employees — See Ch. 39. Pensions — See Ch. 44.
§ 68-4 GIRARD CODE § 68-4
1:30
ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
[Adopted 1-19-1987 by Ord. No. 566 (Ch. I, Part 1, Sec. 1, of the
1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 75-1. Terms beginning after October 31, 1985.
There is hereby established an annual salary of $1,200 for the Mayor and
each Council member of the Borough of Girard taking oath of office after
October 31, 1985, beginning with the year of 1987.
§ 75-2. Prior terms.
There is hereby established an annual salary of $600 for each Council
member whose term of office began prior to October 31, 1985.
§ 75-3. Monthly payments.
Said salary shall be paid monthly in 12 equal installments.
§ 75-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-3
1:31

ARTICLE II
Tax Collector
[Adopted 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 707]
§ 75-4. Salary amount; monthly payments.
Effective January 1, 2010, the compensation of the duly elected Tax
Collector of the Borough of Girard for all Borough taxes collected by him/
her is fixed at an annual salary of $4,800, payable monthly by the Borough
of Girard in the amount of $400.
§ 75-5. Costs to be paid by Borough.
The cost of all supplies and bond premiums directly attributable to the
collection of the taxes of the Borough of Girard shall be paid by the Borough
of Girard when properly submitted by the Tax Collector.
§ 75-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 75-5
1:33
PART II: GENERAL LEGISLATION
Chapter 100
ADVERTISING MATERIAL DISTRIBUTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Signs — See Ch. 331.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADVERTISEMENT — A commercial or noncommercial advertisement shall
include any handbill, printed sheet or sheets, or other written matter
offering for sale either merchandise, real or personal property, or services,
whether or not the same is loose or packaged in a plastic or other container.
§ 100-2. Restrictions.
No person shall distribute commercial or noncommercial advertisements of
any nature by placing said advertisements on mailboxes or on mailbox posts
located within the Borough right-of-way.
§ 100-3. Violations and penalties.14
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
14.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 75-5 GIRARD CODE § 100-3
1:34
Chapter 105
AIRPORT DISTRICT OVERLAY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 105-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create an airport district overlay that
considers safety issues around the airport; regulates and restricts the
heights of constructed structures and objects of natural growth; creates
appropriate zones, establishing the boundaries thereof and providing for
changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; creates the
permitting process for use within said zones; and provides for enforcement,
assessment of violation penalties, an appeals process, and judicial review.
§ 105-2. Effect on other zone districts.
The Airport District Overlay shall not modify the boundaries of any
underlying zoning district. Where identified, the Airport District Overlay
shall impose certain requirements on land use and construction in addition
to those contained in the underlying zoning district.
§ 105-3. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
AIRPORT ELEVATION — The highest point of an airport's usable landing
area measured in feet above sea level. The airport elevation of the Erie
Airport is 733 feet.
AIRPORT HAZARD — Any structure or object, natural or man-made, or use
of land which obstructs the airspace required for flight or aircraft in landing
or taking off at an airport or is otherwise hazardous as defined in 14 CFR
Part 77 and 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5102.
AIRPORT HAZARD AREA — Any area of land or water upon which an airport
hazard might be established if not prevented as provided for in this chapter
and Act 164 of 1984, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq. (Pennsylvania laws relating
to aviation).
APPROACH SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the extended runway center line and extending outward and
upward from each end of the primary surface. An approach surface is
applied to each end of the runway based on the planned approach. The
inner edge of the approach surface is the same width as the primary surface
§ 100-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-3
1:35
and expands uniformly depending on the planned approach. The Approach
Surface Zone, as shown on Figure 1,15 is derived from the approach surface.
CONICAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface extending outward
and upward from the periphery of the horizontal surface at a slope of 20
feet horizontally to one foot vertically for a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
The Conical Surface Zone, as shown on Figure 1,16 is based on the conical
surface.
DEPARTMENT — Pennsylvania Department of Transportation.
FAA — Federal Aviation Administration of the United States Department of
Transportation.
HEIGHT — For the purpose of determining the height limits in all zones set
forth in this chapter and shown on the Zoning Map,17 the datum shall be
mean sea level elevation unless otherwise specified.
HORIZONTAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary plane 150 feet above the
established airport elevation that is constructed by swinging arcs of various
radii from the center of the end of the primary surface and then connecting
the adjacent arc by tangent lines. The radius of each arc is based on the
planned approach. The Horizontal Surface Zone, as shown on Figure 1,18 is
derived from the horizontal surface.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and
intended to be used by propeller-driven aircraft of greater than 12,500
pounds' maximum gross weight and jet-powered aircraft.
NONCONFORMING USE — Any preexisting structure, object of natural
growth, or use of land which is inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter or an amendment thereto.
NONPRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only
horizontal guidance, or area-type navigation equipment, for which a
straight-in nonprecision instrument approach procedure has been approved
or planned.
OBSTRUCTION — Any structure, growth, or other object, including a
mobile object, which exceeds a limiting height set forth by this chapter.
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY — A runway having an existing
instrument approach procedure utilizing an instrument landing system
(ILS) or a precisions approach radar (PAR). It also means a runway for
which a precision approach system is planned and is so indicated on an
approved airport layout plan or any other planning document.
PRIMARY SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface longitudinally
centered on the runway, extending 200 feet beyond the end of paved
15.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
16.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
17.Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is on file in the Borough offices.
18.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 105-3 GIRARD CODE § 105-3
1:36
runways or ending at each end of turf runways. The elevation of any point
on the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on
the runway center line. The Primary Surface Zone, as shown on Figure 1,19
is derived from the primary surface.
RUNWAY — A defined area of an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of
aircraft along its length.
STRUCTURE — An object, including a mobile object, constructed or
installed by man, including, but without limitation, buildings, towers,
cranes, smokestacks, earth formations and overhead transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACE (ZONE) — An imaginary surface that extends
outward and upward from the edge of the primary surface to the horizontal
surface at a slope of seven feet horizontally to one foot vertically (7:1).
The Transitional Surface Zone, as shown on Figure 1,20 is derived from the
transitional surface.
TREE — Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY — A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller-driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds' maximum gross weight
or less.
VISUAL RUNWAY — A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft
using visual approach procedures.
§ 105-4. Establishment of zones.
There are hereby created and established certain zones within the Airport
District Overlay, defined in § 105-3 and depicted on Figure 1 and illustrated
on the Airport Hazard Area Map,21 hereby adopted as part of this chapter,
which include:
§ 105-5. Permit requirements.
A. Approach Surface Zone.
B. Conical Surface Zone.
C. Horizontal Surface Zone.
D. Primary Surface Zone.
E. Transitional Surface Zone.
A. As regulated by Act 164, 74 Pa.C.S.A. § 5101 et seq., and defined by 14
CFR 77.13(a) (as amended or replaced), any person who plans to erect
a new structure, to add to an existing structure, or to erect and
maintain any object (natural or man-made), in the vicinity of the airport,
shall first notify the Department's Bureau of Aviation (BOA) by
19.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
20.Editor's Note: Figure 1 is on file in the Borough offices.
21.Editor's Note: Figure 1 and the Airport Hazard Area Map are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 105-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-5
1:37
§ 105-6. Variances.
submitting PENNDOT Form AV-57 to obtain an obstruction review of
the proposal at least 30 days prior to commencement thereof. The
Department's BOA response must be included with this permit
application for it to be considered complete. If the Department's BOA
returns a determination of no penetration of airspace, the permit
request should be considered in compliance with the intent of this
chapter. If the Department's BOA returns a determination of a
penetration of airspace, the permit shall be denied, and the project
sponsor may seek a variance from such regulations as outlined in
§ 105-6.
B. No permit is required to make maintenance repairs to or to replace
parts of existing structures which do not enlarge or increase the height
of an existing structure.
A. Any request for a variance shall include documentation in compliance
with 14 CFR Part 77, Subpart B (FAA Form 7460-1, as amended or
replaced). Determinations of whether to grant a variance will depend
on the determinations made by the FAA and the Department's BOA as to
the effect of the proposal on the operation of air navigation facilities
and the safe, efficient use of navigable airspace. In particular, the
request for a variance shall consider which of the following categories
the FAA has placed the proposed construction in:
(1) No objection. The subject construction is determined not to exceed
obstruction standards, and marking/lighting is not required to
mitigate potential hazard. Under this determination, a variance
shall be granted.
(2) Conditional determination. The proposed construction/alteration is
determined to create some level of encroachment into an airport
hazard area which can be effectively mitigated. Under this
determination, a variance shall be granted contingent upon
implementation of mitigating measures as described in § 105-9,
Obstruction marking and lighting.
(3) Objectionable. The proposed construction/alteration is determined
to be a hazard and is thus objectionable. A variance shall be denied,
and the reasons for this determination shall be outlined to the
applicant.
B. Such requests for variances shall be granted where it is duly found that
a literal application or enforcement of the regulations will result in
unnecessary hardship and that relief granted will not be contrary to the
public interest, will not create a hazard to air navigation, will do
substantial justice, and will be in accordance with the intent of this
chapter.
§ 105-5 GIRARD CODE § 105-7
1:38
§ 105-7. Use restrictions.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter, no use shall be made
of land or water within the Airport District Overlay in such a manner
as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio
communications between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots
to distinguish between airport lights and others, impair visibility in the
vicinity of the airport, create bird strike hazards or otherwise endanger or
interfere with the landing, takeoff or maneuvering of aircraft utilizing the
airport.
§ 105-8. Preexisting nonconforming uses.
The regulations prescribed by this chapter shall not be construed to require
the removal, lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or
tree not conforming to the regulations as of the effective date of this
chapter or otherwise interfere with the continuance of a nonconforming
use. No nonconforming use shall be structurally altered or permitted to
grow higher so as to increase the nonconformity, and a nonconforming use,
once substantially abated (subject to Chapter 425, Zoning), may only be
reestablished consistent with the provisions herein.
§ 105-9. Obstruction marking and lighting.
Any permit or variance granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter
may be conditioned according to the process described in § 105-6 to require
the owner of the structure or object of natural growth in question to permit
the municipality, at its own expense, or require the person requesting
the permit or variance, to install, operate, and maintain such marking or
lighting as deemed necessary to assure both ground and air safety.
§ 105-10. Violations and penalties.
Subject to that in Chapter 425, Zoning.
§ 105-11. Appeals.
Subject to the process in Chapter 425, Zoning.
§ 105-12. Conflicting regulations.
Where there exists a conflict between any of the regulations or limitations
prescribed in this chapter and any other regulation applicable to the same
area, the more stringent limitation or requirement shall govern and prevail.
§ 105-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 105-12
1:39
Chapter 108
ALARMS AND ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54. Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
§ 105-12 GIRARD CODE § 105-12
1:40
ARTICLE I
False Alarms
[Adopted 11-20-1995 by Ord. No. 649 (Ch. XV, Part 6, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 108-1. Service charge.
If any individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity or concern
causes more than two false alarms to occur during a twelve-month period,
then a service charge of $40 per occurrence shall be levied against the
owner of said system for each and every false burglar or fire alarm
occurring more than two times during the twelve-month period.
§ 108-2. Notification.
Each individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity or concern
will be notified in writing after the first reported false burglar or fire alarm
occurrence.
§ 108-3. Definitions.
For the purpose of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
YEAR or CURRENT YEAR — The twelve-month period commencing January
1 and ending December 31.
§ 108-4. Failure to pay service charge; violations and penalties.
A. Any individual, establishment, partnership, corporation, entity or
concern who or which fails to pay said sum within 30 days following
notification of the third and subsequent false alarms will be cited by the
Girard Borough Police Department, and alarm connection service with
the municipality may be suspended until such time as the aforesaid
service charge is remitted to the Borough of Girard.
B. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough in the enforcement of this
article. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Borough are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith.22
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-5
1:41
§ 108-5. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to prevent an unnecessary response by the
Fire Department or the Police Department resulting from an alarm received
but which has been caused either by a defect in the fire alarm system or the
burglar alarm system or by the accidental or careless use or misuse of such
systems.
§ 108-5 GIRARD CODE § 108-5
1:42
Chapter 112
ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
§ 108-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-5
1:43

ARTICLE I
Open Containers; Public Consumption
[Adopted 4-16-1984 by Ord. No. 539 (Ch. VI, Part 4, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 112-1. Prohibited acts.23
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any malt, vinous or alcoholic
beverage or to be in the possession of, with intent to consume, any malt,
vinous or alcoholic beverage in an open container in any public park in the
Borough of Girard or on any public street, roadway, alley or sidewalk within
the said Borough or in or adjacent to any public facility of the Borough
of Girard, nor shall any person consume any malt, vinous or alcoholic
beverages or be in the possession of, with intent to consume, any malt,
vinous or alcoholic beverage in an open container while in a vehicle parked
on or in any public vehicle parking area or in or adjacent to any public park
or public facility of the said Borough.
§ 112-2. Disposal of containers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to break, leave, discard or deposit in
any manner any glass, bottle, glassware, can or container of any kind, make
or description on any public street, sidewalk, park, parking area or public
place of any nature within the limits of the Borough of Girard except in
designated trash containers.
§ 112-3. Exception for certain public property.24
With the approval of the Council of the Borough of Girard by resolution,
any agency, commission or board of the Borough of Girard which has direct
responsibility for the operation of specific parcels of public property within
the Borough shall have the option to allow the consumption of malt, vinous
or alcoholic beverages or the possession of, with intent to consume, malt,
vinous or alcoholic beverages in an open container upon the property, the
operation of which is within the jurisdiction of the said agency, commission
or board.
§ 112-4. Exception for special occasions.25
By resolution of the Council of the Borough of Girard, permission may be
granted to allow consumption of malt, vinous or alcoholic beverages and
possession of, with intent to consume, malt, vinous or alcoholic beverages
in open containers on specific public property for special occasions and for
a definite period of time.
23.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-5
1:45
§ 112-5. Applicability of state and federal law.
All state and federal laws which pertain to the consumption and use of
alcoholic beverages shall apply.
§ 112-6. Violations and penalties.26
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 112-7. Definitions.27
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
INTENT TO CONSUME — Includes any of the following:
OPEN CONTAINER — Any open bottle, can or container containing liquor,
beer, wine or other alcoholic beverage.
POSSESS — Exercise of dominion over the container or beverage.
A. Drinking from the container.
B. Possession with movement of the container to the mouth.
C. Possession with alcohol on the breath of the possessor.
Any circumstances evidencing an intent to ultimately consume on any
public lands without permission.
D.
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
27.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 112-5 GIRARD CODE § 112-7
1:46
Chapter 116
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
§ 116-1. License required.
On and after January 1, 1955, no person or persons, firm or corporation
shall at any time have in his, its, or their possession for use within the
Borough of Girard any device, machine, or apparatus whatsoever for the
playing of games and amusement, said devices, machine, and apparatus
being machines upon which football, baseball, and other games are played
through the insertion therein of a coin or other metal disc, slug, or token,
or otherwise without first having procured a license therefor as hereinafter
provided.
§ 116-2. Application for license.
Said license shall be procured by filing with the Secretary of the Borough
Council a written application, duly signed and sworn to, setting forth the
name, residence, occupation and citizenship of the applicant, together with
the length of said residence, the name of the owner and location of the
premises on which said machine is to be installed and the manufacture and
nature of said machine or machines. If the owner of the premises is not the
applicant, then the applicant shall set forth the length of time for which the
premises have been leased.
§ 116-3. Issuance of license; fee. [Amended 12-9-1957 by Ord. No.
315; 12-11-1961 by Ord. No. 338; 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 60728]
If, after due investigation, the Borough authorities shall have determined
that the application is proper, a license may be issued for the calendar year
in which application is made, and a fee as set from time to time by resolution
of the Borough Council will apply for each and every such device installed
within the Borough, provided that no license shall be issued to a person
not a citizen of the United States, and provided further that such license
shall be renewable on January 1 of each and every year after that in which
originally issued by payment of a like sum (as set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council) into the Borough treasury. A license is
not required for jukebox machines.
§ 116-4. Display of license.
A license in proper form is hereby required for such machine so licensed,
which shall be attached to or posted in the immediate vicinity of each such
machine so that the same may be clearly observable and readable.
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 112-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 116-5
1:47
§ 116-5. Gambling devices prohibited.
Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license,
or permit any gambling devices whatsoever or any mechanism which has
been judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary
to law.
§ 116-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1974 by Ord. No.
44629]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 120
ANIMALS
29.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 116-5 GIRARD CODE § 116-6
1:48
ARTICLE I
Animal Control
[Adopted 6-15-1981 by Ord. No. 524 (Ch. III, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 120-1. Animals running at large prohibited.
On and after the effective date of this article, it shall be unlawful for any
person or persons who are the owners or custodians of any pet to permit
any pet owned by him, her or them or under his, her, or their supervision
and control to run at large either in the day or at nighttime, either upon the
public streets and highways (including state highways) of the Borough of
Girard or upon the property of persons other than the owner of such pet.
§ 120-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
RUNNING AT LARGE — Running about loose on the street or upon property
of persons other than the owner of such pets, unleashed and
unaccompanied by the owner or custodian or by any member of his family
or by any servant or agent of the owner of such pets.
§ 120-3. Seizure and impoundment of animals running at large.
In the event that a pet is found running at large within the Borough
of Girard, said pet may be seized on sight, either in the daytime or at
nighttime, by any Borough police officer or any other agent of the Borough
and impounded. In such event, the owner or custodian of said pet, if known,
shall be notified of such impoundment and shall be given a period of three
days to redeem said pet upon payment of all costs assessed against such
animal, including the cost of boarding the pet during the period of the
impoundment, and upon payment of the penalty hereafter set forth for the
violation of this article. If the owner is not known, a notice shall be posted
in the Borough office.
§ 120-4. Custody of impounded animals.
The Borough Council of the Borough of Girard may, from time to time,
provide such places, means or methods and equipment as it shall deem
necessary for the purpose of keeping in custody any pet seized under the
provisions of this article, or, in its discretion, it may provide such places,
means or methods under the control and management of any individual
authorized for such purposes.
§ 120-5. Redemption of impounded animals.
The owner or custodian of any pet seized and impounded under the
provisions of this article may, before the expiration of the three-day period
noted above, redeem such pet by paying all costs for feeding and care and
§ 120-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-5
1:49
the penalty assessed against such animal and by paying the fine or penalty
assessed for violation of this article.
§ 120-6. Sale and disposition of impounded animals.
In the event that the owner or custodian of any pet seized and held under
the terms of this article shall not redeem such pet within three days of the
date of service of notice or posting of notice, the Borough authorities, by
their proper officer, shall have authority to destroy said pet or to sell the
same by public or private sale to such person or persons as may desire to
purchase the same to the benefit of the Borough of Girard. No pets caught
and detained shall be sold for the purpose of vivisection.
§ 120-7. Disposal of animal waste and feces.
It is hereby declared that the depositing of offal waste by dogs or cats
upon public or private property within the Borough of Girard constitutes a
health hazard and a danger to the general public, including children that
may be attracted to play in and around the areas. It is therefore declared
to be unlawful for the owner or person in charge of a dog or cat to allow
the animal to deposit offal waste within the Borough of Girard without the
owner or the custodian of the dog or cat immediately removing the waste
material and having the same deposited in a recognized sanitary manner.
The owner or person in charge of said animal depositing waste within the
Borough of Girard shall cause the waste to be removed from the public or
private property immediately before allowing the animal to move from the
general vicinity of the waste disposal.
§ 120-8. Noise disturbances. [Amended 11-16-1992 by Ord. No. 616]
It is hereby declared that the barking, howling, baying, yelping, screeching,
crying and other noisemaking by dogs, cats and other animals which do
so for a period in excess of 10 minutes or make such noise intermittently
for 20 minutes or more to the disturbance of any person any time of the
day or night, regardless of whether the animal or bird is physically situated
in or upon private property, is a nuisance, provided that, at the time the
animal or bird is making such noise, no person is trespassing or threatening
to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal or bird is
situated, nor is there any other legitimate cause which justifiably provoked
the animal or bird.
§ 120-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 11-16-1992 by Ord. No.
616]
In the event that any person shall violate any of the provisions of this article,
said person, upon conviction before a Magisterial District Judge, shall pay a
fine not exceeding $25 for the first offense, $50 for the second offense and
$100 for the third and all subsequent offenses, together with the costs of
prosecution and proper charges for the impoundment of the pets involved,
not to exceed $25 per day, as the case may be. In default of the payment
§ 120-5 GIRARD CODE § 120-9
1:50
of any fine and/or costs imposed, said person shall be sentenced to the Erie
County Jail for a period not exceeding 10 days.
§ 120-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 120-9
1:51
Chapter 133
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
§ 133-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FLUE — Any duct, pipe, stack, chimney or conduit which conducts air
contaminants into the open air.
PERSON — Any individual, natural person, syndicate, association,
partnership, firm, corporation, institution, agency, authority, department,
bureau or other instrumentality of federal, state, local or regional
government or other entity recognized by law as the subject of rights and
duties.
SMALL OPEN FIRE or OPEN FIRE — The use of a grill, outdoor barbecue,
fireplace or similar device to cook food with charcoal or wood; or any other
fire from which the properties of combustion are emitted directly into the
air without first passing through a structural flue, stack or chimney (except
through a small integral flue, chimney or stack built into a freestanding grill
or residential chiminea-type device using only such materials as authorized
hereunder and otherwise complying with this chapter) and conducted in
such location, conditions, and in a manner which contribute only a
negligible amount of air contaminants.
§ 133-2. Open burning restricted.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, no person, corporation,
partnership, association, organization or other group whatsoever
(hereinafter collectively referred to as "property owner" or "person," as
applies) shall burn any materials of any kind in the Borough, except as
authorized by this chapter.
§ 133-3. Small open fires authorized.
Subject to rules, regulations, and limitations contained in this chapter, an
adult property owner or other adult authorized by the property owner may
conduct or allow a small open fire on his or her property, solely for the
following purposes:
A. Warmth; and
§ 120-9 GIRARD CODE § 133-3
1:52
§ 133-4. Rules and regulations.
B. Noncommercial preparation of food for human consumption, light,
ornament or recreation.
A. Permitted receptacles/containers.
(1) Open fires. All other small open fires authorized under this chapter
must be contained within one of the following authorized
containments: in a grill, barbecue, fireplace, chiminea, stone
perimeter, noncombustible fire ring, or in a fire pit.
B. Permitted locations.
(1) Portable grills/barbecues, with the exception of propane or naturalgas-
burning grills, designed for and used strictly for cooking only
shall, while in use, be no less than five feet from a house, a
structure, combustible materials, a roadway, a utility, or a property
line.
(2) Permanently constructed (nonportable) outdoor stoves, ovens,
grills, barbecues and fireplaces, with the exception of propane or
natural-gas-burning grills, used for cooking only shall be no less
than five feet from a house, structure, roadway, property line,
utility, tree, or other combustible materials.
(3) Other small open fires shall be maintained only in an authorized
containment which, unless otherwise approved by the Fire
Marshal, shall be located not less than 10 feet from the nearest
house, structure, roadway, property line, utility, tree, or other
combustible materials.
C. Permitted and prohibited materials.
(1) Permitted materials. All open fires authorized by this chapter shall
be conducted using only charcoal, natural gas, or other clean
burning fuel, dry, clean logs, twigs, or other untreated wood
products. Only smokeless fuels, or small kindling, if any, may be
used to start a fire.
(2) Prohibited materials. The use of any material(s) to start or maintain
a fire other than those specifically permitted under Subsection C(1)
hereof, including but not limited to any of the following materials, is
strictly prohibited: no paints; painted or chemically treated woods;
railroad ties; telephone poles; plastics; cardboard boxes; paper or
paper products; garbage, or any other household or residential
wastes; construction waste or demolition/salvage debris;
commercial or industrial materials or waste; oil, grease, gasoline,
asphalt products, or any other petroleum products; rubber; tires;
tar or tar paper; dead animals; animal or human waste; pathogenic
waste; insulated wire; toxic or noxious materials, cloth, leaves,
§ 133-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-4
1:53
§ 133-5. Order to extinguish, abate or correct.
A police officer, or other duly authorized law or code enforcement officer
of the Borough of Girard, may, upon investigation, order that any fire be
immediately extinguished, abated, diminished, or corrected (in his or her
sole discretion) if, in the officer's sole judgment, the fire:
green yard waste, or other materials that tend to cause excessive
or malodorous emissions or excessive smoke.
D. Maximum size. In all cases, the fire shall be of such size that the
combustible material and flame are contained completely within the
perimeter of the authorized containment receptacle.
E. No excessive smoke, odors or malodorous emissions. No persons shall
allow or maintain a fire which creates excessive smoke, excessive odor,
or malodorous emissions. Smoke and odors shall be considered
excessive if they contribute more than a negligible amount of air
contaminants perceptible beyond the property line of the source of the
fire.
F. Adult supervision, control, and extinguishment. Only an adult property
owner or other adult authorized by the property owner shall authorize
or conduct a small open fire. The adult property owner or other adult
authorized by the property owner to conduct such a fire shall at all
times be present at and shall tend to the fire from the time it is lit
through the time of total extinguishment. Adequate means to control
and extinguish the open fire shall be readily available at all times during
any burning. Suitable covering or means of disposal of ashes shall be
provided to prevent them from becoming airborne. The adult property
owner or other authorized person supervising the fire shall be
responsible to assure that all aspects of the fire comply with this
chapter and shall assure that the fire is completely extinguished before
that person leaves the site. Immediately upon the discovery of any
unauthorized or noncompliant fire or burning, the property owner or
other person responsible for the property on which such burning occurs
shall immediately extinguish, or cause the extinguishment of, such
burning. Proof that the defendant in any enforcement action owns or
controls the property on which open burning occurs shall be prima facie
evidence that such person has conducted, or allowed to be conducted,
such open burning.
A. Is emitting excessive smoke, excessive odor, or malodorous emissions;
B. Contains prohibited materials or is using a prohibited or inadequate
containment devise or mechanism;
C. Is in a prohibited location or of a prohibited size;
D. Is emitting sparks or hot ashes that may pose a threat to nearby
structures, trees, other combustible materials, or to the safety of
persons or property;
§ 133-4 GIRARD CODE § 133-5
1:54
§ 133-6. Prohibited acts.
§ 133-7. Burning of rubbish, refuse or other waste materials.30
It shall be unlawful to burn or cause to be burned any rubbish, refuse or
other waste materials, other than leaves, upon any public street or public
alley in the Borough; however, leaves may not be burned upon the paved
or improved portion of any street or alley. Also, it shall be unlawful to
burn or cause to be burned any rubbish, refuse or other waste material,
including leaves, upon any private property, including private roadways or
drives, on Sunday and Monday of any week or between the hours of 9:00
p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or within 20 feet of any building or other structure.
All rubbish, refuse or other waste material (other than leaves) which is
burned shall be burned in nonflammable containers with wire mesh or other
approved covers. Leaves may be burned on Tuesday and Saturday of any
week between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. on any private property
on the days and times aforesaid in such a manner as not to interfere with
the public use of streets and alleys and subject to the above requirements. It
shall be unlawful to allow any fire, which started for the purpose of burning
rubbish, refuse, other waste material or leaves, to remain unattended. It
shall not be unlawful to burn or cause to be burned garbage in incinerators
of a type designed for use in dwellings, which do not emit obnoxious gases,
fumes or odors.
E. Where its size, materials, containment, location, emissions, proximity to
structures, trees, other combustible materials, conduct of participants,
weather conditions (including but not limited to wind, drought, dry or
other conditions) or air quality, or other circumstances, are such that
continuation of the fire poses a risk of harm to persons or property;
F. Where a complaint of noise has been made.
A. No person, firm or corporation shall permit, authorize, conduct, or
participate in the burning of any open fire except in compliance with
this chapter.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall refuse to comply immediately and
fully with any order of a Girard Borough police officer, or other duly
authorized law enforcement officer or code official, to contain, control,
correct, or extinguish any fire or burning due to drought or burning ban
during such period.
C. No person, firm or corporation shall permit, authorize, conduct, or
participate in the burning of any open fire between the hours of 12:00
midnight and 7:00 a.m.
30.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 133-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 133-8
1:55
§ 133-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than the greater of $600 or the maximum amount per offense
permitted under law, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each violation of
any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense. In addition,
in any civil enforcement action brought by the Borough to collect unpaid
fines or penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter, the Borough shall also
be entitled to collect all costs, expenses, and attorneys' fees associated with
such action. (Residents will be given a one-time warning.)
§ 133-9. Effective date.
This chapter shall take effect January 1, 2013, as provided under law.
Chapter 145
CONSTRUCTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
Nuisances; dangerous buildings — See Ch.
266.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 270.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 133-8 GIRARD CODE § 133-9
1:56
ARTICLE I
One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 467 (Ch. V, Part 2, of the 1974 Code
of Ordinances)]
§ 145-1. Title.
This article shall be known as the "One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code of
Girard Borough."
§ 145-2. Adoption of standards.
There is hereby adopted by the Borough of Girard, Erie County,
Pennsylvania, for the purpose of establishing rules and regulations for the
fabrication, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement, alteration,
addition to, repair, location and use of detached one- and two-family
dwellings, their appurtenances and accessory structures, the "BOCA Oneand
Two-Family Dwelling Code, First Edition, 1971," and each and all of
the regulations, provisions, penalties, conditions, and terms of the said code
are hereby referred to, adopted and made a part hereof as if fully set out
in this article, with the additions, insertions, deletions, and changes, if any,
hereinafter set forth, of which not less than three copies have been and now
are on file in the office of the Secretary of the Borough of Girard.
§ 145-3. Modifications and amendments.
The One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code is hereby changed and amended in
the following respects:
A. Section R-106 of the said code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R-106 Violations and penalties: It shall be unlawful for any person,
firm or corporation, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant,
to fabricate, erect, construct, reconstruct, enlarge, alter, add to, repair,
locate, improve, remove, convert, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or
maintain any one- or two-family dwelling in the Borough of Girard, or
cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any
of the provisions of this code.
It is hereby declared that certain violations of this code may constitute
a public nuisance, and, in addition to any other remedies provided by
this code for its enforcement, Girard Borough may bring civil suit to
enjoin the violation of any provisions of this code.
§ 145-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-3
1:57
§ 145-4. Interpretation.
In interpreting any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted,32 the
following principles shall be governing:
If for any reason any one or more sections, sentences, or parts of
this code are held invalid, such judgment shall not affect, impair, or
invalidate the remaining provisions. Any person, firm, or corporation
violating any of the provisions of this code shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $300, and costs
of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days. Provided: each and every day
or portion thereof during which any violation of any provision of this
code is committed or continued shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Section R-107 of the said code is hereby amended to read as follows:
R-107 Right of appeal: All persons shall have the right to appeal the
Building Official's decision to the Board of Appeals, and the terms and
provisions of Section 127, including all subsections thereunder, of the
Building Code of Girard Borough shall apply with respect to said right
of appeal.
C. Chapter 25, Section P-2501 to P-2510, of the said code is hereby deleted
in its entirety and the following is hereby added to read:
Chapter 25, Sewers and Private or Individual Sewage Disposal
Systems: Said systems shall comply with the Pennsylvania Sewage
Facilities Act, Act 537, as amended, approved January 24, 1966, and
all amendments and supplements thereto.31
A. The said code shall not supersede any provision of any law of the
commonwealth or of any regulation promulgated by any department or
agency of the commonwealth by authority of law, where such law or
regulation is in conflict with or identical to a provision of the said code
or where such law or regulation deals with a subject that local
authorities have no authority to regulate; provided, however, that any
provision of the said code that is stricter than or in addition to any state
law or regulation governing a particular subject or activity shall be in
effect and shall be enforced within the Borough of Girard, subject to the
penalties herein prescribed for violation33 of the said code hereby
adopted.
B. Mention in or regulation by the code hereby adopted of any specific use
of property or of any business or industry shall not in itself authorize
such use of property or the carrying on of such business or industry in
the Borough. It is hereby declared that it is the intent of the Borough
31.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
32.Editor's Note: The BOCA One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; see § 145-2 of this article.
33.Editor's Note: See § 145-3A of this article.
§ 145-3 GIRARD CODE § 145-4
1:58
§ 145-5. Continuing nature of provisions.
The provisions of this article, and of the code hereby adopted,34 so far as
they are the same as those of ordinances in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this article, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances
and not as new enactments. Nothing in this article or in the code hereby
adopted shall affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall it affect
any suit or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any right
or penalty or to punish any offense under the authority of any such prior
ordinance.
Council that permitted and prohibited uses of property within the
Borough shall be as governed by Chapter 425, Zoning, of the Code of
the Borough of Girard, and its amendments and supplements.
34.Editor's Note: The BOCA One- and Two-Family Dwelling Code; see § 145-2 of this article.
§ 145-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-5
1:59

ARTICLE II
Uniform Construction Code
[Adopted 6-21-2004 by Ord. No. 686]
§ 145-6. Adoption of standards.
The Borough of Girard adopts and incorporates by reference the following
codes as its Construction Code:
§ 145-7. Training and certification.
The Borough of Girard adopts by reference regulations governing training
and certification, administration and other matters governing
implementation of the UCC as adopted by the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry, as the same in the future may be amended.
A. Provisions of Chapters 2 to 29 and 31 to 35 of the International Building
Code.
B. The International Residential Code, exclusive of its Chapter 1, but
including Sections R101, R102 and R106 and including Sections AE501
through AE503 and AE601 through AE605 of its Appendix E.
C. The International Electrical Code, exclusive of its administrative
provisions, aside from those defining its scope, construction plan
requirements and required testing and inspections, to the extent they
do not conflict with administrative regulations implementing the UCC.
D. The International Mechanical Code, exclusive of Chapter 1, but
including Sections 101.1, 105, 106.3 and 107 to the extent they do not
conflict with the administrative regulations implementing the UCC.
E. The International Fuel Gas Code, exclusive of its Chapter 1, but
including Section 101 to the extent it does not conflict with the
administrative regulations implementing the UCC.
F. The International Plumbing Code, exclusive of its Chapter 1, but
including Sections 101, 104.1, 104.5, 105, 106.3 and 107 to the extent
they do not conflict with the administrative regulations implementing
the UCC.
G. The International Fire Code, exclusive of its Chapter 1, but including
Sections 101.1 to 101.3, 102, 103.1 to 103.3, 104.3, 104.4, 104.5, 105,
106, 107, 109.1, 110 and 111 to the extent they do not conflict with the
administrative regulations implementing the UCC.
H. The International Energy Conservation Code.
I. Code requirements for housing accessibility.
§ 145-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-8
1:61
§ 145-8. Election to administer and enforce.
Girard Borough hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 145-9. Adoption of UCC by reference.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code Chapters 401 to
405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the Municipal Building Code of Girard Borough.
§ 145-10. Administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within Girard Borough shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways as determined by the Girard
Borough Council from time to time by resolution:
§ 145-11. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals shall be established by resolution of the Borough of
Girard in conforming to the requirements of the relevant provisions of the
code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes set forth therein.
If at any time enforcement and administration is undertaken jointly with one
or more other municipalities, said Board of Appeals shall be established by
joint action of the participating municipalities.
A. By the designation of an employee of Girard Borough to serve as the
Borough Code Official on behalf of Girard Borough.
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of Girard Borough.
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this Act through an intermunicipal
agreement.
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this Act on behalf of Girard Borough.
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous-use structures.
A. A Joint Board of Appeals shall be established in accordance with 35 P.S.
§ 7210.501(c) and administrative regulations adopted by the
Department of Labor and Industry to hear appeals from decisions of the
Building Code Official and/or Construction Code Official.
B. A member of the Board of Appeals holds office at the pleasure of the
governing bodies of the municipalities participating in the
intermunicipal agreement and may be removed with or without cause
§ 145-8 GIRARD CODE § 145-11
1:62
§ 145-12. Requests for extensions or variances; fees.
by a majority vote of the governing bodies of the participating
municipalities. The Board of Appeals may not act upon appeals,
requests for variance or requests for extension of time which relate to
matters regulated and governed by state laws and Borough ordinances
other than the UCC and this article.
C. An action pertaining to an unsafe building, structure or equipment shall
not be stayed by virtue of an appeal.
D. The Board of Appeals shall decide an appeal or request for variance or
for extension of time by reviewing documents and written briefs or
arguments, unless the owner requests a hearing. In the event an owner
requests a hearing, the owner shall with such request pay all additional
fees therefor as are imposed by resolution of the Girard Borough
Council.
E. The Board of Appeals shall hold a hearing within 60 days after the date
of an applicant's request and payment of required fees therefor, unless
the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of time.
F. An application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent
of the UCC or regulations adopted under it have been incorrectly
interpreted; that the provision of the UCC do not fully apply; or that an
equivalent form of construction is to be used. In considering appeals
under this section, the Board of Appeals shall only consider the
following in making its decision:
(1) Whether the true intent of the UCC and this article have been
correctly interpreted by the Building Code or Construction Code
Official.
(2) Whether provisions of the UCC and this article do not apply.
(3) Whether an equivalent form of construction is to be used.
A. The Board of Appeals may consider the following factors when ruling
upon a request for extension of time or a request for variance from
regulations:
(1) The reasonableness of application of the UCC and this article's
additional standards to the particular case.
(2) The extent to which the granting of a variance or an extension of
time will pose a violation of the UCC and/or additional standards in
this article or an unsafe condition.
(3) The availability of professional or technical personnel needed to
come into compliance.
(4) The availability of materials and equipment needed to come into
compliance.
§ 145-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-12
1:63
§ 145-13. Effect on other provisions.
§ 145-14. Fees.
(5) The efforts being made to come into compliance as quickly as
possible.
(6) Compensatory features that will provide an equivalent degree of
protection to the UCC and additional standards in this article.
B. Economic cost shall not furnish justification for granting an appeal or a
variance or extension of time.
C. In considering an appeal or a request for variance, the Board of Appeals
may deny the request in whole or in part; grant the request in whole or
in part; grant the request upon certain conditions being satisfied; or
grant other appropriate relief.
D. The Board of Appeals shall provide written notice of its decision to the
owner and the Building Code Official. The Building Code Official shall
provide a copy of said decision to the Girard Borough Zoning
Administrator within seven days after his or her receipt thereof.
E. The Girard Borough Council, by resolution, may impose fees for
appeals. Such fees shall be paid contemporaneously with submission of
an appeal petition.
F. The firm(s) retained by the Borough may establish fees approved by the
Borough of Girard for additional services required of it in appeal.
G. The Girard Borough Council, by resolution, is authorized to establish
fees to be paid to members of the Board of Appeals for services
rendered.
H. The municipality involved in a proceeding before the Board of Appeals
shall be responsible for payment of fees due to Board members for such
proceeding. Fees established for appeals may include such costs as the
Girard Borough Council deems reasonable.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by Girard Borough on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this article and whose requirements are
less than minimum requirements of the code are hereby amended to
conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of Girard Borough not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
§ 145-12 GIRARD CODE § 145-14
1:64
§ 145-15. Intermunicipal agreements.
The Girard Borough Council is authorized to enter into one or more
intermunicipal agreements with other municipalities in Erie County to
provide for enactment of consistent ordinances implementing,
administrating and enforcing the UCC and for retention by said
municipalities of one or more firm(s) to provide plan review, inspection and
administrative enforcement services required under the Act and this article.
§ 145-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Fees assessable by Girard Borough for the administration and
enforcement undertaken pursuant to this article and the code shall be
established by the governing body by resolution from time to time.
B. No application for a permit, certificate or other service to be provided
by the Borough shall be accepted unless all fees and deposits required
therefor are paid with the application or other request.
C. No application for a UCC construction permit or construction plan
approval shall be accepted or referred to the retained firm(s) unless all
fees and deposits required therefor are paid with such.
D. If an initial deposit fund has been or soon will be exhausted, the
Borough's Zoning Administrator or the retained firm(s), as the case may
be, shall have authority to require that the applicant pay one or more
additional deposits toward fees for additional services.
E. If a fee or deposit under this article, resolution of Girard Borough
Council or contract with retained firm(s) is not paid by the date
required therefor, the Borough or the retained firm(s), as the case may
be, shall not perform any inspection, review or other service and shall
not issue any permit, report or certificate until such time as the
required fee or deposit has been paid in full.
A. Any person or entity committing any act(s) prohibited herein (or in the
Uniform Construction Code as adopted by this article) shall violate this
article and commit a summary offense.
B. Each day that a violation of this article continues shall be considered a
separate violation.
C. This article shall be enforced to include all attorneys' fees and costs
payable in enforcement actions.
D. A fine in the amount of $25 per violation and per day of violation is
hereby prescribed for all violations of this article.
E. Upon conviction, any person violating any provisions of this article shall
be sentenced to pay fines as prescribed in Subsection D, plus costs and
all attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the proceeding.
§ 145-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 145-17
1:65
§ 145-17. Civil and criminal enforcement actions.35
Actions to enforce the UCC and/or this article and actions to enjoin unlawful
construction or activities or compel action to remedy violations brought
in the District Justice Court or Court of Common Pleas of Erie County
shall be instituted and prosecuted by the Borough. The firm(s) retained by
Girard Borough under contract shall assist in prosecution of such actions,
including but not limited to providing testimonial and documentary
evidence. In the event the Borough is required to commence an action
for enforcement of this article or for other relief in equity or at law as
consequence of a violation, the Girard Borough Zoning Administrator and
Solicitor are authorized to prosecute said actions, and the Borough, in
addition to fines for violation and other relief, shall be entitled to recover
from the violator all costs and all attorneys' fees incurred in the proceeding.
The Borough's remedies shall be deemed to be cumulative. Election of one
remedy shall not foreclose any alternative remedy.
§ 145-18. Liability of municipal officials.
Municipal code, zoning and other municipal officers or employees charged
with the civil or criminal enforcement of this code, while acting for the
municipality and within the scope of their employment, shall not thereby
be rendered liable personally and are hereby relieved from all personal
liability for any damage accruing to persons or property as a result of an act
required or permitted in the discharge of official duties.
§ 145-19. Reporting requirements.
The person(s) or firm(s) retained by the Borough under contract to provide
services under the UCC and this article shall retain for the Borough and
as property of the Borough all documents received and generated in
performance of its duties and shall provide to the Zoning Administrator
such reports and documents as are required in the contract(s), these to
include, at a minimum:
A. Written certification of approval of construction plan.
B. Copy of site plan after foundation inspection certifying location of all
buildings.
C. Monthly report of inspections conducted.
D. Weekly reports of building activity.
E. Decisions of Board of Appeals pertaining to the Borough.
F. Final inspection reports.
G. UCC certificate of occupancy.
35.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 145-17 GIRARD CODE § 145-19
1:66
Chapter 151
CURFEW
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 157.
§ 151-1. Findings; intent.
§ 151-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, whenever used in this chapter, shall be
construed and defined as follows:
AFTER HOURS — The period of time between the hours of 12:00 midnight
and 6:00 a.m. year-round.
EMERGENCY — Refers to unforeseen circumstances, or the status or
condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life,
A. Violence in our community committed by and against minors is a cause
of great concern for the immediate health, safety and general welfare of
our citizens. The Borough highly values the health, safety and general
welfare of our minors and has a vested interest in preserving and
nurturing them as a valuable asset and investment in Girard's future.
Persons under the age of 18 are vulnerable to be pressured to
participate in violent unlawful activities and to be victims of
perpetrators of violent crimes due to their general lack of maturity and
experience. Minors who are present in public places during the late
night and early morning hours are particularly vulnerable to being
victimized and abused. The Borough needs effective tools available to
protect minors from the dangers that exist in the late night and early
morning hours at public places.
B. The Council of the Borough of Girard, recognizing the problem of
crimes committed by and committed against minors during the late
night and early morning hours and believing that it can be dealt with
more effectively by regulating the hours during which minors may
remain in public places and certain establishments without adult
supervision, and by defining more clearly certain duties and
responsibilities upon those who have custody and responsibility for the
care of such minors, hereby enacts this chapter with the intent of
promoting the general welfare and protecting the general public
through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the
Borough of Girard, promoting the safety and welfare of the Borough's
minors whose youth and inexperience renders them particularly
vulnerable to becoming participants in criminal activity and victims of
perpetrators of crime, and fostering and strengthening parental
responsibility for children.
§ 145-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-2
1:67
limb, or property. This term includes, but is not limited to, fires, natural
disaster, automobile accidents or similar circumstances.
ESTABLISHMENT — Any privately owned place of business operated for
profit, including any place of amusement or entertainment, to which the
public is invited.
KNOWINGLY — Knows or has reason to know.
MINOR — Any person less than 18 years of age and does not include any
person who is married or who is emancipated. For the purpose of this
chapter, any person shall be deemed to be 18 years of age on the date of his
or her 18th birthday and not before this time.
OPERATOR — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation
owning, operating, managing or conducting any establishment. Whenever
used in any provision prescribing a penalty, the word "operator" shall
include the members, partners, officers and managers of any firm,
association, partnership or corporation.
PARENT — The biological or adoptive parent of a minor; a legal guardian;
or an adult person 21 years of age or older and who is authorized by a
minor's parent or legal guardian to be responsible, either temporarily or
permanently, for the custody or care of any minor or for the control of such
minor.
PUBLIC PLACE — Any public street, highway, road, alley, park, playground
or parking lot or any private building, structure or area to which the public
is invited or in which the public is allowed to remain.
REMAIN — To be at or stay at a place.
§ 151-3. Unlawful conduct of minors; exceptions.
It shall be unlawful for a minor to remain in or upon any public place or to
remain in any motor vehicle operating or parked therein or thereon or to
remain in or upon an establishment in the Borough of Girard after hours,
except as follows:
A. The minor is accompanied by a parent;
B. The minor is involved in an emergency;
C. The minor is engaged in an activity related to his or her employment or
is going to or returning home from such activity without detour or stop;
D. The minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting a place where he or she
resides with a parent or the minor is on the property or the sidewalk of
an adult next-door neighbor with that neighbor's permission;
E. The minor is attending an activity sponsored by a school, religious or
civic organization, by a public organization or agency, or by another
similar organization or entity, which activity is supervised by adults,
and/or the minor is going to or returning from such activity without
detour or stop;
§ 151-2 GIRARD CODE § 151-3
1:68
§ 151-4. Unlawful conduct of parents.
No parent shall knowingly permit any minor to remain in or upon any public
place or establishment after hours unless the minor is engaged in an activity
permitted under § 151-3.
§ 151-5. Unlawful conduct of operators of establishments.
No operator of an establishment shall knowingly permit any minor to
remain upon the premises of such establishment after hours.
§ 151-6. Rules and regulations.
The Chief of Police or the Mayor is hereby authorized, from time to time, to
promulgate such rules and regulations, including the extension of hours for
special occasions, as in his or her opinion shall be necessary or useful in the
enforcement of this chapter. Such rules and regulations shall, however, be
subject to the approval of the Council of the Borough of Girard.
§ 151-7. Enforcement.
Before taking any enforcement action under this chapter, a police officer
shall ask the apparent offender's age and reason for being in the public
place. The officer shall not issue a citation or make an arrest under this
section unless the officer reasonably believes that an offense has occurred
and that, based on any response and other circumstances, no exception set
forth in § 151-3, Unlawful conduct of minor; exceptions, applies. The officer
may issue a citation against the minor and/or the parent.
§ 151-8. Violations and penalties.
F. The minor is on an errand at the direction of a parent, and the minor
has in his or her possession a writing signed by the parent containing
the following information: the name, signature, address and telephone
number of the parent authorizing the errand, the telephone number
where the parent may be reached during the errand, the name of the
minor, the minor's designation(s) and the hours the minor is authorized
to be engaged in the errand; no minor or parent shall falsify the
document described above;
G. The minor is involved in interstate travel through or beginning or
terminating in the Borough of Girard;
H. The minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the
United States Constitution, such as free exercise of religion, freedom of
speech, and the right of assembly; or
I. The minor is at a public place or establishment for an activity or event
not otherwise covered by this chapter where Council has provided
authorization.
§ 151-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 151-8
1:69
Chapter 157
A. Any minor or parent who violates the provisions of this chapter may be
issued a nontraffic summary citation. The minor may be taken into
temporary custody, in which case his or her parents or other
appropriate person shall be notified, and the minor shall be released
into the custody of the appropriate parent or parents of the minor or to
a brother or sister 18 years of age or older. If no such person is available
after reasonable efforts have been made to locate such person, then the
minor shall be release to such agencies or institutions as are
established for juvenile welfare. A referral to supportive services shall
be made where appropriate.
B. Any minor or parent who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty
of a summary offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
fine or imprisonment as follows:
(1) First offense: written warning with referral to supportive services
where appropriate.
(2) Second offense: $25 with referral to supportive services where
appropriate.
(3) Third offense: $50 with referral to supportive services where
appropriate.
(4) Fourth offense: $100 with referral to supportive services where
appropriate.
(5) Fifth offense: $200. Parents are subject to imprisonment for up to
90 days and minors to referral to the juvenile court system. The
court may also refer the offender(s) to supportive services where
appropriate.
(6) Sixth and subsequent offenses: $300. Parents are subject to
imprisonment for up to 90 days and minors to referral to the
juvenile court system. The court may also refer the offender(s) to
supportive services where appropriate.
C. Any operator convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter for the
first time shall be fined $50 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a
term not to exceed 90 days. Any operator convicted of violating the
provisions of this chapter for the second or subsequent time shall be
fined $300 and shall be subject to imprisonment for a term not to
exceed 90 days.
D. Each violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a
separate offense.36
36.Editor's Note: Original Section 9, Report to Council, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 151-8 GIRARD CODE § 151-8
1:70
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 54.
Public consumption of alcoholic
beverages — See Ch. 112.
Curfew — See Ch. 151.
§ 157-1. Prohibited conduct.
No person shall indulge in disorderly, noisy or disturbing practices, as
hereinafter defined, within the Borough of Girard. Any adult or minor
person who commits any of the following acts shall be deemed in violation
of this chapter:
A. Obscene language, conduct or behavior: uses or indulges in obscene
language, conduct or behavior.
B. Annoys or disturbs others: acts in such manner as to annoy, disturb,
interfere with, obstruct or be offensive to others.
C. Unlawful assembly: congregates with others on a public street,
sidewalk, park or place for other than a lawfully permitted purpose.
D. Shouts or makes noise: shouts or makes any other noise, either outside
or inside a building, to the annoyance or disturbance of any person or
persons.
E. Tampers with municipal property: damages, destroys or makes
improper or unauthorized use of any municipal property, including
parks, cemeteries, parking lots and notices, or conducts himself or
herself in a manner contrary to any notices, rules or regulations of the
Borough or refuses to obey orders of any person in authority with
respect to the use of or conduct in or with respect to such property.
F. Disturbs peace and quiet: disturbs the peace and quiet of the Borough
of Girard or any lawful meeting or assembly therein.
G. Prowls or loiters: maliciously loiters, prowls or congregates with others
on the streets, alleys, sidewalks and other public thoroughfares in the
Borough of Girard or in and about any public building, private dwelling
or any doorways, stairways or areas adjacent thereto in said Borough.
H. Fighting: engages in fighting or in violent behavior contrary to the
public welfare, health and safety of the citizens of the Borough of
Girard.
I. Public drunkenness: appears in any public place or thoroughfare in the
Borough of Girard so manifestly under the influence of alcohol as to
constitute a danger to himself or herself or is a danger or annoyance to
the person or property of others.
§ 151-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 157-1
1:71
§ 157-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more
than $600, together with costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
the same, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
Chapter 168
ELECTRIC RATES
§ 168-1. Residential service.
The following shall be the schedule of charges, regulations and special
provisions for residential service for electricity distributed and sold through
the Girard Borough Electric Department:
J. Noisy operation of a motor vehicle: operates a motor vehicle in such a
manner so as to cause any excessive, unusual or avoidable noise,
including the operation of a vehicle in turning corners at an excessive
speed, causing the tires thereof to squeal.
A. Service defined. Residential service (Rate RS) shall apply to customers
using the Borough's standard service for residential lighting, appliance
operation, cooking and general household purposes.
B. Character of service: alternating current, 60 cycles; supplied at 120/
240 volts, single phase, in the entire Borough.
C. Net rate. The rates of residential service (Rate RS) shall be as provided
in the Electric Rate Resolution of the Council of the Borough of Girard
and as it is hereafter from time to time adopted, amended, and modified
by Council.
D. Minimum charge. The minimum monthly charge shall be the customer
charge as established under the net rate.
E. Special provisions.
(1) Combined service. Where a customer conducts a business in the
same premises as his residence and the combined energy
requirements are measured by a single meter, the energy so used
shall be billed at the above rate, provided that the connected load
in lighting and power used for business or commercial purposes
does not exceed 2,000 watts. Where the commercial portion of the
total load is in excess of 2,000 watts, separate meters must be
installed for the residential and for the commercial requirements,
or the combined service shall be billed under the terms and
provisions of Rate GS, general service-secondary.
(2) Multiple dwellings. When two or more families, with separate
cooking facilities, occupy a residential dwelling, the wiring shall be
§ 157-1 GIRARD CODE § 168-1
1:72
§ 168-2. General service-secondary.
The following shall be the schedule of charges, regulations and special
provisions for general service-secondary for electricity distributed and sold
through the Girard Borough light plant:
arranged so that the service to each family can be metered and
billed separately. If the wiring is not so arranged and two, but not
more than four, families are served through one meter, the energy
blocks and minimum charges shall be multiplied by the number of
families served.
(3) Loads in excess of 25 kilowatts. The Borough shall install a suitable
demand meter to determine the maximum fifteen-minute
integrated demand when a customer's service requires the
installation of an individual transformer or when a customer's total
monthly consumption exceeds 6,000 kilowatt-hours for two
consecutive months or when service entrance requirements exceed
200 amperes. If the demand so determined under this provision
exceeds 25 kilowatts, a monthly demand charge, in an amount as
from time to time set by resolution of the Council of the Borough of
Girard, per kilowatt shall apply to such excess, in addition to the
customer and energy charges. The demand charge in no event shall
be based upon less than 75% of the highest excess demand during
the preceding 11 months.
(4) Temporary service for single-unit house construction. Upon
application of owner, a temporary service and meter, both of which
are to be transferred to the completed building, will be provided
upon the payment of a charge therefor as from time to time
established by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Girard.
Where the temporary service requires removal and replacement of
a permanent service drop, the payment shall be an amount as from
time to time established by resolution of the Council of the Borough
of Girard.
(5) Temporary discontinuance of service. If a customer requests a
discontinuance and reconnection of service at the same location
within a twelve-month period, he shall be required to pay a charge
for each of the intervening months in an amount as from time to
time established by resolution of the Council of the Borough of
Girard.
A. Service defined. General service-secondary (Rate GS) shall apply to
customers using the Borough's standard service for general light and
power purposes not included within the availability of Rate RS,
residential service, with billing demand not in excess of 25 kilowatts.
When the customer's active billing demand is equal to or greater than
25 kilowatts for 12 consecutive months or is equal to or greater than 50
kilowatts for two consecutive months, the customer will be transferred
to Rate GP, general service-primary, for a minimum of 12 months.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-2
1:73
B. Character of service: alternating current, 60 cycles; supplied at 120/
240 volts, single phase, and 240 volts polyphase. At the option of the
Borough, three-phase service may be made available in limited areas at
480 volts for power service or at 120/208 volts where lighting demands
exceed 75 kilowatts.
C. Net rate. The rate of general service-secondary (Rate GS) shall be as
provided in the Electric Rate Resolution of the Council of the Borough
of Girard and as it is hereafter from time to time adopted, amended, and
modified by Council.
D. Determination of billing demand. The Borough shall install suitable
demand meters to determine the maximum fifteen-minute integrated
demand when a customer's total monthly consumption exceeds 1,000
kilowatt-hours for two consecutive months. The billing demand shall be
the sum of the individual demands of each metered service. The
individual demand of each metered service shall be determined
separately.
E. Minimum charge. The minimum monthly charge for general servicesecondary
(Rate GS) shall be the customer charge as established under
the Electric Rate Resolution of the Borough of Girard.
F. Special provisions.
(1) Temporary service. Service of a temporary nature will be rendered
at the charges set forth herein, provided that the customer
reimburses the Borough for all costs of installing and removing the
service installation, including costs of poles, conductors,
transformers, meters and other equipment, together with all labor
and other expenses incurred, less the salvage recovered from all
materials and equipment removed after termination of service.
Service will not be connected until the customer has made an
advance payment equal to the estimated charges for installation
and removal of service.
(2) Untransformed service. When service is supplied at primary or
transmission voltages (2,400 volts or higher) and the customer
furnishes all necessary transformer and terminal equipment, the
kilowatt demand charge per month shall be decreased as provided
in the Electric Rate Resolution. The Borough, at its option, may
meter its service at secondary voltage. The foregoing adjustment
shall not apply to bills computed under the minimum monthly
charge provision, nor shall it apply where the Borough provides
transformation from a higher to a lower primary voltage, if done for
the express benefit of the customer.
§ 168-2 GIRARD CODE § 168-3
1:74
§ 168-3. General service-primary.
The following shall be the schedule of charges, regulations and special
provisions for general service-primary for electricity distributed and sold
through the Girard Borough light plant:
A. Service defined. General service-primary (Rate GP) shall apply to
customers using the Borough's standard service for commercial and
industrial light and power purposes with billing demand in excess of
100 kilowatts.
B. Character of service: alternating current, 60 cycles; supplied at 240
volts polyphase in the Borough. At the option of the Borough, threephase
service may be made available in certain areas at 120/208 volts,
480 volts or 277/480 volts. New customers that require transformer
capacity in excess of 2,000 kva and existing customers whose load
increases such that a transformer change is required (over 2,000 kva)
will be required to take untransformed service at a primary voltage
specified by the Borough. The Borough may meter the service either
primary or secondary.
C. Net rate. The rate of general service-primary (Rate GP) shall be as
provided in the Electric Rate Resolution of the Council of the Borough
of Girard and as it is hereafter from time to time adopted, amended, and
modified by Council.
D. Minimum monthly charge: the kilowatt demand charge for 1/2 of the
billing demand, but in no event computed on less than 1/2 of the highest
kilowatt demand billed during the preceding 11 months, nor less than
100 kilowatts.
E. Special provisions.
(1) Temporary service. Service of a temporary nature will be rendered
at the charges set forth herein, provided that the customer
reimburses the Borough for all costs of installing and removing the
service installation, including cost of poles, conductors,
transformers, meters and other equipment, together with all labor
and other expenses incurred, less the salvage recovered from all
materials and equipment removed after termination of service.
Service will not be connected until the customer has made an
advance payment equal to the estimated charges for installation
and removal of service.
(2) Untransformed service. When service is supplied at primary or
transmission voltages (2,400 volts or higher) and the customer
furnishes all necessary transformer and terminal equipment, the
active kilowatt demand charge per month shall be decreased as
provided in the Electric Rate Resolution. The Borough, at its option,
may meter its service at secondary voltage. The said adjustment
shall not apply to bills computed under the minimum monthly
charge provision, nor shall it apply where the Borough provides
§ 168-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-3
1:75
§ 168-4. Three-phase service.
Standard three-phase service shall consist of 240/120 volt, three-phase,
200 amperes to 1,000 amperes; 480/277 volt, Y-connected three-phase,
200 amperes to 1,000 amperes; 208/120 volt three-phase, 200 amperes to
1,000 amperes. Whenever a standard three-phase service is installed at the
request of a customer, the customer shall be required to make a deposit
of $500 in advance of installation. 480/240 volt delta-connected threephase,
all three-phase service under 200 amperes and any other threephase
service are special order items. Whenever a three-phase service
other than a standard three-phase service is installed at the request of
a customer, the customer shall be required to make a deposit of 50% of
the cost of installation, including labor and material, as determined by the
Borough Electric Department, in advance of installation. All deposits shall
be refunded by application to monthly bills for service after one year of
continuous service.
§ 168-5. Private outdoor lighting service.
For night lighting of private areas, the Borough will install a one-hundredseventy-
five- or four-hundred-watt mercury vapor luminaire and lamp
connected to existing facilities and replace burned-out lamps during regular
daytime working hours as soon as practicable following notification by
customer. Any additional facilities required shall be at the expense of the
customer. The rate for private outdoor lighting services shall be as provided
in the Electric Rate Resolution of the Council of the Borough of Girard and
as it is hereafter from time to time adopted, amended, and modified by
Council, with a guaranteed purchase by customer for a minimum period of
18 months.
§ 168-6. Standard service; poles; overhead distribution system.
A developer or subdivider of new residential developments may apply for
underground electric service, to be installed in accordance with the
following rules and regulations:
transformation from a higher to a lower primary voltage, if done for
the express benefit of the customer.
A. For the purposes of this section only, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
DEVELOPMENT — Five or more adjoining unoccupied lots in a
recorded plan for the construction of single-family residences
(detached or otherwise) or one or more adjoining lots for the
construction of one or more apartment houses containing an aggregate
of five or more family units, if electric service to such residential or
apartment house lots necessitates extending the Borough's existing
distribution lines.
§ 168-3 GIRARD CODE § 168-6
1:76
DISTRIBUTION LINE — An electric supply line from which energy is
delivered to one or more service lines.
ROW HOUSE — One of a continuous row of five or more single-family
residences, in which the house at each end of the row has one party
wall, and each of the intervening houses has two party walls.
SERVICE LINE — A line receiving energy from a distribution line
and delivering it to the meter or a disconnection device controlling
service to the residence or apartment building, whichever is nearer the
distribution line.
B. All distribution and service lines installed pursuant to an application for
underground electric service within a development shall be installed
underground, shall conform to the Borough's construction standards
and shall be owned and maintained by the Borough. Any streetlighting
lines installed then or thereafter shall also be installed underground.
The Borough shall not be liable for injury or damage occasioned by the
willful or negligent excavation, breakage or other interference with its
underground lines by other than its own employees or agents.
C. The applicant for electric service to a development shall:
(1) At his own cost, provide the Borough with easements satisfactory to
the Borough for occupancy by distribution, service and
streetlighting lines and related facilities, except in public ways
which the Borough has the legal right to occupy.
(2) At his own cost, clear the ground in which the aforesaid lines and
related facilities are to be laid of trees, stumps and other
obstructions. The applicant or his agent shall perform the
trenching and backfilling subject to inspection and approval by the
Borough.
(3) Request underground electric service at such time that the
aforesaid lines may be installed before curbs, pavements and
sidewalks are laid.
(4) The applicant for underground electric service shall furnish to the
Borough plans and specifications prepared by and bearing the seal
of an electrical engineer. Upon approval of the plans and
specifications by the Borough, the applicant shall, at his expense,
build the underground electric system in accordance with the
approved plans and specifications, subject to daily inspection by a
Borough representative. The Borough inspector shall have
authority to order strict compliance with the plans and
specifications as approved by the Borough.
(5) Standard streetlighting service will be by wood pole, whether by
overhead distribution system or by underground distribution
service. If a developer or subdivider desires a decorative or type of
pole other than the standard wood pole, the same will be furnished
a price to be negotiated prior to installation. The Borough may
§ 168-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-6
1:77
§ 168-7. Deposit for service prior to connection.
Prior to the connection or furnishing of service of any classification, the
Borough may require a deposit for service in an amount to be set from time
to time by resolution of the Council of the Borough of Girard. Said deposit
shall, upon termination of service, be refunded to the customer without
interest; provided, however, the Borough may apply all or any portion of
said deposit to any balance remaining due for service furnished prior to
termination.
§ 168-8. Installation of meters; costs; ownership.
The Borough shall designate where meters are to be placed in any new
installation. The Borough may, at its expense, relocate any present meters.
Meters hereafter installed shall be paid for and owned by Borough.
§ 168-9. Failure to pay for service; manner of collection.
All property to which electric current is now or hereafter furnished by
the Borough shall be subject to a lien for electric rates for said service
so supplied thereto in accordance with this chapter. Such liens may be
filed by the proper Borough authorities within the time and in the manner
provided by law whenever payment for said services has become delinquent
and irrespective of whether or not the service is furnished to the owner,
tenant or other occupier of said premises. In addition to the lien as herein
provided, the Borough shall have the right to refuse to furnish electric
current to any owner, tenant or occupier of premises where there is an
unpaid bill for said service furnished to a prior owner, tenant or occupier of
the said premises.
§ 168-10. Discount rate; penalty for late payment; reconnection fee.
The Council of the Borough of Girard may from time to time by resolution
establish a discount rate at which bills shall be issued for service provided
under all classifications. Said discount rates will apply to the base rates
as herein provided for. The net amount billed is due and payable within a
period of 15 days as shown on the bill. If the net amount is not paid within
such fifteen-day period, there shall be due and payable, in addition thereto,
such penalty as shall be established by the Electric Rate Resolution of the
Borough of Girard. If the net amount of the bill plus penalty is not paid
within 40 days of the billing date, the service shall, upon notice thereof,
be disconnected. If service is disconnected for nonpayment, the customer
shall pay, in addition to all arrearage, including penalty, a reconnect fee as
provided by the Electric Rate Resolution.
require a supply of replacement poles or parts in addition to those
required for the initial installation.
§ 168-6 GIRARD CODE § 168-11
1:78
§ 168-11. Obtaining current from other sources prohibited. [Added
2-21-2011 by Ord. No. 715]
All persons owning or occupying property to which electric current is now
or hereafter furnished by the Girard Borough Electric Company to any enduse
customers are prohibited from obtaining any electric current from any
source, including, but not limited to, solar or wind power, other than from
the Girard Borough Electric Company.
§ 168-12. Restriction on suppliers. [Added 2-21-2011 by Ord. No.
715]
No person, firm or corporation shall provide or introduce or generate
electric current for light, heat or power for end-use customers within the
limits of Girard Borough. The Girard Borough Electric Company shall be the
sole electricity generation supplier within the Borough of Girard.
§ 168-13. Violations and penalties. [Added 2-21-2011 by Ord. No.
715]
§ 168-14. Repealer; effective date. [Added 2-21-2011 by Ord. No.
715]
All ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith are hereby
repealed. This chapter shall become effective on February 21, 2011, and
shall remain in force until modified, amended, or rescinded by the Borough
of Girard, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
A. Any person, firm, partnership or corporation who or which shall violate
§ 168-11 or 168-12 of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 and/or suffer
imprisonment of not more than 60 days, plus costs of prosecution.
B. Injunctive relief. When any person, firm, partnership, or corporation
has violated § 168-11 or 168-12, the Borough may petition the Court of
Common Pleas of Erie County, Pennsylvania, through the Borough
Attorney for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, or
both, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific
performance of the provisions of this chapter. The Borough may also
seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief.
A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against a person, firm,
partnership, or corporation in violation of the provisions of this chapter.
C. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided in this section are not
exclusive. The Borough may take any, all or any combination of these
actions against any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that has
violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this chapter. Any such
person, firm, partnership or corporation violating this chapter shall be
responsible to reimburse the Borough of Girard for all court costs,
attorney fees, and expenses incurred as a result of a violation.
§ 168-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 168-14
1:79
Chapter 185
FIREARMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 157.
§ 185-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FIREARM — Includes any shotgun, pistol, flintlock, BB gun or air pistol,
including any and all handguns or rifles designed to propel a missile,
regardless of the caliber thereof.
§ 185-2. Prohibited acts; exception.
The discharge or firing of any firearm as described in § 185-1 of this chapter,
except in necessary defense of person or property, is hereby prohibited on
the properties of the Borough of Girard, provided that this prohibition shall
not apply to any law enforcement officer in the performance of his or her
duties.37
§ 185-3. Target practice.
Target practice is forbidden on properties owned by the Borough of Girard.
§ 185-4. Safety zones.
The Borough of Girard does recognize the statewide safety zone for firearms
hunters, which is 150 yards from any house, residence or other building.
The statewide archery and crossbow safety zone is 50 yards. Also, the safety
zone for all hunters, both firearms and archery, is 150 yards from any
playground, school, nursery school or day-care center.
§ 185-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $600, plus
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
37.Editor's Note: Original Section 3, pertaining to hunting, which immediately followed this
section, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 168-14 GIRARD CODE § 185-5
1:80
Chapter 189
FIRE HYDRANTS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Open burning — See Ch. 133. Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
§ 189-1. Permit requirements; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to connect onto a fire
hydrant for the purpose of obtaining water without first securing a written
permit therefor from the Borough Manager, which permit shall be issued
upon the payment of a fee in such amount as may from time to time be
established by resolution of the Borough Council. Current fees shall be on
file with the Borough Manager and shall be furnished upon request.
§ 189-2. Authority to make connections and turn on hydrants.
Girard Borough Public Works personnel and Dobler Hose and Ladder Fire
Department are the only authorized persons to make connections and turn
on hydrants within the Borough of Girard, unless during emergencies/
disasters and/or at the direction of either the Girard Borough Public Works
Department, the Dobler Hose and Ladder Fire Department and/or the
Girard Borough Emergency Management Coordinator.
§ 189-3. Violations and penalties.38
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
38.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 185-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 189-3
1:81
Chapter 193
FIRE INSURANCE CLAIMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
§ 193-1. Designated officer.
The Borough Manager is hereby appointed as the designated officer who
is authorized to carry out all responsibilities and duties stated herein and
as set forth in Section 508 of the Insurance Company Law of 1921 (40 P.S.
§ 638).
§ 193-2. Restrictions on claim payments. [Amended 6-19-1995 by
Ord. No. 645]
No insurance company, association or exchange (hereinafter the "insuring
agent") doing business in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania shall pay a
claim of a named insured for fire damage to a structure located within
the Borough of Girard (hereinafter the "municipality") where the amount
recoverable for the fire loss to the structure under all policies exceeds
$7,500, unless the named insured or insuring agent is furnished by the
Borough Manager with a municipal certificate pursuant to Act 93 of 199439
and the provisions of this chapter.
§ 193-3. Payment procedures. [Amended 6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
645]
Where, pursuant to Section 508(B)(1)(i) of Act 98 of 1992 [40 P.S.
§ 638(b)(1)(i)], the Borough Manager issues a certificate indicating that
there are no delinquent taxes, assessments, penalties or user charges
against real property, the insuring agent shall pay the claim of the named
insured; provided, however, that if the loss as agreed upon by the named
insured and the insuring agent equals or exceeds 60% of the aggregate
limits of liability on all fire policies covering the building restructure, the
following procedures must be followed:
A. The insuring agent shall transfer from the insurance proceeds to the
designated officer of the Borough in the aggregate of $2,000 for each
$15,000 of a claim and for each fraction of that amount of a claim, this
section to be applied such that if the claim is $15,000 or less, the
amount transferred to the Borough shall be $2,000.
39.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
§ 189-3 GIRARD CODE § 193-3
1:82
§ 193-4. Adoption of procedures and regulations. [Amended
6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 645]
The Borough of Girard may, by resolution, adopt procedures and regulations
to implement Act 98 of 1992, as amended by Act 93 of 1994,40 and this
chapter and may, by resolution, fix reasonable fees to be charged for
Borough activities or services provided pursuant to Act 98 of 1992, as
amended by Act 93 of 1994, and this chapter, including, but not limited to,
issuance of certificates and bills, performance of inspections and opening
separate fund accounts.
§ 193-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-19-1995 by Ord. No.
64541]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 199
FIRE PREVENTION AND FIRE PROTECTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Alarms and alarm systems — See Ch. 108.
Open burning — See Ch. 133.
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Fire hydrants — See Ch. 189.
Fire insurance claims — See Ch. 193.
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
B. The designated officer of the Borough shall pay the necessary amounts
from the insurance proceeds necessary to pay the taxes, assessments,
penalties, charges and costs as shown on the bill and credit such
payment of items.
40.Editor's Note: See 40 P.S. § 638.
41.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 193-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-1
1:83
§ 199-1. Adoption of Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 7-15-1974 by
Ord. No. 451]
There is hereby adopted by the Borough of Girard, for the purpose of
prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and property
from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the "Fire Prevention
Code," recommended by the American Insurance Association, being
particularly the 1970 Edition thereof, save and except portions as are
hereinafter modified or amended, of which code not less than three copies
have been and now are on file in the office of the Secretary of the Borough
of Girard, and the same are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if
set forth at length herein, and from the effective date of this chapter, the
provisions thereof shall be controlling within the limits of the Borough of
Girard.
§ 199-2. Bureau of Fire Prevention.
§ 199-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
CHIEF OF THE BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION — The Fire Marshal.
CORPORATION COUNSEL — The Girard Borough Solicitor.
A. The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire
Prevention in the Fire Department of the Borough of Girard, which is
hereby established and which shall be operated under the supervision
of the Chief of the Fire Department.
B. The Fire Marshal in charge of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be
appointed by the Council of the Borough of Girard. He shall continue in
office for an indefinite term and until his successor is designated by the
said Council.
C. The Chief of the Fire Department may detail such members of the Fire
Department as inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
member of Council designated by the Council President as Safety
Director may recommend to the Council the employment of technical
inspectors, who, when authorization is made, shall be selected through
an examination to determine their fitness for the position. The
examination shall be open to members and nonmembers of the Fire
Department, and appointments made after examination shall be for an
indefinite term.
D. A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually in
January and transmitted to the Council through the Safety Director; it
shall contain all proceedings under this code, with such statistics as the
Chief of the Fire Department may wish to include therein; the Chief of
the Fire Department or the Safety Director shall recommend any
amendments to the code which, in his judgment, shall be desirable.
§ 199-1 GIRARD CODE § 199-3
1:84
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Girard.
SAFETY DIRECTOR — A member of Council designated by the Council
President at any regular or subsequent organization meeting of Council
to serve until the next organizational meeting or until his successor is
appointed.
§ 199-4. Establishment of limits of districts. [Amended 7-15-1974
by Ord. No. 451]
The limits of districts referred to in the Fire Prevention Code, Sections
12.5b, 16.22a, 16.61 and 21.6a, shall be established by the Girard Borough
Planning Commission, with consideration to Chapter 425, Zoning, of the
Code of the Borough of Girard, the principal business district, closely built
commercial areas, residential areas, and heavily populated areas.
§ 199-5. Amendments to Fire Prevention Code. [Amended 7-15-1974
by Ord. No. 451; 10-21-1991 by Ord. No. 596]
The Fire Prevention Code is hereby amended and changed in the following
respects:
A. Subsection a of Section 1.4 is hereby amended by adding the following
proviso at the end thereof: "Provided: nothing herein shall be intended
to supersede the procedure for removal of fire hazards set forth in the
Act of 1927, P.L. 450, No. 291, Section 3 (35 P.S. § 1183), as amended,
where such procedure shall be followed by the Pennsylvania State
Police or its assistants."
B. Section 1.9 is amended by adding the following paragraph at the end
thereof:
f. No permit shall be issued until a fee of $2, which shall be for the
use of the Borough, shall have been paid to the Chief of the Bureau
of Fire Prevention. Every permit shall be valid for the period of time
specified by the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention and indicated
upon such permit, but in no instance for longer than one calendar year
or the portion thereof remaining after the issuance of such permit.
C. Section 1.10 is amended by adding the following sentence at the end
thereof: "No permit fee or part thereof shall be refunded upon
revocation of the permit."
D. Subsection a of Section 12.3 is amended to read as follows:
a. Permits shall be obtained:
(1) To possess or to sell or otherwise dispose of explosives or
blasting agents.
(2) To transport explosives or blasting agents.
(3) To use explosives or blasting agents.
§ 199-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-5
1:85
§ 199-6. Modifications.
The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall have power to modify any
of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon application in writing by
the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical
difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of the code, provided
that the spirit of the code shall be observed, public safety secured, and
substantial justice done. The particulars of such modification when granted
or allowed and the decision of the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
thereon shall be entered upon the records of the Department, and a signed
copy shall be furnished the applicant.
§ 199-7. Appeals.
Whenever the Chief of the Fire Department shall disapprove an application
or refuse to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that the
provisions of the code do not apply or that the true intent and meaning of
the code have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant may
appeal from the decision of the Chief of the Fire Department to the Borough
Council within 30 days from the date of the decision appealed.
§ 199-8. New materials, processes or occupancies.
The Safety Director, the Chief of the Fire Department and the Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall act as a committee to determine and specify,
(4) To operate a terminal for handling explosives or blasting
agents.
(5) To deliver or receive explosives or blasting agents from a
carrier at a terminal between sunset and sunrise.
(6) To transport blasting caps or electric blasting caps on the
same vehicle with explosives.
Provided: no permit need be obtained from the Bureau of Fire
Prevention under this section where a license or permit is required by
law or departmental regulation of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
and where a valid state license or permit is in the possession of the
person desiring to have, keep, use or transport explosives or blasting
agents.
E. Subsection a of Section 12.5 is amended to read as follows:
a. The manufacture of explosives or blasting agents is prohibited
within the Borough. This shall not apply to hand-loading of small-arms
ammunition for personal use when not for resale.
F. Article 13, "Fireworks," is hereby deleted.42
42.Editor's Note: Original Section 5(7), as amended 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 666, which
immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1,
General Provisions, Art. I). See now Ch. 133, Burning, Open.
§ 199-5 GIRARD CODE § 199-8
1:86
after giving affected persons an opportunity to be heard, any new materials,
processes or occupancies, which shall require permits, in addition to those
now enumerated in said code. The Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention
shall post such list in a conspicuous place in his office and distribute copies
thereof to interested persons.
§ 199-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1974 by Ord. No.
451]
§ 199-10. Interpretation. [Added 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 451]
In interpreting any of the provisions of the code hereby adopted, the
following principles shall be governing:
A. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code hereby
adopted or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply
with any order made thereunder or who shall build in violation of any
detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved
thereunder or any certificate or permit issued thereunder and from
which no appeal shall have been taken or who shall fail to comply with
such an order as affirmed or modified shall, upon summary conviction,
be punished by a fine of not more than $300, and costs of prosecution,
or, upon failure to pay said fine, by imprisonment for not more than 30
days, provided the imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not
excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall
be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a
reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each 10 days that
prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate
offense.
B. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
A. The said code shall not supersede any provision of any law of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, or of any regulation promulgated by
any department or agency of the commonwealth by authority of law,
where such law or regulation is in conflict with or identical to a
provision of the said code or where such law or regulation deals with a
subject that local authorities have no authority to regulate; provided,
however, that any provision of the said code that is stricter than or in
addition to any state law or regulation governing a particular subject or
activity shall be in effect and shall be enforced within the Borough of
Girard, subject to the penalties herein prescribed for violation of the
said code hereby adopted.
B. Mention in or regulation by the code hereby adopted of any specific use
of property, or of any business or industry, shall not in itself authorize
such use of property in the Borough or the establishment or carrying on
of such business or industry in the Borough. It is hereby declared the
intent of Borough Council that permitted or prohibited uses of property
§ 199-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 199-10
1:87
Chapter 205
FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 320.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Water — See Ch. 414.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 205-1. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 205-2. Applicability.
§ 205-3. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any provisions currently in effect in flood-prone
areas. However, any underlying ordinance shall remain in full force and
effect to the extent that those provisions are more restrictive.
§ 205-4. Municipal liability.
within the Borough shall be as governed by Chapter 425, Zoning, of the
Code of the Borough of Girard, as amended and/or supplemented.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community;
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices to
minimize flood damage in the future;
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage;
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units and its residents by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business, or
corporation to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction
or development anywhere within the Borough unless an approved
building permit has been obtained from the Building Official.
B. A building permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing
buildings or structures, provided that no structural changes or
modifications are involved.
§ 199-10 GIRARD CODE § 205-4
1:88
§ 205-5. Building permit required.
Building permits shall be required before any proposed construction or
development is undertaken within any identified flood-prone area of the
Borough.
§ 205-6. Issuance of building permit.
§ 205-7. Application for permit.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes in the identified floodprone
area(s). Larger floods may occur on rare occasions. Flood heights
may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such as ice jams and
bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does not imply that
areas outside any identified flood-prone area or that land uses
permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough or any
officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from
reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made
thereunder.
A. The Building Official shall issue a building permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. No building permit shall be issued until all other required permits have
been obtained from any other office or agency.
A. Application for such a building permit shall be made in writing to the
Building Official on forms supplied by the Borough. Such application
shall contain at least the following:
(1) Name and address of applicant.
(2) Name and address of owner of land on which proposed
construction is to occur.
(3) Name and address of contractor.
(4) Site location.
(5) Proposed lowest flood and basement elevations in relation to mean
sea level.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost.
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction, as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
§ 205-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-7
1:89
§ 205-8. Additional permit requirements.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located within, or
adjacent to, any identified flood-prone area, applicants for building
permits shall also provide the following specific information:
(1) A plan which accurately delineates the area which is subject to
flooding, the location of the proposed construction, the location of
any other flood-prone development or structures, and the location
of any existing or proposed stream improvements or protective
works. Included shall be all plans for proposed subdivision and land
development in order to assure that:
(a) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize
flood damage;
(b) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and
water systems, are located, elevated and constructed to
minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
(c) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to
flood hazards.
(2) Such plan shall also include existing and proposed contours;
information concerning one-hundred-year-flood elevations, and
other applicable information, such as uplift forces, associated with
the one-hundred-year flood; size of structures; location and
elevations of streets; water supply and sanitary sewage facilities;
soil types; and floodproofing measures.
(3) A document certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect that the proposed construction has been adequately
designed against flood damage and that the plans for the
development of the site adhere to the restrictions cited in §§ 205-19
through 205-21 of this chapter.
A. Prior to any proposed alteration or relocation of any stream or any
watercourse, etc., within the municipality, a permit shall be obtained
from the Department of Environmental Protection, Dams and
Encroachment Division, as specified in the Water Obstruction Act of
1913, as amended.43 Further, notification of the proposal shall be given
to all affected adjacent municipalities. Copies of such notifications shall
be forwarded to both the Federal Insurance Administration and the
Department of Community and Economic Development. Under no
circumstances shall any use, activity and/or developments adversely
affect the capacity of the channels or floodways of any watercourse,
drainage ditch, or any other drainage facility or system.
43.Editor's Note: Said Act was repealed 10-23-1979 by P.L. 204, No. 70. See now the Dam
Safety and Encroachments Act, 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
§ 205-7 GIRARD CODE § 205-8
1:90
§ 205-9. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified flood-prone area to be considered for
approval shall be submitted by the Building Official to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of a
building permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall
be considered by the Building Official for possible incorporation into the
proposed plan.
§ 205-10. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified flood-prone area to be considered for
approval may be submitted by the Building Official to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, Municipal
Engineer, etc.) for review and comment.
§ 205-11. Changes.
After the issuance of a building permit by the Building Official, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit, or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Building Official.
§ 205-12. Placards.
In addition to the building permits, the Building Official shall issue a
placard, which shall be displayed on the premises during the time
construction is in progress. This placard shall show the number of the
building permit, the date of its issuance and be signed by the Building
Official.
§ 205-13. Start of construction.
Work on the proposed construction shall begin within six months after
the date of issuance of the building permit or the permit shall expire,
unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Building Official.
Construction shall be considered to have started with the first placement of
permanent construction of the site, such as the pouring of slabs or footing
or any work beyond the stage of excavation. For a structure without a
basement or poured footings, the start of construction includes the first
B. Prior to the issuance of any building permit, the Building Official shall
review the application for permit to determine if all other necessary
governmental permits, such as those required by state and federal laws,
have been obtained, including those required by Act 537, the
Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act, 35 P.S. § 750.1 et seq., and the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, Section 404,
33 U.S.C. § 1334. No permit shall be issued until this determination has
been made.
§ 205-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-13
1:91
permanent framing or assembly of the structure or any part thereof on
its piling or foundation, or the affixing of any prefabricated structure or
mobile home to its permanent site. Permanent construction does not include
land preparation, land clearing, grading, filling, excavation for basement,
footings, piers, or foundations, erection of temporary forms, the installation
of piling under proposed subsurface footings, or the installation of sewer,
gas and water pipes or electrical or other service lines from the street.
§ 205-14. Inspections; revocation of permit.
During the construction period, the Building Official or other authorized
official may inspect the premises to determine that the work is progressing
in compliance with the information provided on the permit application and
with all applicable Borough laws and ordinances. In the event that the
Building Official discovers that the work does not comply with the permit
application or any applicable laws and ordinances or that there has been a
false statement or misrepresentation by any applicant, the Building Official
shall revoke the building permit and report such fact to the Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
§ 205-15. Fees.
Applications for a building permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to
the Borough, based upon the estimated cost of the proposed construction as
determined by the Building Official at the following rates:
Estimated Cost Fee
$0 to $200 $0
$201 to $1,000 $5
Each additional $1,000, or part thereof, beyond the first
$1,000
$1
§ 205-16. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Notices. Whenever the Building Official or other authorized municipal
representative determines that there are reasonable grounds to believe
that there has been a violation of any provision of this chapter, or of any
regulations adopted pursuant thereto, such authority shall give notice
of such alleged violation as hereinafter provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent, as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
§ 205-13 GIRARD CODE § 205-16
1:92
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or any part thereof,
and with the regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Hearings. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in
connection with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of
any regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be
granted a hearing on the matter before the Council, provided that such
person shall file with the Borough Secretary a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the notice was served. The filing
of the request for a hearing shall operate as a stay of the notice and the
suspension. Upon receipt of such petition, the Borough Secretary shall
set a time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice shall be modified
or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than 10 days
after the day on which the petition was filed, provided that, upon
application of the petitioner, the Borough Secretary may postpone the
date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such ten-day period
when, in his judgment, the petitioner has submitted good and sufficient
reasons for such postponement.
C. Findings and order. After such hearing, the Council shall make findings
as to compliance with the provisions of this chapter and regulations
issued thereunder and shall issue an order, in writing, sustaining,
modifying, or withdrawing the notice, which shall be served as provided
in Subsection A of this section.
D. Record of hearing. The proceedings at such a hearing, including the
findings and decision of the Council and together with a copy of every
notice and order related thereto, shall be entered as a matter of public
record in the Borough, but the transcript of the proceedings need not
be transcribed unless judicial review of the decision is sought as
provided by this section.
E. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order or direction of the Building Official or any
other authorized employee of the municipality shall be guilty of an
offense and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine to the Borough of not less
than $25 nor more than $300, plus costs of prosecution. In default of
such payment, such person shall be imprisoned in county prison for a
period not to exceed 10 days. Each day during which any violation of
this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to
the above penalties, all other actions are hereby reserved, including an
action in equity for the proper enforcement of this chapter. The
imposition of a fine or penalty for any violation of, or noncompliance
§ 205-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-16
1:93
§ 205-17. Appeals.
§ 205-18. Designation of flood-prone areas.
with, this chapter shall not excuse the violation or noncompliance or
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct
or remedy such violations and noncompliances within a reasonable
time. Any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged,
altered or relocated in noncompliance with this chapter may be
declared by the Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by an action or decision of the Building Official,
or by any of the requirements of this chapter, may appeal to the Council.
Such appeal must be filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision
or action of the Building Official. Upon receipt of such appeal, the
Council shall set a time and place, within not less than 10 nor more than
30 days, for the purpose of hearing the appeal. Notice of the time and
place of the hearing of the appeal shall be given to all parties, at which
time they may appear and be heard.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Council may seek relief
therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the
laws of this commonwealth.
A. Identification. The "flood-prone area(s)" shall be any area(s) of the
Borough of Girard which are identified as being flood-prone on the
Flood Hazard Boundary Map, as issued by the Federal Insurance
Administration, dated June 30, 1976.
B. Determination of the regulatory flood elevation. For purposes of this
chapter, the regulatory flood elevation, i.e., the one-hundred-year-flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet, shall be used. To
determine the one-hundred-year-flood elevation, the elevation at a
given point on the boundary of the identified flood-prone area(s) which
is nearest the construction site in question will be used. In helping to
make this necessary elevation determination, other sources of data,
where available, shall be used, such as:
(1) Corps of Engineers: floodplain information reports.
(2) United States Geological Survey: flood-prone quadrangles.
(3) United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources
Conservation Service: county soil surveys (alluvial soils).
(4) Known high-water marks from past floods.
(5) Other sources. In lieu of the above, the municipality may require
the applicant to determine the elevation with hydrologic and
hydraulic engineering techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic
analyses shall be undertaken only by professional engineers or
others of demonstrated qualifications, who shall certify that the
§ 205-16 GIRARD CODE § 205-18
1:94
§ 205-19. Elevation requirements.
§ 205-20. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction proposed
to be undertaken within any identified flood-prone area:
technical methods used correctly reflect currently accepted
technical concepts. Studies, analyses, computations, etc., shall be
submitted in sufficient detail to allow a thorough technical review
by the Borough.
C. Changes in designation of area(s). The delineation of any of the
identified flood-prone area(s) may be revised by the Council where
natural or man-made changes have occurred and/or more detailed
studies conducted or undertaken by the United States Army Corps of
Engineers, River Basin Commission or other qualified agency or
individual documents the notification for such changes. However, prior
to any such a change, approval must be obtained from the Federal
Insurance Administration (FIA).
D. Boundary disputes. Should a dispute concerning any district boundary
arise, an initial determination shall be made by the Borough Planning
Commission; any party aggrieved by this decision may appeal to the
Council. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
A. General.
(1) In the identified flood-prone area(s), the development and/or use of
any land shall be permitted, provided that the development and/or
use adheres to the restrictions and requirements of all other
applicable codes and ordinances in force in the municipality.
(2) Within any identified flood-prone area(s), the elevation of the
lowest flood (including basement) of any new or improved
residential structures shall be at or above the regulatory flood
elevation.
(3) Within any identified flood-prone area(s), the elevation of the
lowest floor (including basement) of nonresidential structures shall
be at or above the regulatory flood elevation or be floodproofed up
to that height.
B. Any structure, or part thereof, which will not be completely or
adequately elevated shall be floodproofed in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Additional information may be obtained from
the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (United States
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972).
A. Fill. If fill is used, it shall:
§ 205-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-20
1:95
(1) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from all
points.
(2) Consist of soil or small rock materials only. Sanitary landfills shall
not be permitted.
(3) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and resistance
to erosion, scouring or settling.
(4) Be not steeper than one vertical to two horizontal, unless
substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are submitted to and
approved by the Borough Building Official.
(5) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect adjacent
properties.
B. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwaters.
C. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes and storage tanks and other similar
objects or components located at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be firmly anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
D. Floors, walls and ceilings. Where located at or below the regulatory
flood elevation:
(1) Wood flooring shall be installed to accommodate a lateral
expansion of the flooring, perpendicular to the flooring grain,
without incurring structural damage to the building.
(2) Plywood shall be of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
E. Electrical systems and components.
(1) Electric water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
systems, and other electrical equipment or apparatus shall not be
located below the regulatory flood elevation, and other electrical
§ 205-20 GIRARD CODE § 205-20
1:96
equipment or apparatus shall be permitted only at elevations above
the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
level of the one-hundred-year-flood elevation.
(3) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
F. Plumbing.
(1) Water heaters, furnaces, and other mechanical equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
(2) No part of any on-site sewage disposal systems shall be located
within any identified flood-prone area(s).
(3) Water supply systems and sanitary sewage systems shall be
designed to prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system
and discharges from the system into floodwaters.
(4) All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to prevent the
infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges from the
system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made for the
drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater infiltration
occurs.
G. Paints and adhesives. When used at or below regulatory flood elevation:
(1) Paints or other finishes shall be of a marine or water-resistant
quality.
(2) Adhesives shall be of a marine or water-resistant quality.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) shall be
finished with a marine or water-resistant paint or other finishing
material.
H. Storage. No materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive or, in
times of flooding, could be injurious to human, animal or plant life shall
be stored below the regulatory flood elevation.
I. Drainage facilities. Storm facilities shall be designed to convey the flow
of surface waters without damage to persons or property. The systems
shall insure drainage at all points along streets and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge of excess runoff onto adjacent properties.
J. Sanitary sewer facilities. All new or replacement sanitary sewer
facilities and private package sewage treatment plants (including all
pumping stations and collector systems) shall be designed to minimize
or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges
from the systems into the floodwaters. In addition, they should be
§ 205-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-20
1:97
§ 205-21. Special requirements for mobile homes.
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage and
impairment.
K. Water facilities. All new or replacement water facilities shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the
system and be located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damages.
L. Streets. The finished elevation of proposed new streets shall be no more
than one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Utilities. All utilities, such as gaslines, electrical and telephone systems,
being placed in flood-prone areas should be located, elevated (where
possible) and constructed to minimize the change or impairment during
a flood.
A. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall be anchored to resist
flotation, collapse, or lateral movement by providing over-the-top and
frame ties to ground anchors in accordance with the American National
Standards Institute and National Fire Protection Association Standards,
as specified in the Standard of the Installation of Mobile Homes,
Including Mobile Home Park Requirements [NFPA No. 501A-1974
(ANSI A119.3-1975)], as amended, for mobile homes in hurricane zones
and other appropriate standards, such as the following:
(1) Over-the-top ties shall be provided at each of the four corners of the
mobile home, with two additional ties per side at intermediate
locations for units 50 feet or more in length and one additional tie
per side for units less than 50 feet in length.
(2) Frame ties shall be provided at each corner of the mobile home,
with five additional ties per side at intermediate locations for units
50 feet or more in length and four additional ties per side for units
less than 50 feet in length.
(3) All components of the anchoring system shall be capable of
carrying a force of 4,800 pounds.
B. All mobile homes and any additions thereto shall also be elevated in
accordance with the following requirements:
(1) The stands or lots shall be elevated on compacted fill or on pilings
so that the lowest floor of the mobile home will be at or above the
regulatory flood elevation.
(2) Adequate surface drainage is provided.
(3) Adequate access for a hauler is provided.
(4) Where pilings are used for elevation, the lots shall be large enough
to permit steps; piling foundations shall be placed in stable soil no
§ 205-20 GIRARD CODE § 205-21
1:98
§ 205-22. Existing structures.
Structures existing in any identified flood-prone area prior to the enactment
of this chapter but which are not in compliance with these provisions may
continue to remain, subject to the following:
§ 205-23. Variances.
more than 10 feet apart; reinforcement shall be provided for pilings
that will extend for six feet or more above the ground level.
C. An evacuation plan indicating alternate vehicular access and escape
routes shall be filed with the appropriate Borough officials for mobile
home parks and mobile home subdivisions where appropriate.
A. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to any existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50%
of its market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the
greatest extent possible.
B. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to any existing structure, to any extent or amount of 50% or more
of its market value, shall be undertaken only in full compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
A. If compliance with the elevation or floodproofing requirements of this
chapter would result in an exceptional hardship for a prospective
builder, developer, or landowner, the Borough may, upon request, grant
relief from the strict application of the requirement.
B. Request for variances shall be considered by the Borough in
accordance with the procedures contained in § 205-16 and the
following procedures:
(1) If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification
necessary to provide relief.
(2) In granting any variance, the Borough shall attach whatever
reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers necessary in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare and to
achieve the objectives of this chapter.
(3) Whenever a variance is granted, the Borough shall notify the
applicant, in writing, that:
(a) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium
rates for flood insurance.
(b) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
(4) In reviewing any request for a variance, the Borough shall consider,
but not be limited to, the following:
§ 205-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 205-23
1:99
§ 205-24. Definitions.
(a) That there is good and sufficient cause.
(b) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(c) That the granting of the variance will not result in an
unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood heights,
additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of
the public, or conflict with any other applicable local or state
ordinances and regulations.
(5) A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall
be maintained by the Borough. In addition, a report of all variances
granted during the year shall be included in the annual report to
the Federal Insurance Administration.
A. General. Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in
this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most
reasonable application.
B. Specific definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all mobile homes and trailers
to be used for human habitation.
CONSTRUCTION — The construction, reconstruction, renovation,
repair, extension, expansion, alteration, or relocation of a building or
structure, including the placement of mobile homes.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved
real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures,
the subdivision of land, the placement of mobile homes, streets, and
other paving, utilities, filling, grading, excavation, mining, dredging, or
drilling operations.
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD-PRONE AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is
subject to partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby
stream, river or watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual
and rapid accumulation of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or
eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water
and sanitary facilities, structures, and their contents.
§ 205-23 GIRARD CODE § 205-24
1:100
Chapter 209
GARAGE SALES
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purposes of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but
not including any addition, change, or modification in construction, exit
facilities, or permanent fixtures or equipment.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, office, or place of assembly, contained in one
or more sections, built on a permanent chassis, which arrives at a
site complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
unpacking and assembly operations, and constructed so that it may
be used with or without a permanent foundation. The term does not
include recreational vehicles or travel trailers.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land under single ownership which
has been planned and improved for the placement of two or more
mobile homes for nontransient use.
OBSTRUCTION — Any wall, dam, wharf, embankment, levee, dike,
pile, abutment, projection, excavation, channel, rectification, culvert,
building, fence, stockpile, refuse, fill, structure, or matter in, along,
across, or projecting into any channel, watercourse, or flood-prone
area, which may impede, retard, or change the direction of the flow of
water either in itself or by catching or collecting debris carried by such
water or is placed where the flow of the water might carry the same
downstream to the damage of life and property.
ONE-HUNDRED-YEAR FLOOD — A flood that, on the average, is likely
to occur once every 100 years, i.e., that has a one-percent chance of
occurring each year, although the flood may occur in any year.
PERSON — Any person, persons, partnership, business, or corporation.
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The one-hundred-year-flood
elevation, plus a freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on the ground,
including but not limited to buildings, sheds, mobile homes, and other
similar items.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building
or lot development; provided, however, that the division of land of more
than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access, shall
be exempted.
§ 205-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-1
1:101
§ 209-1. Definitions.
Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the
purpose of this chapter, have the meanings indicated in this section:
GARAGE SALES — A sale, open to the public, of new, used or previously
owned personal property, including but not limited to goods, wares,
merchandise and clothing, held on vacant property or on the lawn, yard,
porch, patio or in the garage, residence or other outbuilding of the person
who obtains a permit for such sale as provided by this chapter.
PERSON — Any natural person or persons, association, partnership, firm,
corporation or other entity. The singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.
§ 209-2. Permit requirements; exception.
§ 209-3. Permit limitations.
Not more than three permits shall be issued under this chapter to the same
person in any one calendar year, and not more than three sales shall be held
from any one location in any one calendar year, not including the second
weekend in August.
§ 209-4. Time limit.
No garage sale shall exceed four consecutive calendar days.
§ 209-5. Permit conditions; failure to comply.
Every permit shall be issued under the following conditions, and failure to
comply with any condition shall constitute a violation of this chapter and
shall entitle the Borough Secretary to revoke the permit:
A. No person shall cause or permit any garage sale to take place upon any
property owned by such person without first having obtained a permit
therefor. Application for such permit shall be made to the Borough
Secretary by the person at whose residence such sale shall be held, and
such application shall state the name of the applicant, the location of
the proposed sale, the day or days on which the sale is to be held and
the names and resident addresses of all other persons who are to
contribute personal property to the sale. Such permit shall be issued by
the Borough Secretary upon the filing of an application. There is no fee
for the permit.
B. This chapter does not apply to garage sales occurring within Girard
Borough on Thursday, Friday, Saturday or Sunday of the second
weekend of August annually, and all residents will be exempt from
obtaining a permit for that weekend.
A. The sale shall be held at the location stated in the application and on
the permit;
§ 209-1 GIRARD CODE § 209-5
1:102
§ 209-6. Restrictions.
Because the sale is temporary in nature and permissible in residential
districts where commercial activities are not permitted, such sale shall be
limited to possessions of the holder of the permit (and the other families
and households referred to in this chapter). It shall be unlawful to engage
or employ any individual, organization or other entity to plan, arrange,
conduct, promote or supervise the sale.
§ 209-7. Exhibition of permit.
The permit holder must exhibit the permit at the time of sale in full view of
the public at all times.
§ 209-8. Signs; notices.
§ 209-9. Prohibited items.
None of the following may be sold or offered for sale:
B. The permit shall be valid for up to four consecutive calendar days as
stated on the permit;
C. No more than three families or households may participate in the sale
by furnishing personal property for sale and/or engaging in the sale of
personal property;
D. No sale shall commence before 8:00 a.m. or after 5:00 p.m., prevailing
time, on any day; and
E. There shall be no unnecessary or excessive noise.
A. No notice, advertisement or directional sign pertaining to such sale
shall be placed or posted:
(1) On any post or pole used for traffic signs, signals or streetlights;
(2) On the surface of any street, curb lawn or sidewalk; or
(3) Without permission of the owner or occupant of the property,
anywhere on private property.
B. Upon conclusion of the time stated in the permit for the holding of such
sale, the holder of the permit shall remove and take away all such
notices, advertisements and directional signs not previously removed
and taken away.
A. Anything for which a separate license is required by law or by any
federal, state or municipal regulation;
B. Anything of an explosive, poisonous or dangerous nature.
§ 209-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 209-10
1:103
§ 209-10. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate or fail to comply with any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 nor more than $300, plus costs, and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 212
GAS WELLS
§ 212-1. Permit required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to drill a hole into the surface of the earth
to secure natural gas within the Borough of Girard without first obtaining a
permit therefor.
§ 212-2. Permit application.
It shall be the duty of the property owner to secure from the Borough
Manager a permit to drill a natural gas well. A permit fee in such amount
as may, from time to time, be set by the Council of the Borough of Girard by
resolution shall be paid to the Borough of Girard at the time of application.
No permit shall be issued until the property owner has presented the
following documents to the Borough Manager:
§ 212-3. Location of well sites.
No well site shall be closer than:
A. State of Pennsylvania permit.
B. A survey and plot plan made and certified by a surveyor or civil
engineer licensed by the State of Pennsylvania, which plot plan shall
indicate the location of the well site, together with distances indicated
thereon of the well site from any existing structures, structures on the
adjoining property, property lines and right-of-way lines.
C. The well driller's name and address.
D. The well driller's certificate that his rotary drilling rig has a one-andone-
half-inch fire hose connection on the front of the drilling rig so that
a fire hose can be connected to flood the well in case of fire.
E. The well driller's certificate of insurance.
F. The signature of the well driller or his agent that he understands and
will comply with all provisions of this chapter.
A. Fifteen feet from any building on the owner's property.
B. Twenty-five feet from any building on neighboring property.
§ 209-10 GIRARD CODE § 212-3
1:104
§ 212-4. Water well protection.
§ 212-5. Drilling method and grouting.
§ 212-6. Discharge from rotary rig.
When one is drilling with a rotary rig, the discharge pipe must discharge
the air, dirt, rock and gas at least 30 feet from any structure. The discharge
pipe must be of steel and securely attached to the diverter head.
§ 212-7. Fencing.
A fence of at least four feet in height shall be erected and maintained
around the residue (mud) pit until such time as the pit is completely covered
over.
C. Fifty feet from any building of public assembly.
D. Fifteen feet from the owner's property line.
E. Ten feet from any public road right-of-way.
A. In areas of the Borough which are not served by public water and there
exists a water well within 700 feet of the gas well site, the hole from the
surface to a depth of 185 feet shall be drilled by a cable (nonrotary)
drilling machine. This requirement shall also apply to any gas well
drilled within 700 feet of the Borough of Girard water wells.
B. In areas of the Borough which are served by public water and the gas
well site is at least 700 feet from any water well in an adjacent unserved
area, a rotary drilling machine may be used from the surface to the
depths required.
A. The well driller shall first construct a hole to bedrock with an eight-inch
steel pipe, then continue to drill through the rock to a minimum depth
of 185 feet.
B. A six-inch steel casing (11 pounds per lineal foot) shall then be inserted
to the full depth of the drilled hole. The top of the six-inch casing shall
have a six-inch slip-on flange welded to it.
C. The driller shall then, by a pressure pump, grout with portland cement
and water to seal the six-inch pipe inside the eight-inch pipe.
D. The driller shall pump the cement to the bottom and continue to pump
until the entire six-inch pipe is encased and cement appears on the
surface.
E. Drilling may resume not less than 12 hours after completion of
grouting.
F. No well shall be grouted or cemented until the Borough inspector is
present.
§ 212-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 212-8
1:105
§ 212-8. Fire protection.
§ 212-9. Insurance.
The well drillers shall carry liability insurance in the amount of $1,000,000.
§ 212-10. Violations and penalties.44
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 217
GRASS, WEEDS AND OTHER VEGETATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances; dangerous buildings — See Ch.
266.
Trees — See Ch. 392.
§ 217-1. Unlawful vegetation; nuisance.
No person, firm or corporation owning or occupying any property within
the Borough of Girard shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental purpose, to
grow or remain upon such premises so as to exceed a height of six inches
or to throw off any noxious or unpleasant odor or to conceal any filthy
A. All rotary rigs shall be equipped with a one-and-one-half-inch female
swivel connection of National Fire Department thread, connected into
the main air line, that feeds air to the rotary drill.
B. In case of fire at the well, the local Fire Department can flood the well
by connecting a fire hose to the swivel connection.
C. Two twenty-pound Purple K fire extinguishers with a connection to
connect to a one-and-one-half-inch fire line shall also be at the well site
and ready for immediate use.
44.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 212-8 GIRARD CODE § 217-1
1:106
deposit or to create or produce pollen. Any grass, weeds or other vegetation
growing upon any premises in the Borough in violation of any provision
of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance and detrimental to the
health, safety, cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough.
§ 217-2. Responsibility for trimming, cutting or removing.
The owner of any premises, either as to vacant premises or premises
occupied by the owner, and the occupant thereof, in case of premises
occupied by other than the owner, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds
or other vegetation growing or remaining upon such premises in violation
of any provision of § 217-1 of this chapter.
§ 217-3. Notice of violation; failure to comply; costs.
The Borough Council, or any officer or employe of the Borough designated
thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to give notice, by personal
service or by United States mail, to the owner or occupant, as the case may
be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds or other vegetation is growing or
remaining in violation of any provision of § 217-1 of this chapter, directing
and requiring such owner or occupant to remove, trim, or cut such grass,
weeds or other vegetation, so as to conform to the requirements of this
chapter, within five days after issuance of such notice. In case any person,
firm or corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice,
within the period of time stated therein, the Borough authorities may cause
to be removed, trimmed or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation, as the
case may be, and the cost thereof, with an additional penalty of 10% of the
cost thereof, may be collected by the Borough from such person, firm or
corporation, in the manner provided by law.
§ 217-4. Violations and penalties.
A. Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a
fine of not more than $600, plus all court costs, including reasonable
attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough in the enforcement of this
chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of the
determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate
offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents of the Borough are
hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including injunction, to
enforce compliance herewith.45
B. Such fine and costs may be imposed in addition to the cost of removal,
trimming or cutting and the additional penalty of 10%, imposed as
45.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 217-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 217-4
1:107
Chapter 228
HOUSING STANDARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Electric rates — See Ch. 168.
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
217.
Nuisances; dangerous buildings — See Ch.
266.
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 270.
§ 228-1. Definitions; word usage.
provided in § 217-3 of this chapter, but, on the other hand, prosecution
may be instituted and proceeded with under this section without the
Borough's taking any action under such § 217-3 for such removal,
trimming and/or cutting.
A. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and
enforcement of this chapter:
BASEMENT — A portion of a building located partly underground, but
having less than half its clear floor-to-ceiling height below the average
grade of the adjoining ground.
BOROUGH MANAGER — The legally designated authority of the
Borough of Girard, or his authorized representative.
CELLAR — A portion of a building located partly or wholly underground
and having half or more than half of its clear floor-to-ceiling height
below the average grade of the adjoining ground.
DWELLING — Any building which is wholly or partly used or intended
to be used for living or sleeping by human occupants, provided that
temporary housing as hereinafter defined shall not be regarded as a
dwelling.
DWELLING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms located within a
dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are
used or intended to be used for living, sleeping, cooking and eating.
EXTERMINATION — The control and elimination of insects, rodents
or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing
or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by
poisoning, spraying, fumigating or trapping; or by any other recognized
and legal pest-elimination methods approved by the Borough Manager.
GARBAGE — The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.
§ 217-4 GIRARD CODE § 228-1
1:108
HABITABLE ROOM — A room or enclosed floor space used or intended
to be used for living, sleeping, cooking or eating purposes, excluding
bathrooms, water closet compartments, laundries, pantries, foyers or
communicating corridors, closets and storage spaces.
INFESTATION — The presence, within or around a dwelling, of any
insects, rodents, or other pests.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — Any dwelling containing more than two
dwelling units.
OCCUPANT — Any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping,
cooking or eating in, or having actual possession of, a dwelling unit or
rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a building,
or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let.
ORDINARY MINIMUM WINTER CONDITIONS — The temperature 15°
F. above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous ten-year
period.
OWNER — Any person who, alone or jointly or severally with others:
PERSON — Any individual, firm, corporation, association or
partnership.
PLUMBING — All of the following supplied facilities and equipment:
gas pipes, gas-burning equipment, water pipes, garbage disposal units,
waste pipes, water closets, sinks, installed dishwashers, lavatories,
bathtubs, shower baths, installed clothes-washing machines, catch
basins, drains, vents, and any other similar supplied fixtures, together
with all connections to water, sewer or gaslines.
ROOMING HOUSE — Any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling
containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the
owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or
wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner
or operator.
ROOMING UNIT — Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but
not for cooking or eating purposes.
RUBBISH — Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; and the term shall include the residue from the burning of
wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons,
boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings,
tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass crockery and dust.
Shall have legal title to any dwelling or dwelling unit, with or
without accompanying actual possession thereof; or
(1)
Shall have charge, care or control of any dwelling or dwelling
unit, as owner or agent of the owner, or as executor, executrix,
administrator, administratrix, trustee or guardian.
(2)
§ 228-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-1
1:109
§ 228-2. Inspections.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized and directed to make
inspections to determine the condition of dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises located within the Borough of Girard in order that he
may perform his duty of safeguarding the health and safety of the occupants
of dwellings and of the general public. For the purpose of making such
inspections, the Borough Manager is hereby authorized to enter, examine
and survey at all reasonable times all dwellings, dwelling units, rooming
units and premises. The owner or occupant of every dwelling, dwelling unit
and rooming unit, or the person in charge thereof, shall give the Borough
Manager free access to such dwelling, dwelling unit or rooming unit and
its premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall
give the owner thereof, or his agent or employee, access to any part of such
dwelling or dwelling unit, or its premises, at all reasonable times for the
purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are necessary to effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any lawful rule or
regulation adopted or any lawful order issued pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 228-3. Enforcement; service of notices and orders; hearings.
SUPPLIED — Paid for, furnished, or provided by or under the control of
the owner or operator.
TEMPORARY HOUSING — Any tent, trailer or other structure used for
human shelter which is designed to be transportable and which is not
attached to the ground, to another structure, or to any utility system on
the same premises for more than 30 consecutive days.
B. Meanings of certain words. Whenever the words "dwelling," "dwelling
unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" and "premises" are used in this
chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words "or any part hereof."
A. Whenever the Borough Manager determines that there are reasonable
grounds to believe that there has been a violation of any provision of
this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant thereto, he
shall give notice of such alleged violation to the person or persons
responsible therefor, as hereinafter provided:
(1) Such notice shall:
(a) Be put in writing.
(b) Include a statement of the reasons why it is being issued.
(c) Allow a reasonable time for the performance of any act it
requires.
§ 228-1 GIRARD CODE § 228-3
1:110
(d) Be served upon the owner or his agent or the occupant, as the
case may require, provided that such notice shall be deemed to
be properly served upon such owner or agent, or upon such
occupant, if a copy thereof is served upon him personally or if a
copy thereof is sent by certified mail to his last known address
or if a copy thereof is posted in a conspicuous place in or about
the dwelling affected by the notice or if he is served with such
notice by any other method authorized or required under the
laws of the State of Pennsylvania.
(2) Such notice may:
(a) Contain an outline of remedial action which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter and with rules
and regulations adopted pursuant thereto.
B. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision of this chapter, or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, may request and shall be granted
a hearing on the matter before the Borough Manager, provided that
such person shall file in the office of the Borough Manager a written
petition requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of
the grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Borough Manager shall set a time and
place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written notice
thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an opportunity to
be heard personally or by counsel and to show why such notice should
be modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later
than 10 days after the day on which the petition was filed, provided
that, upon application of the petitioner, the Borough Manager may
postpone the date of the hearing for a reasonable time beyond such tenday
period if, in his judgement, the petitioner has submitted a good and
sufficient reason for such postponement.
C. After such hearing, the Borough Manager shall sustain, modify or
withdraw the notice, depending upon his findings as to whether the
provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations adopted
pursuant thereto have been complied with. If the Borough Manager
sustains or modifies such notice, it shall be deemed to be an order. Any
notice served pursuant to Subsection A of this section shall
automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is not
filed in the office of the Borough Manager within 10 days after such
notice is served. After a hearing in the case of any notice suspending
any permit required by this chapter or by any rule or regulation
adopted pursuant thereto, when such notice has been sustained by the
Borough Manager, the permit shall be deemed to have been revoked.
Any such permit which has been suspended by a notice shall be deemed
to be automatically revoked if a petition for hearing is not filed in the
office of the Borough Manager within 10 days after such notice is
served.
§ 228-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-3
1:111
§ 228-4. Adoption of rules and regulations.
The Borough Manager is hereby authorized to make and, after a public
hearing has been held in accordance with the laws governing the conduct
of public hearings by the Borough Manager, to adopt such written rules
and regulations as may be necessary for the proper enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, provided that such rules and regulations shall not
D. The proceedings at such hearing, including the findings and decision of
the Borough Manager, shall be summarized, reduced to writing and
entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Borough
Manager. Such record shall also include a copy of every notice or order
issued in connection with the matter. Any person aggrieved by the
decision of the Borough Manager may seek relief therefrom in any
court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by the laws of this state.
E. Whenever the Borough Manager finds that an emergency exists which
requires immediate action to protect the public health, he may, without
notice or hearing, issue an order reciting the existence of such an
emergency and requiring that such action be taken as he deems
necessary to meet the emergency. Notwithstanding the other provisions
of this chapter, such order shall be effective immediately. Any person to
whom such order is directed shall comply therewith immediately, but,
upon petition to the Borough Manager, shall be afforded a hearing as
soon as possible. After such hearing, depending upon his finding as to
whether the provisions of this chapter and of the rules and regulations
adopted pursuant thereto have been complied with, the Borough
Manager shall continue such order in effect or modify it or revoke it.
F. Upon determination by the Borough Manager that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the following action shall be taken:
(1) The Borough Manager shall direct a registered or certified letter
notice to the owner of such property. The owner shall be
determined by reviewing the county tax assessment records of the
most current year. Said letter shall be mailed to the address as
determined by such records.
(2) The said letter notice shall inform the said owner as to the violation
of this chapter, citing the reason for violation, giving the owner 15
days to remove the reason for the violation, advising that, in default
thereof, the Borough will remove the cause of violation by the use
of its own personnel and equipment and/or cause the structure to
be destroyed by fire, through the use of a volunteer fire company,
and/or hereby contract a private person to effectuate such removal.
Girard Borough may collect the cost of such repair, vacation or
demolition, together with a penalty of 10% of such cost, in the
manner provided by law; or Girard Borough may seek injunctive
relief in a court of competent jurisdiction pursuant to the Rules of
Civil Procedure, or a combination of the above, and charge the cost
thereof to such owner.
§ 228-3 GIRARD CODE § 228-4
1:112
be in conflict with the provisions of this chapter. The Borough Manager shall
file a certified copy of all rules and regulations in the Borough office. Such
rules and regulations shall have the same force and effect as the provisions
of this chapter, and the penalty for violation thereof shall be the same as
the penalty for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as hereinafter
provided.
§ 228-5. Basic equipment and facilities.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking or
eating therein, which does not comply with the following requirements:
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain a kitchen sink in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Borough Manager.
B. Every dwelling unit shall contain a room which affords privacy to a
person within said room and which is equipped with a flush water closet
and a lavatory basin in good working condition and properly connected
to a water and sewer approved by the Borough Manager.
C. Every dwelling unit shall contain, within a room which affords privacy
to a person within said room, a bathroom or shower in good working
condition and properly connected to a water and sewer system
approved by the Borough Manager.
D. Every kitchen sink, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower required
under the provisions of Subsections A, B and C of this section shall be
properly connected with both hot and cold water lines.
E. Every dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage
facilities, type and location of which are approved by the Borough
Manager.
F. Every dwelling unit shall have adequate garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers, type and location of which are approved by
the Borough Manager.
G. Every dwelling shall have supplied water heating facilities which are
properly installed, are maintained in safe and good working condition,
are properly connected with the hot water lines required under the
provisions of Subsection D of this section and are capable of heating
water to such a temperature as to permit an adequate amount of water
to be drawn at every required kitchen sink, lavatory basin, bathtub or
shower at a temperature of not less than 120° F. Such supplied water
heating facilities shall be capable of meeting the requirements of this
subsection when the dwelling or dwelling unit heating facilities
required under the provisions of § 228-6E of this chapter are not in
operation.
§ 228-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-5
1:113
§ 228-6. Light, ventilation and heating.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
H. Every dwelling unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of Pennsylvania and Borough of Girard.
A. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing
directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured
between stops, for every habitable room shall be 10% of the floor area
of such room. Whenever walls or other portions of structures face a
window of any such room and such light-obstruction structures are
located less than three feet from the window and extend to a level
above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be
deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as
contributing to the required minimum total window area. Whenever the
only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such
room, the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15% of
the total floor area of such room.
B. Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which
can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate
the room. The total openable window area in every habitable room shall
be equal to at least 45% of the minimum window area size or minimum
skylight-type window size, as required in Subsection A, except where
there is supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the Borough Manager.
C. Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the
light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms contained in
Subsections A and B, except that no window or skylight shall be
required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet
compartments equipped with a ventilation system which is kept in
continuous operation and approved by the Borough Manager.
D. Where there is electric service available from power lines which are not
more than 300 feet away from a dwelling, every habitable room of such
dwelling shall contain at least two separate floor or wall-type electric
convenience outlets, or one such convenience outlet and one supplied
ceiling-type electric light fixture, and every water closet compartment,
bathroom, laundry room, furnace room and public hall shall contain at
least one supplied ceiling or wall-type electric light fixture. Every such
outlet and fixture shall be properly installed, shall be maintained in
good and safe working condition and shall be connected to the source of
electric power in a safe manner.
E. Every dwelling shall have heating facilities which are properly installed,
are maintained in safe and good working condition and are capable of
§ 228-5 GIRARD CODE § 228-6
1:114
§ 228-7. Property maintenance standards; safety standards.
No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy
any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does
not comply with the following requirements:
safely and adequately heating all habitable rooms, bathrooms, and
water closet compartments in every dwelling unit located therein to a
temperature of at least 70° F., at a distance three feet above floor level,
under ordinary minimum winter conditions.
F. Every public hall and stairway in every multiple dwelling containing five
or more dwelling units shall be adequately lighted at all times. Every
public hall and stairway in structures devoted solely to dwelling
occupancy and containing not more than four dwelling units may be
supplied with conveniently located light switches, controlling an
adequate lighting system which may be turned on when needed,
instead of full-time lighting.
G. During that portion of each year when the Borough Manager deems it
necessary for protection against mosquitoes, flies and other insects,
every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall
have supplied screens and a self-closing device, and every window or
other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be
used for ventilation, shall likewise be supplied with screens, provided
that such screens shall not be required during such period in rooms
deemed by the Borough Manager to be located high enough in the
upper stories of buildings as to be free from such insects and in rooms
located in areas of this Borough which are deemed by the Borough
Manager to have so few such insects as to render screens unnecessary.
H. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for
ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide
an entry for rodents, shall be supplied with a screen or such other
device as will effectively prevent their entrance.
A. Every foundation, floor, wall, ceiling and roof shall be reasonably
weathertight, watertight and rodentproof, shall be capable of affording
privacy and shall be kept in good repair.
B. Every window, exterior door and basement hatchway shall be
reasonably weathertight, watertight and rodentproof and shall be kept
in sound working condition and good repair.
C. Every inside and outside stair, every porch and every appurtenance
thereto shall be so constructed as to be safe to use and capable of
supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon
and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair.
D. Every plumbing fixture and water and waste pipe shall be properly
installed and maintained in good sanitary working condition, free from
defects, leaks and obstructions.
§ 228-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-7
1:115
§ 228-8. Minimum space, use and location requirements.
No person shall occupy or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or
dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with
the following requirements:
E. Every water closet compartment floor surface and bathroom floor
surface shall be constructed and maintained so as to be reasonably
impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a
clean and sanitary condition.
F. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility which is required
under this chapter shall be so constructed or installed that it will
function safely and effectively and shall be maintained in satisfactory
working condition.
G. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility,
equipment or utility which is required under this chapter to be removed
from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let or
occupied by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be
necessary while actual repairs or alterations are in process, or during
temporary emergencies when discontinuance of service is approved by
the Borough Manager.
H. No owner shall occupy or let to any other occupant any vacant dwelling
unit unless it is clean, sanitary and fit for human occupancy.
A. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 150 square feet of floor space
for the first occupant thereof and at least 100 additional square feet of
floor space for every additional occupant thereof, the floor space to be
calculated on the basis of total habitable room area.
B. In every dwelling unit of two or more rooms, every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by one occupant shall contain at least 70 square feet
of floor space, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more
than one occupant shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor space for
each occupant thereof.
C. No dwelling or dwelling unit containing two or more sleeping rooms
shall have such room arrangements that access to a bathroom or water
closet compartment intended for use by occupants of more than one
sleeping room can be had only by going through another sleeping room,
nor shall room arrangements be such that access to a sleeping room
can be had only by going through another sleeping room or a bathroom
or water closet compartment.
D. At least 1/2 of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling
height of at least seven feet, and the floor area of that part of any room
where the ceiling height is less than five feet shall not be considered as
part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room for
the purpose of determining the maximum permissible occupancy
thereof.
§ 228-7 GIRARD CODE § 228-8
1:116
§ 228-9. Responsibilities of owners and occupants.
E. No cellar space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit.
F. No basement space shall be used as a habitable room or dwelling unit
unless:
(1) The floor and walls are impervious to leakage of underground and
surface runoff water and are insulated against dampness.
(2) The total of window area in each room is equal to at least the
minimum window area sizes as required in § 228-6A.
(3) Such required minimum window area is located entirely above the
grade of the ground adjoining such window area.
(4) The total of operable window area in such room is equal to at least
the minimum as required under § 228-6B, except where there is
supplied some other device affording adequate ventilation and
approved by the Borough Manager.
A. Every owner of a dwelling containing two or more dwelling units shall
be responsible for maintaining in a clean and sanitary condition the
shares or public areas of the dwelling and premises thereof.
B. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall keep in a clean and
sanitary condition that part of the dwelling, dwelling unit and premises
thereof which he occupies and controls.
C. Every occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall dispose of all his
rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing it in the rubbish
containers required by § 228-5F.
D. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall dispose of all his garbage and
any other organic waste which might provide food for rodents in a clean
and sanitary manner by placing it in the garbage disposal facilities or
garbage storage containers required by § 228-5F. It shall be the
responsibility of the owner to supply such facilities or containers for all
dwelling units in a dwelling containing more than four dwelling units
and for all dwelling units located on premises where more than four
dwelling units share the same premises. In all other cases, it shall be
the responsibility of the occupant to furnish such facilities or
containers.
E. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall be responsible for hanging all
screens and double or storm doors and windows whenever the same are
required under the provisions of this chapter or of any rule or
regulation adopted pursuant thereto, except where the owner has
agreed to supply such service.
F. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single dwelling unit shall be
responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests
therein or on the premises; and every occupant of a dwelling unit in a
§ 228-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-9
1:117
§ 228-10. Rooming houses.
No person shall operate a rooming house or shall occupy or let to another
for occupancy any rooming unit in any rooming house, except in compliance
with the provisions of every section of this chapter, except the provisions of
§§ 228-5 and 228-9.
dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible
for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one
infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection,
whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain
a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insectproof condition,
extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever
infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units in any dwelling
units, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner.
G. Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures
therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be responsible for
the exercise of reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof.
A. No person shall operate a rooming house unless he holds a valid
rooming house permit issued by the Borough Manager in the name of
the operator and for the specific dwelling or dwelling unit. The operator
shall apply to the Borough Manager for such permit, which shall be
issued by the Borough Manager upon compliance by the operator with
the applicable provisions of this chapter and of any rules and
regulations adopted pursuant thereto. This permit shall be displayed in
a conspicuous place within the rooming house at all times. No such
permit shall be transferable. Every person holding such a permit shall
give notice in writing to the Borough Manager within 24 hours after
having sold, transferred, given away or otherwise disposed of
ownership of, interest in or control of any rooming house. Such notice
shall include the name and address of the person succeeding to the
ownership or control of such rooming house. Every rooming house
permit shall expire at the end of one year following its date of issuance,
unless sooner suspended or revoked as hereinafter provided.
B. Any person whose application for a permit to operate a rooming house
has been denied may request and shall be granted a hearing on the
matter before the Borough Manager, under the procedure provided by
§ 228-3 of this chapter.
C. Whenever upon inspection of any rooming house the Borough Manager
finds that conditions or practices exist which are in violation of any
provision of this chapter or of any rule or regulation adopted pursuant
thereto, the Borough Manager shall give notice in writing to the
operator of such rooming house that unless such conditions or practices
are corrected within a reasonable period, to be determined by the
Borough Manager, the operator's rooming house permit will be
suspended. At the end of such period, the Borough Manager shall
reinspect such rooming house, and if he finds that such conditions or
§ 228-9 GIRARD CODE § 228-10
1:118
practices have not been corrected, he shall give notice in writing to the
operator that the latter's permit has been suspended. Upon receipt of
notice of suspension, such operator shall immediately cease operation
of such rooming house, and no person shall occupy for sleeping or living
purposes any rooming unit therein.
D. Any person whose permit to operate a rooming house has been
suspended, or who has received notice from the Borough Manager that
his permit is to be suspended unless existing conditions or practices at
his rooming house are corrected, may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Borough Manager, under the
procedure provided by § 228-3 of this chapter, provided that, if no
petition for such hearing is filed within 10 days following the day on
which such permit was suspended, such permit shall be deemed to have
been automatically revoked.
E. At least one flush water closet, lavatory basin, and bathtub or shower,
properly connected to a water and sewer system approved by the
Borough Manager and in good working condition, shall be supplied for
each eight persons or fraction thereof residing within a rooming house,
including members of the operator's family whenever they share the
use of the said facilities, provided that, in a rooming house where rooms
are let only to males, flush urinals may be substituted for not more than
1/2 the required number of water closets. All such facilities shall be so
located within the dwelling as to be reasonably accessible from a
common hall or passageway to all persons sharing such facilities. Every
lavatory basin and bathtub or shower shall be supplied with hot water
at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by
written approval of the Borough Manager.
F. The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen
and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of
any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the
maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner.
G. Every room occupied for sleeping purposes by one person shall contain
at least 70 square feet of floor space, and every room occupied for
sleeping purposes by more than one person shall contain at least 50
square feet of floor space for each occupant thereof.
H. Every rooming unit shall have safe, unobstructed means of egress
leading to safe and open space at ground level, as required by the laws
of this state and this Borough.
I. The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the
sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors and ceilings and the
maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming
house, and he shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance
of the entire premises where the entire structure or building is leased
or occupied by the operator.
§ 228-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 228-11
1:119
§ 228-11. Unfit dwellings; condemnation procedure.
The designation of dwellings or dwelling units as unfit for human habitation
and the procedure for the condemnation and placarding of such unfit
dwellings or dwelling units shall be carried out in compliance with the
following requirements:
§ 228-12. Violations and penalties.46
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
A. Any dwelling or dwelling unit which shall be found to have any of the
following defects shall be condemned as unfit for human habitation and
shall be so designated and placarded by the Borough Manager:
(1) One which is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, unsanitary, unsafe
or vermin-infested that it creates a serious hazard to the health or
safety of the occupants or of the public.
(2) One which lacks illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities
adequate to protect the health or safety of the occupants or of the
public.
(3) One which, because of its general condition or location, is
unsanitary or otherwise dangerous to the health or safety of the
occupants or of the public.
B. Any dwelling or dwelling unit condemned as unfit for human habitation,
and so designated and placarded by the Borough Manager, shall be
vacated within a reasonable time as ordered by the Borough Manager.
C. No dwelling unit which has been condemned and placarded as unfit for
human habitation shall again be used for human habitation until written
approval is secured from, and such placard is removed by, the Borough
Manager. The Borough Manager shall remove such placard whenever
the defect or defects upon which the condemnation and placarding
action were based have been eliminated.
D. No person shall deface or remove the placard from any dwelling or
dwelling unit which has been condemned as unfit for human habitation
and placarded as such, except as provided in Subsection C.
E. Any person affected by any notice or order relating to the condemning
and placarding of a dwelling or dwelling unit for human habitation may
request and shall be granted a hearing on the matter before the
Borough Manager, under the procedure set forth in § 228-3 of this
chapter.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 228-11 GIRARD CODE § 228-12
1:120
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 228-13. Conflicting provisions.
In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with
a provision of any zoning, building, fire, safety, or health ordinance or code
of this Borough existing on the effective date of this chapter, the provision
which establishes the higher standard for the promotion and protection
of the health and safety of the people shall prevail. In any case where
a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a provision of
any other ordinance or code of this Borough existing on the effective date
of this chapter which establishes a lower standard for the promotion and
protection of the health and safety of the people, the provisions of this
chapter shall be deemed to prevail, and such other ordinances or codes are
hereby declared to be repealed to the extent that they may be found in
conflict with this chapter.
Chapter 250
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 250-1. Findings; purpose.
The people and citizens of the Borough of Girard, acting by and through
their duly elected governing body, this Council, are aware that the practice
of body massage under certain circumstances can scientifically promote
physical well-being by relieving and relaxing muscle tension, stimulating
vascular circulation which enhances the disposition of waste products
generated by muscular exercise and assisting in the development of muscle
tone though a form of passive exercise. It is further recognized that the
physical contact involved in such practice can provide a source of
communication of disease for which the health and safety of the community
requires local government control and supervision. This Council further
recognizes that various businesses operating under the guise of practicing
body massage, sometimes called "massage parlors," are intended to
stimulate sexual and erotic reactions, which this Council believes is
contrary to the morals and welfare of this Borough. In addition to regulating
the legitimate and bona fide practice of massage, this Council intends
to prohibit and prevent the abuse of said practice for sexual and erotic
stimulation purposes.
§ 228-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-2
1:121
§ 250-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have
the meanings ascribed to them by this section:
MASSAGE — Any method of pressure on, or friction against, or stroking,
kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating of the
external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, lineaments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments or other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice.
MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — Any establishment having a fixed place of
business where any person, partnership, corporation or association engages
in, carries on or permits to be engaged in or carried on the practice of
massage as is defined above, but shall exclude licensed hospitals, licensed
nursing homes, medical clinics and the offices and quarters of licensed
health profession practitioners.
MASSAGE TECHNICIAN — Any masseur (male) or masseuse (female) who
engages in the practice of massage for any consideration whatsoever, but
shall exclude persons licensed by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
practice healing arts (i.e., medicine, osteopathy, podiatry, physical therapy,
nursing, chiropractic) and barbers, beauticians and manicurists insofar as
they deal with the head, hands and feet.
PERSON — Any individual or any firm, partnership, corporation or other
association of individuals or group acting as a unit.
SEXUAL OR GENITAL AREA — The genital organs, pubic area, anus or
perineum of any person; the penis or scrotum of any male person; the vulva,
vaginal cavity or breasts of any female person.
§ 250-3. Massage technician license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on the
practice of massage in the Borough of Girard without first having obtained
a massage technician license from the Borough Manager.
§ 250-4. Massage establishment license required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, operate or conduct a
massage establishment in the Borough of Girard without first having
obtained a massage establishment license from the Borough Manager.
§ 250-5. Application for massage technician license.
A. Each person seeking a massage technician license shall submit to the
Borough Manager a written application containing the following:
(1) Name and residence address of applicant.
§ 250-2 GIRARD CODE § 250-5
1:122
(2) Applicant's social security number and motor vehicle operator's
license number, if any.
(3) Applicant's weight, height, color of hair and color of eyes.
(4) Written evidence that the applicant is at least 18 years of age.
(5) A statement of the applicant of each place and type of employment
for three years immediately preceding the date of application,
indicating precise dates and addresses.
(6) A statement of the applicant of each place of residence for three
years immediately preceding the date of the application, indicating
the precise dates and addresses.
(7) Applicant's statement of conviction of any crime or forfeiture of
bond or bail involving any criminal charge or violation of ordinance
(except minor traffic violations) within five years immediately
preceding the date of the application, indicating the precise
charge, location, date and disposition.
(8) A photograph taken by the Girard Borough Police Department.
(9) Fingerprints taken by the Girard Borough Police Department.
(10) A licensed physician's certificate, obtained within not more than 30
days immediately preceding the date of the application, from a
physician acceptable to the Girard Borough Manager certifying
that the applicant is free from any contagious or communicable
diseases and that the physician based his or her conclusions, in
part, upon a recognized blood test for syphilis, a culture for
gonorrhea, a specific test or tests for tuberculosis and a specific
test for HIV.
(11) The application shall be made under oath before a notary public or
other officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorized to
administer oaths.
B. Each applicant shall pay to the Borough of Girard at the time of
submitting the application a nonrefundable filing fee for an original
application and a nonrefundable filing fee for each renewal application
as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.47
C. A license issued hereunder shall have a life or term of one year from the
date of issue. An application for a renewal of said license for one year
may be filed at any time prior to the expiration of the then-existing
license.
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 250-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-6
1:123
§ 250-6. Issuance of massage technician license.
Within 30 days after receiving a complete application for a massage
technician license, the Borough Manager may issue said license to the
applicant unless the said Borough Manager determines that the applicant:
§ 250-7. Suspension and revocation of massage technician license.
§ 250-8. Application for massage establishment license.
A. Is under the age of 18 years; or
B. Has been convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail on a charge of
violating a criminal law or ordinance, within five years immediately
preceding the filing of the application, involving sexual misconduct,
dishonesty, fraud or deceit; or
C. Is not free from a contagious or communicable disease.
A. A massage technician license may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Manager upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) The application for such license contained a false statement or
statements.
(2) The massage technician has violated the provisions of this chapter.
(3) The massage technician contracts a contagious or communicable
disease.
(4) The massage technician is convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail
on a charge of violating a criminal law or ordinance in this or any
other jurisdiction involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit.
B. The Borough Manager shall serve the massage technician with written
notice of said suspension or revocation, specifying the reasons therefor,
before said suspension or revocation shall become effective. Service of
said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to the person in
apparent charge of the massage establishment.
C. The massage technician shall have the right to a hearing on said
suspension or revocation, which hearing shall be held before the
Council of the Borough of Girard within the 30 days after the service of
the notice of such suspension or revocation, whether or not the
suspension or revocation was effective immediately.
A. Each person seeking a massage establishment license shall submit to
the Borough Manager a written application containing the following:
(1) A detailed statement indicating the exact nature of the massage to
be administered, the proposed location of the establishment and
the detailed plans therefor.
§ 250-6 GIRARD CODE § 250-8
1:124
§ 250-9. Issuance of massage establishment license.
(2) Specific information on each individual, partner, limited partner,
corporate officer, corporate director, corporate stockholder owning
more than 3% of the issued and outstanding stock of a corporate
applicant, comprising the applicant, to include the following:
(a) Name and residence address.
(b) Social security number and motor vehicle operator's license
number, if any.
(c) Height, weight, color of eyes and color of hair.
(d) A statement of each place and type of employment for three
years immediately preceding the date of application, indicating
the precise dates and addresses.
(e) A statement of each place of residence for three years
preceding the date of application, indicating precise dates and
addresses.
(f) A statement of conviction of any crime or forfeiture of bond or
bail involving any criminal charge or violation of ordinance
(except minor traffic violations) within five years immediately
preceding the date of application, indicating the precise
charge, location, date and disposition.
(g) A photograph and/or fingerprints taken by the Girard Borough
Police Department.
(3) The application shall be made under oath before a notary public or
other officer of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania authorized to
administer oaths.
(4) If the applicant is a corporation, a duly certified copy of its articles
of incorporation shall be submitted with the application.
(5) If the applicant is a partnership, a duly certified copy of the
partnership agreement shall be submitted with the application.
B. Each applicant shall pay to the Borough Manager of Girard at the time
of submitting the application a nonrefundable filing fee of $200 for an
original application and a nonrefundable filing fee of $100 for each
renewal application. In addition, the applicant shall pay such other fees
as may be required under any other ordinance which may be applicable.
C. A license issued hereunder shall have a life or term of one year from the
date of issue of the final massage establishment license (Part II). An
application for a renewal of said license for one year may be filed at any
time prior to the expiration of the then-existing license.
A. A massage establishment license shall consist of two parts, as follows:
§ 250-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-9
1:125
§ 250-10. Suspension and revocation of massage establishment
license.
(1) Part I: an indication that the persons involved in said application
meet the requirements of § 250-8 hereinabove and that the
proposed operation, if permitted, will not violate other applicable
ordinances of the Borough.
(2) Part II: the final license to be issued before occupancy or use of said
establishment.
B. Within 30 days after receiving a complete application, the Borough
Manager may issue Part I of said massage establishment license to the
applicant, unless the said Borough Manager determines that:
(1) An individual comprising the applicant has been convicted of or has
forfeited bond or bail on a charge of violating a criminal law or
ordinance within five years immediately preceding the filing of the
application involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit; or
(2) The operation, as proposed by the applicant, if permitted, would
not comply with all applicable ordinances of the Borough of Girard.
C. Within 10 days after receiving a written request from the applicant for
inspection of the completed establishment, the Borough Manager shall
inspect said establishment and issue the final massage establishment
license (Part II) to the applicant, provided that a valid Part I of said
license has been issued less than one year before said issuance of the
final license, unless the said Borough Manager determines that the
establishment does not comply with the requirements of § 250-11
hereinbelow.
A. A massage establishment license may be suspended or revoked by the
Borough Manager upon the occurrence of any of the following events:
(1) The application for such license contained a false statement or
statements.
(2) The massage establishment licensee has violated the provisions of
this chapter.
(3) An individual comprising the massage establishment licensee has
been convicted of or has forfeited bond or bail on a charge of
violating a criminal law or ordinance in this or any other
jurisdiction involving sexual misconduct, dishonesty, fraud or
deceit.
B. The Borough Manager shall serve the massage establishment licensee
with written notice of said suspension or revocation, specifying the
reason therefor, before said suspension or revocation shall become
§ 250-9 GIRARD CODE § 250-10
1:126
§ 250-11. Necessary facilities for massage establishments.
effective. Service of said notice shall be deemed effective if delivered to
a person in apparent charge of the massage establishment.
C. The massage establishment licensee shall have the right to a hearing on
said suspension or revocation, which hearing shall be held before the
Girard Borough Council within 30 days after the service of the notice of
such suspension or revocation, whether or not the suspension or
revocation was effective immediately.
A. Construction of rooms used for toilets, tubs, steam baths and showers
shall be made waterproof with approved waterproof materials and shall
be installed in accordance with the appropriate codes of Girard
Borough.
B. All massage tables, bathtubs, shower stalls, steam or bath areas and
floors shall have surfaces which may be readily disinfected.
C. Adequate bathing, dressing and locker facilities shall be provided for
the patrons to be served at any given time. In the event male and female
patrons are to be served simultaneously, separate bathing, dressing,
locker and massage room facilities shall be provided.
D. The premises shall have adequate equipment for disinfecting and
sterilizing nondisposable instruments and materials used in
administering massages. Such nondisposable instruments and
materials shall be disinfected after use on each patron.
E. Closed cabinets shall be provided and used for the storage of clean
linens, towels and other materials used in connection with
administering massages. All soiled linens, towels and other materials
shall be kept in properly covered containers or cabinets, which
containers or cabinets shall be kept separate from the clean storage
areas.
F. Toilet facilities shall be provided in convenient locations. When
employees and patrons of different sexes are on the premises at the
same time, separate toilet facilities shall be provided for each sex. A
single water closet per sex shall be provided for each 20 or more
employees or patrons of that sex on the premises at any one time.
Urinals may be substituted for half of the water closets for the male
patrons after one water closet has been provided. Toilets shall be
designated as to the sex accommodated therein.
G. Lavatories or washbasins provided with both hot and cold running
water shall be installed in either the toilet room or vestibule
immediately adjacent thereto. Lavatories or washbasins shall be
provided with soap and a dispenser and with sanitary towels.
H. The premises shall be equipped with a service sink for custodial
supplies.
§ 250-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-11
1:127
§ 250-12. Operating regulations.
I. The premises shall comply with all building and safety codes of the
commonwealth and the Borough of Girard.
A. All areas of the massage establishment, including appliances and
apparatus, shall be kept clean and operated in a sanitary condition.
B. Price rates for all services shall be prominently posted in the reception
area in a location available to all prospective customers.
C. All employees of a massage establishment, including massage
technicians, shall be clean and wear clean, nontransparent outer
garments. A separate dressing room for each sex must be available on
the premises, and each dressing room shall contain a tub or shower in
good working order and individual lockers for each employee and
customer. Doors to such dressing rooms shall open inward and shall be
self-closing.
D. The massage establishment shall be stocked with clean, laundered
sheets and towels in sufficient quantity and shall be laundered after
each use thereof and stored in a sanitary manner.
E. The sexual and genital area of patrons must be covered by towels,
cloths or undergarments when in the presence of an employee or
massage technician.
F. All walls, ceilings, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steams rooms, and
all other physical facilities shall be in good repair and maintained in a
clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor
rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments and toilet
rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in
operation. Bathtubs and showers shall be thoroughly cleaned after each
use. When carpeting is used on the floors, it shall be kept dry.
G. Oils, creams, lotions and other preparations used in administering
massages shall be kept in clean, closed containers or cabinets.
H. Eating in the massage work areas shall not be permitted. Animals,
except for Seeing Eye dogs, shall not be permitted in the massage work
areas.
I. Each massage technician shall wash his or her hands in hot running
water, using a proper soap or disinfectant before administrating a
massage to each patron.
J. Each patron must bathe his or her entire body on the massage
establishment premises before submitting to massage by a massage
technician.
K. Each massage establishment and each massage technician shall keep
and maintain at all times on the premises of said establishment a
written record of the patrons served, which record shall include the
§ 250-11 GIRARD CODE § 250-12
1:128
§ 250-13. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful:
§ 250-14. Display of license.
The licensee of a massage establishment and each massage technician shall
display their respective valid licenses in a conspicuous place within the
massage establishment in such manner that the same may be readily seen
by persons upon entering the establishment.
§ 250-15. Identification card.
§ 250-16. Inspections.
name and address of the patron, the date and time (including duration)
of the massage operation, the type and nature of the massage
performed and the fee or other consideration charged. Said records
shall be maintained for not less than five years.
A. For a massage technician or any other person to perform a massage on
a person of the opposite sex.
B. For a massage technician or any other person knowingly to place his or
her hand or hands upon or to touch or be in contact with any part of his
or her body, to fondle, or caress in any other manner, or to massage the
sexual or genital area of any other person.
C. For a massage technician or any other person to perform, offer or agree
to perform any act which would require the touching or manipulating
by any means of the sexual or genital area of any other person.
D. To employ any person under the age of 18 years in any capacity in and
at a massage establishment.
E. To permit any person under the age of 18 years to come to or remain on
the premises of any massage establishment, whether as a patron, guest
or otherwise.
F. To employ a person to practice a massage without such person being
duly licensed as a massage technician.
A. The Borough Manager shall provide each duly licensed massage
technician with an identification card containing the technician's
photograph, name, license number and license expiration date.
B. Each duly licensed massage technician shall wear and display said
identification card on the front of his or her outermost garment at all
times while on the premises of the massage establishment.
C. It shall be unlawful for any massage technician to violate the provisions
of § 250-3 of this chapter.
§ 250-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-16
1:129
§ 250-17. Transfer of license.
All licenses issued hereunder are nontransferable. Said licenses are issued
only for a given geographical premises in the case of a massage
establishment license and to a specific person in the case of the massage
technician license.
§ 250-18. Deferred compliance.
§ 250-19. Violations and penalties.
A. The Borough Manager or his designee shall, from time to time, make
inspections of each massage establishment for the purpose of
determining compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Such
inspection shall include the right to inspect the records required to be
maintained pursuant to § 250-12K hereinabove. In applying for and
accepting a massage establishment license, the licensee is deemed to
have agreed to such inspection without notice or legal process.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to prohibit or attempt to prohibit an
inspection as provided in Subsection A above.
A. The owner, operator or massage technician of a massage establishment
operating in the Borough of Girard as of the effective date of this
chapter may apply to the Borough Manager for and may be granted a
grace period not to exceed six months in order to comply with the
requirements necessary for the issuance of a final massage
establishment license (Part II) or a massage technician license pursuant
to §§ 250-4 and 250-8 of this chapter.
B. With the sole exception of the foregoing provisions of Subsection A
herein, all other provisions of this chapter shall become effective upon
enactment hereof.
A. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of
and liable for a summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine not exceeding $600 and the costs of the action.
In default of payment of such fine and costs, such person may be
sentenced and committed to the Erie County Prison for a period not
exceeding 30 days.
B. Any person who is convicted of violating any part of § 250-12 of this
chapter shall suffer an automatic revocation of any license issued under
this chapter and shall be permanently disqualified from making
application for any license hereunder in the future.
§ 250-16 GIRARD CODE § 250-19
1:130
Chapter 259
MOBILE HOMES AND MOBILE HOME PARKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 250-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 250-19
1:131

ARTICLE I
Mobile Homes
[Adopted 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 703]
§ 259-1. Title.
The official title of this article is the "Girard Borough Mobile Home
Ordinance."
§ 259-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling containing a
minimum of 800 square feet of heated living area intended for permanent
occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units designed to be
joined into one integral unit capable of again being separated for repeated
towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready for occupancy except for
minor and incidental unpacking and assembly operations and designed so
that it may be used with or without a permanent foundation and whether
or not it is placed on a permanent foundation. A travel trailer or motorized
home, as defined herein, shall be construed as a mobile home if occupied or
connected with utilities.
§ 259-3. Use restrictions.
All mobile homes and use thereof shall comply with the following
requirements:
A. No mobile home shall be installed unless a permit is first obtained.
B. No mobile home shall be installed unless so installed on masonry or
poured concrete footers.
C. Each mobile home must have approved skirting around the entire
perimeter of the dwelling.
D. Each mobile home shall have adequate tie-downs, able to withstand a
wind pressure of 15 pounds per square foot on an exposed vertical
surface. Either over-the-top and/or frame tie-downs shall be used. The
strapping for any over-the-top tie-downs shall be of 4,700 pounds'
tensile strength.
E. Each mobile home must meet Borough setback requirements and shall
not be installed on a lot consisting of less than 1.5 acres of land. More
than one mobile home may be installed on a single lot only if there is at
least 1.5 acres of land for each mobile home so installed.
F. Each mobile home shall be maintained in a state of good repair, suitable
for human habitation.
§ 259-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-3
1:133
§ 259-4. Removal permit required.
No mobile home, whether installed on a private lot or in a mobile home
park, shall be removed without first obtaining a permit from the Girard
Borough Tax Collector. Such permit shall be issued only upon payment
of taxes assessed against the home and unpaid at the time the permit is
requested.
§ 259-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this article shall, upon being
found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the
Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs,
including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough as a result
thereof. No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable
until the date of the determination of violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil
Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has
been a violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for
the person, partnership or corporation violating this article to have believed
that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed
to have been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date
of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and
thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate
violation. These remedies are in addition to all other remedies available
under law or equity, including, but in no way limited to, injunctive relief.
G. Occupancy prior to issuance of a permit, inspection, and prior approval
shall constitute a violation of this article.
H. A manufactured or mobile home is authorized in the R-1 Zoning
District, subject to regulations established in Chapter 425, Zoning, of
the Code of the Borough of Girard.
§ 259-3 GIRARD CODE § 259-5
1:134
ARTICLE II
Manufactured and Mobile Home Parks
[Adopted 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 705]
§ 259-6. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Manufactured or Mobile Home Park
Ordinance of Girard Borough."
§ 259-7. Definitions.
A. General interpretation. Words not specifically defined in this section
shall be given their usual and customary definition.
B. Terms defined in other laws. Terms not specifically defined in this
section but which are defined in other Borough ordinances shall be
interpreted according to such other established definitions. It is not the
intention of this article to establish new definitions for terms expressly
defined in other Borough ordinances, except as deemed appropriate for
this article.
C. Defined terms. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ADMINISTRATOR — That person designated as Girard Borough
Manager by resolution of the Council to administer and enforce this
article and shall include his or her designee(s).
AUTHORITY — That department of a political subdivision which owns
and/or operates public water, public sanitary sewer and/or public storm
sewer lines and facilities.
HEALTH DEPARTMENT — The Erie County Department of Health.
HUD-CODE HOME — A manufactured or mobile home which is
constructed in accordance with standards set forth in Manufactured
Home Construction and Safety Standards, developed and administered
by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development,
as the same may in the future be amended. This term shall be deemed
included within a manufactured or mobile home.
LICENSE — A written approval and authorization, in such form as is
adopted by resolution of the Girard Borough Council, authorizing a
person to operate and maintain a manufactured or mobile home park.
MANUFACTURED HOME — Any home that is built in a factory to
the HUD Code and transported on its own wheel, axle and/or chassis
system and installed on a building site, whether or not wheels and
axles are removed during siting; shall be deemed to include "mobile
home" and all other equivalent terms, especially when located within a
manufactured or mobile home park.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK — A development or area
under single ownership comprising at least five contiguous areas of
§ 259-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-7
1:135
§ 259-8. Applicability; effect of other provisions.
land where owners of manufactured homes place their manufactured
homes on rented land space or owners of land place manufactured
homes for rental of the home and space by others for nontransient use.
MANUFACTURED OR MOBILE HOME PARK LOT — A parcel of land
within a manufactured or mobile home park, constructed and installed
with utility connections, off-street parking area and other
improvements or appurtenances required under applicable laws,
ordinances or regulations or desired by the lot owner or occupant, for
a single manufactured home and the exclusive use of its occupants.
MOBILE HOME — Generally an outdated term since implementation of
the HUD Code, which refers to manufactured homes; shall be deemed
incorporated with the term "manufactured home."
MODULAR HOME — A factory-built home designed to meet state or
local building codes, rather than the HUD Code, and transported for
installation on a building site.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, partnership, corporation, trust, estate,
public or private association, limited-liability company or other entity.
SERVICE BUILDING/COMMUNITY SERVICE FACILITY — A building or
structure housing operational, office, recreational, park maintenance
and/or other facilities built to serve a manufactured or mobile home
park and/or conform to required local standards.
SINGLE-WIDE HOME — A single-section manufactured or mobile home
usually measuring no wider than 12 feet or 14 feet and no longer than
70 feet.
SITE-BUILT/STICK-BUILT HOME — A home erected at a building site
using conventional means of construction with few prefabricated
components. When constructed on a manufactured home lot by the lot
owner or other person, it shall be deemed a manufactured home for
purposes of this article.
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE — Chapter
370, Subdivision and Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of
Girard.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE/CONSTRUCTION CODE — The
Pennsylvania Uniform Construction Code, as adopted by ordinance of
Girard Borough.48
A. Application of article. The regulations of this article shall apply
generally to all manufactured or mobile home parks developed,
constructed and/or used in Girard Borough.
B. General rule of application. Except as specifically set forth in this
article, the regulations of this article shall not be deemed to modify,
48.Editor's Note: See Ch. 145, Art. II, Uniform Construction Code.
§ 259-7 GIRARD CODE § 259-8
1:136
§ 259-9. Permit for construction and development.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to construct,
develop, alter or extend any manufactured or mobile home park in Girard
Borough without first obtaining and maintaining in full force and effect a
permit issued by Girard Borough Council through the administrator in the
name of such person for the specific development, construction, alteration
or extension proposed.
amend or alter substantive and procedural provisions of other federal
and state laws and regulations and/or Girard Borough ordinances and
resolutions, including but not limited to Chapter 370, Subdivision and
Land Development, Chapter 360, Stormwater Management, Chapter
425, Zoning, and resolutions adopted by the Girard Borough Council
which relate thereto, as now in effect and as may in the future be
amended.
C. Development and design regulations. Regulations governing land use,
land development, design and standards for manufactured or mobile
home parks, stormwater management and construction of required
improvements as set forth in Chapter 425, Zoning, Chapter 370,
Subdivision and Land Development, and Chapter 360, Stormwater
Management, are not intended to be modified as to manufactured or
mobile home parks and shall govern.
D. Building and construction standards. Standards for construction of
manufactured modular and/or stock-built homes as established by the
United States Department of Housing and Urban Development and/or
the Uniform Construction Code shall govern, and this article is not
intended to amend or alter the same.
E. Forms and documents. Except as may be specifically established in this
article, forms of the Borough which relate to subdivisions, land
developments, permits, zoning, construction and stormwater
management shall be as have been adopted in other ordinances or by
resolution of the Girard Borough Council. Forms generally are not
prescribed in this article so as to allow for adoption and amendment of
forms by resolution of the Girard Borough Council as it deems such
documents and revisions to be necessary or appropriate.
A. No permit to develop, construct, alter or extend a manufactured or
mobile home park shall be issued until the applicant first has obtained
all zoning, Construction Code, land development and stormwater
management plan, authority, Health Department and other required
approvals and has either constructed all required improvements or
tendered to the Borough financial security to ensure their proper
construction.
B. The application for permit shall be made in writing by the owner on
such form as is adopted by Girard Borough Council and shall be
submitted to the administrator.
§ 259-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-9
1:137
C. The application for permit shall be signed by the owner(s) and shall set
forth such information as the Council shall require, this to include, at a
minimum:
(1) Name, address and telephone number of each owner;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the person who shall
operate the proposed park, if different than the owner;
(3) Street address, Girard Borough index number and Erie County tax
index number for the subject property;
(4) Size in acres of the subject property;
(5) Number of lots proposed within the park;
(6) Name, address and telephone number of applicant's engineer;
(7) The date on which the application for land development for the
park was submitted and/or approved, as is applicable;
(8) Detail as required for land developments and manufactured or
mobile home parks under Chapter 370, Subdivision and Land
Development;
(9) If not otherwise provided, detail regarding proposed buildings,
service buildings and community service facilities proposed;
location, height, direction and intensity of outdoor lighting;
location and size of all home lots; and location of all screening and
detail of height and materials of construction; and
(10) A time schedule for development of the park.
D. Upon receipt of an application, supplements and payments of such fee
therefor as is established by the Girard Borough Council, the
administrator shall review the application to determine whether the
proposed park complies with regulations in all applicable ordinances. If
an application complies with all applicable ordinances, the
administrator shall issue a permit to the applicant, which shall be valid
for a term of one year.
(1) No permit shall be issued where the subject land is not authorized
under this article or Chapter 425, Zoning, of the Code of the
Borough of Girard to be developed and used as a manufactured or
mobile home park.
(2) No permit shall be issued until all required land development and/
or subdivision plans have been approved, a stormwater
management plan for the development has been approved and the
applicant has either constructed all required improvements or
tendered to Girard Borough financial security required to ensure
their construction.
§ 259-9 GIRARD CODE § 259-9
1:138
§ 259-10. Operation license.
(3) If the development will involve construction which is subject to the
Uniform Construction Code, the applicant shall be obligated to
apply for and obtain all construction permits required under the
ordinance implementing that code. The permit required under this
section is not intended to pertain to the Construction Code.
(4) If the applicant is unable to complete construction, alteration or
extension of the park by the end of the one-year term of the issued
permit and submits a written request for an extension of such
permit, the Girard Borough Council, upon good cause shown, shall
have authority to extend the term of the permit.
A. License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a
manufactured or mobile home park in Girard Borough unless he or she
holds a license issued annually by the Borough in the name of such
person(s) for the specified park. Proof of registration by the Health
Department shall be furnished to the administrator at the time of
application for a license or renewal license.
B. Application. The application for license or renewal license shall be
made in writing by the owner on such form as is adopted by Girard
Borough Council and shall be submitted to the administrator.
C. License fee. The applicant shall tender with an application for license or
renewal license payment of the fee therefor as is prescribed by
resolution of Girard Borough.
D. License term. Each license shall be valid for a period of one year,
commencing July 1 and concluding the following June 30.
E. Action on application. The administrator shall, upon receipt of an
application, issue a license or renewal license upon confirming that the
applicant and the park are in compliance with all regulations in this
article and other applicable laws and ordinances. If the administrator
determines that the applicant is not in compliance with a regulation, the
applicant shall be denied and the reason for denial stated in writing and
communicated to the applicant.
F. Transfer of ownership. Each person holding a license shall file notice in
writing to the administrator within 10 days after having sold,
transferred or disposed of ownership and/or operational responsibility
for any manufactured or mobile home park. Such notice shall identify
the new owner or operator.
G. Suspension. A license may be suspended in the discretion of the
administrator or Girard Borough Council if the owner or operator
should fail to remedy violations of this article within the time prescribed
therefor in an enforcement notice issued by the administrator. In the
event a license is suspended, the administrator shall issue to the
licensee written notice of the suspension, and such suspension shall
§ 259-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-10
1:139
§ 259-11. Refuse and recycling.
The licensee shall be responsible for complying with all regulations
governing collection and disposition of municipal waste, recyclable
materials and leaf waste within the park as are established by Girard
Borough Council.
§ 259-12. Insect and rodent control.
Grounds, buildings and structures within the park shall be maintained free
of insects and rodent harborage and infestation. Extermination methods
and other measures to control insects and rodents shall comply with
requirements of all applicable agencies.
§ 259-13. Litter control.
Manufactured or mobile home park areas shall be kept free of litter, rubbish
and flammable materials.
§ 259-14. Fire prevention.
Manufactured or mobile home parks and homes within parks shall at all
times comply with all regulations in the International Fire Prevention Code
and other applicable laws and regulations.
§ 259-15. Park management.
remain in effect until such time as all cited violations have been
remedied.
A. Responsibilities of licensee.
(1) The licensee for a manufactured or mobile home park shall at all
times operate and maintain the park in compliance with this article
and shall provide supervision adequate to maintain the park, its
facilities and equipment in good repair and in a clean and sanitary
condition.
(2) The licensee shall supervise the placement of each manufactured
home on its park lot, which includes securing its stability and
installing all utility, water and sewer connections.
(3) The licensee shall ensure installation and continued service of
water, sewage disposal and utility services to the park and all lots
within it in accordance with requirements of applicable Borough
ordinances.
(4) The licensee at all times shall ensure that the park and all portions
of it (including all homes within the park) are used solely for
residential purposes, this not prohibiting those activities which are
required for the direct servicing and well-being of park residents
and for management and maintenance of the park.
§ 259-10 GIRARD CODE § 259-15
1:140
§ 259-16. Fees.
The Girard Borough Council is authorized to establish and, in its discretion,
amend fees for permits, licenses, inspections and other services provided
under and pursuant to this article and other applicable ordinances.
§ 259-17. Inspections.
The administrator, the Engineer and/or their designees are authorized and
instructed to conduct such investigations as they deem necessary and
appropriate in consideration of applications for permits and/or licenses and
to ensure compliance with this article and other applicable ordinances.
§ 259-18. Violations and penalties.
In accordance with this article, as stated herein or as may in the future be
amended:
(5) The licensee at all times shall give the administrator free access to
the park and to all lots, service buildings and other community
service facilities for the purpose of inspection.
B. Nothing in this article shall be deemed to prohibit the sale of a
manufactured home located on a park lot and connected to utilities.
C. Unless properly zoned, no manufactured home sales lot or facility shall
be permitted within a park.
A. Any person who fails to apply for and obtain a permit, license or
renewal license required under §§ 259-9 and 259-10 of this article shall
violate this article and, upon such determination, shall be obligated to
pay an administrative fine of $200. If such administrative fine is not
paid on or before the date set forth in the enforcement notice, a civil
action shall be commenced, and a civil fine of $300 is prescribed upon a
finding of violation.
B. Any person who violates any other provision of this article shall violate
this article and, upon such determination, shall be obligated to pay an
administrative fine of $300. If such administrative fine is not paid on or
before the date set forth in the enforcement notice, a civil action shall
be commenced, and a civil fine of $500 is prescribed upon a finding of
violation.
C. Each day a violation of this article occurs shall be deemed a separate
violation and shall subject the violator to a fine or penalty for each day a
violation continues.
D. In the event a violation cited is not remedied and/or the administrative
fine imposed is not paid within 30 days, a person found in a civil action
instituted by the Borough to have violated this article shall be subject to
the civil fines as prescribed in this section for each violation and for
§ 259-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 259-18
1:141
each day such violation(s) continue, plus all costs and plus all attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough.
E. In the event a person should fail to remedy a violation after receipt of an
enforcement notice, the administrator shall have authority to issue a
cease and desist order, which shall extend to directing that construction
activity or operations cease until such time as the cited violations have
been remedied.
F. Upon repeated violations by the same licensee, the administrator shall
have authority to suspend an issued license for a defined period of time
or to permanently revoke an issued license after prior written notice
setting forth the effective date of such action and any action said
licensee must take to avoid such action.
G. The Borough shall have authority to commence an action in the Court of
Common Pleas of Erie County to enjoin a violation or to secure other
equitable relief (including but not limited to compelling compliance
with regulations). In such event, a person found to have violated this
article shall, in addition to other relief, be obligated to pay all costs,
plus all attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough.
§ 259-18 GIRARD CODE § 259-18
1:142
Chapter 266
NUISANCES; DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
217.
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
§ 266-1. Activities constituting nuisances prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, corporation or other
association to create or cause to be created upon any public or private
property within the Borough of Girard any activity which shall constitute a
nuisance.
§ 266-2. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the terms used herein are defined as
follows:
ABANDONED or JUNKED — When applied to a vehicle, a vehicle that is
not currently inspected, is not currently registered and is not capable of
passing a Commonwealth of Pennsylvania inspection, which vehicle has not
been moved for a period of 45 days. Any other article shall be considered
abandoned when it has been left in a position on property for a period of 30
days or longer.
AUTOMOBILE GRAVEYARD — The storage of one or more junked or
wrecked automobiles on any premises. The term shall not include the
storage of wrecked automobiles in a commercial district in connection with
an automobile repair business where the wrecked automobiles are stored
merely awaiting the repair thereof in the immediate future.
BUILDING — An independent structure having a roof supported by columns
or walls resting on its own foundation and includes a dwelling, garage, barn,
stable, shed, greenhouse, mobile home, plant, factory, warehouse, school or
similar structure.
DANGEROUS BUILDINGS — All buildings or structures which have any or
all of the following defects shall be deemed dangerous buildings:
Those whose interior walls or other vertical structural members list,
lean or buckle to such an extent that a plumb line passing through the
center of gravity falls outside of the middle third of its base;
A.
Those which, exclusive of the foundation, show damage or deterioration
to 33% of the supporting member or members or damage or
deterioration to 50% of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or
covering;
B.
§ 259-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-2
1:143
JUNK — Any discarded material or article and shall include, but not be
limited to, scrap metal; scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles;
machinery; equipment; paper; rags; glass; containers; wood; lumber; and
structures.
NUISANCE — Includes, but is not limited to, the storage of abandoned
or junked automobiles or other motor-driven equipment or material part
thereof, the dumping or accumulation of garbage, refuse, trash or other
junk, including all types of discarded personal property, dangerous
buildings, or any other activity which may be considered harmful to the
promotion of the health, cleanliness, comfort, safety and general well-being
of the citizens of Girard Borough.
§ 266-3. Prohibited uses and activities.
The following uses of and activities upon real property, both private and
public, in Girard Borough are hereby declared to be nuisances and are
hereby prohibited. Nothing herein should in any way be construed as to
authorize other activities which may constitute a nuisance, for such other
activities are also prohibited.
Those which have improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs
or in which the same are overloaded or which have insufficient strength
to be reasonably safe for the purpose used;
C.
Those which have been damaged by fire, wind or other causes so as to
be dangerous to life, safety, or the general health and welfare of the
occupants or the public;
D.
Those which are so damaged, dilapidated, decayed, unsafe, unsanitary,
vermin-infested or which so utterly fail to provide the amenities
essential to decent living that they are unfit for human habitation or are
likely to cause sickness or disease so as to work injury to the health,
safety or general welfare of those living therein;
E.
Those which have parts thereof which are so attached that they may fall
and injure property or members of the public;
F.
Those which lack illumination, ventilation or sanitation facilities or,
because of another condition, are unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to
the health, safety, or general welfare of the occupants or the public;
G.
Those which, because of their location, are unsanitary or otherwise
dangerous to the health or safety of the occupants or the public;
H.
Those existing in violation of any provision of Chapter 145,
Construction, Chapter 199, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection, or
other chapters in the Code of the Borough of Girard.
I.
A. The use of any premises as a trash or garbage dump, unless specifically
authorized.
§ 266-2 GIRARD CODE § 266-3
1:144
§ 266-4. Abatement procedures; costs.
Upon a determination by the Girard Borough Police that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, the following action shall be taken:
B. The depositing or dumping of any amount of trash or garbage upon the
premises of another or upon public property.
C. The burning of or setting fire to trash, rubbish, refuse, garbage, motor
vehicles or other machinery brought upon and accumulated or stored
on any premises from any other location or locations.
D. The accumulation or storage of junked or wrecked or abandoned
automobiles.
E. The accumulation or storage of scrap metal or other waste material as a
junkyard.
F. The storing of gasoline, kerosene or other petroleum products in excess
of 5,000 gallons, except by gasoline service stations or dealers where
all gasoline is stored in appropriate tanks.
G. Any use of or activity upon property that, by reason of flames, smoke,
odors, fumes, noise or dust, unreasonably interferes with the
reasonable use, comfort and enjoyment of a neighbor's property or
endangers the health or safety of the occupants of a neighboring
property or endangers the health and safety of Borough residents and/
or the users of the Borough public streets, property or facilities.
H. The excessive or unreasonable accumulation of scrap, junk, trash or
garbage upon premises, causing odors, fumes or unsightly appearance
to neighboring property owners.
I. The deterioration of a structure or property to such a state that it is a
dangerous building and unsafe and unusable for its intended purpose
and/or constitutes a fire hazard endangering surrounding structures or
property and/or provides shelter for rats or other vermin or other wild
animals and/or creates a hazard to the welfare and safety of children or
adults who play or work thereabout.
A. As to dangerous structures or buildings:
(1) The Borough Council shall direct a registered or certified letter
notice to the owner of such property. The owner shall be
determined by reviewing the county tax assessment records of the
most current year. Said letter shall be mailed to the address as
determined by such records.
(2) The said letter notice shall inform the said owner as to the violation
of this chapter, citing the reason for violation, giving the owner 15
days to remove the reason for the violation, advising that, in default
thereof, the Borough will remove the cause of violation by the use
of its own personnel and equipment and/or cause the structure to
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 266-4
1:145
§ 266-5. Hearings; appeals.
be destroyed by fire through the use of a volunteer fire company
and/or hereby contract a private person to effectuate such removal,
and if the owner, occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply
with the order of the Borough within the time specified in the
notice missed by him and no petition for a hearing is filed within
10 days thereafter, or following a hearing by the Girard Council
where the order is sustained thereby, the Borough shall cause such
building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished, as
determined by the Girard Council in accordance with the standards
hereinbefore provided. The Girard Borough may collect the cost of
such repair, vacation or demolition, together with a penalty of 10%
of such cost, in the manner provided by law, or the Girard Borough
may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent jurisdiction
pursuant to the Rules of Civil Procedure, or a combination of the
above, and charge the cost thereof to such owner.
B. As to all other nuisances other than buildings and structures, the Girard
Borough Police shall notify the owner of such property of violation of
this chapter and shall give the owner 15 days to remove the reason for
the violation. After 15 days, the owner shall be cited by the Girard
Borough Police.
A. Any person affected by any notice which has been issued in connection
with the enforcement of any provision as to dangerous buildings or
structures of this chapter may request and shall be granted a hearing
on the matter before the Girard Council, provided that such person
shall file with the Girard Borough Secretary a written petition
requesting such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the
grounds therefor within 10 days after the day the notice was served.
Upon receipt of such petition, the Girard Borough Secretary shall set a
time and place for such hearing and shall give the petitioner written
notice thereof. At such hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and to show why such notice should be
modified or withdrawn. The hearing shall be commenced not later than
30 days after the day on which the petition was filed.
B. After such hearing, the Girard Council shall sustain, modify or withdraw
the notice. If the Girard Council sustains or modifies such notice, it shall
be deemed to be an order. Any notice served pursuant to this chapter
shall automatically become an order if a written petition for a hearing is
not filed with the Girard Borough Secretary within 10 days after such
notice is served.
C. Any aggrieved party may appeal the final order to the Court of Common
Pleas in accordance with the provisions of the Judicial Code.
§ 266-4 GIRARD CODE § 266-6
1:146
§ 266-6. Violations and penalties.49
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 270
NUMBERING OF BUILDINGS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
§ 270-1. Adoption of survey, plan and system.
The survey, plan and system for the numbering of houses and buildings
prepared by the Borough Engineer, copy of which is on file in the Borough
office and made a part hereof, is hereby approved and adopted.
§ 270-2. Numbering required.
From and after July 1, 1963, it shall be the duty of each and every owner,
lessee, agent and occupant of each and every house, building or other
structure in the Borough of Girard to cause the same to be numbered in
accordance with this chapter and the system and plan hereby adopted and
approved.
§ 270-3. Placement of numbers; specifications.50
New and existing buildings shall have approved address numbers, building
numbers or approved building identification placed in a position that is
plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.
These numbers shall contrast with their background. Address numbers shall
be Arabic numbers or alphabetical letters. Numbers shall be a minimum of
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-3
1:147
four inches high with a minimum stroke width of 0.5 inch. Where access
is by means of a private road and the building cannot be viewed from
the public way, a monument, pole or other sign or means shall be used to
identify the structure.
§ 270-4. Covering of numbers prohibited; replacement of old
numbers. [Amended 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 448]
It shall be unlawful to cover any such numbers with any sign, drapery,
or other obstruction tending to conceal them or to alter, deface, remove
or destroy any number required to be displayed by this chapter. All old
numbers shall be removed from any house, building or other structure if and
when a new number has been assigned. The Borough Engineer or Secretary
of Council or Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to require the numbering
and renumbering of any house, building or other structure in accordance
with this chapter and/or to direct the removal of any old numbers therefrom.
§ 270-5. Basis for numbering system.
The numbering system shall be based on the grid system, with the point
of origination at the intersection of the center lines of Main Street and
Mechanic Street.
§ 270-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 7-15-1974 by Ord. No.
44851]
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
Chapter 283
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Public property — See Ch. 299.
51.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 270-3 GIRARD CODE § 270-6
1:148
ARTICLE I
Regulations of Elk Creek Recreation and Leisure Board
[Adopted 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 609 (Ch. XVIII of the 1974 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 283-1. Adoption of regulations.
The written regulations now in effect or hereafter promulgated by the Elk
Creek Recreation and Leisure Board for the use of said swimming pool,
tennis courts and other recreational facilities of the Borough, as posted
from time to time on or about each of said facilities, are hereby declared to
be a part of this article.
§ 283-2. Compliance required.
All persons using said pool, courts and other recreational facilities are
required to obey such regulations and the orders of lifeguards, Borough
Police and other Borough and Elk Creek Recreation and Leisure Board
employees based thereon, as same may from time to time be amended and
supplemented, with respect to the use of said facilities.
§ 283-3. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any of the said written and posted regulations,
as promulgated, amended or supplemented from time to time, or the orders
of duly authorized individuals based thereon may, upon the orders of said
Elk Creek Recreation and Leisure Board or its duly authorized
representative, be barred temporarily or permanently from further use
of the recreational facility involved and/or shall, upon conviction of such
violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 nor more than $25
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to imprisonment in the
county jail for not more than 10 days.
§ 283-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-3
1:149

ARTICLE II
Tobacco-Free Areas
[Adopted 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 729]
§ 283-4. Designation of areas.
The areas of parks and playgrounds where children are present, such as
Girard Borough Park and Municipal Swimming Pool, in the Borough of
Girard shall be designated 100% tobacco-free.
§ 283-5. Posting of signs.
Appropriate signage will be posted designating tobacco-free areas.
§ 283-6. Notification of public.
The community will be notified of this article.
§ 283-7. Violations and penalties; enforcement.
Violators will be immediately ejected from the park or recreational facility.
Any person who violates this article shall, upon being found liable therefor
in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough before a
Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than $600, plus all court
costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough in the
enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall be imposed until the date of
the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may
enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure.
Each day a violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. Further, the
appropriate officers or agents of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek
equitable relief, including injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 283-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 283-7
1:151
Chapter 299
PROPERTY, PUBLIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 283.
§ 283-7 GIRARD CODE § 283-7
1:152
ARTICLE I
Ballplaying in Streets and Public Areas
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 457 (Ch. VI, Part 2, Secs. 11 and
12, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 299-1. Prohibited acts; exception.
Ballplaying, including the throwing, kicking or knocking of any ball,
snowballing and the throwing of any stone or other missile of any kind upon
or onto any of the public streets, alleys, sidewalks or public parks in the
Borough of Girard is hereby prohibited, provided that the prohibition of
ballplaying shall not apply within the designated areas of any recreational
park of the Borough of Girard.
§ 299-2. Violations and penalties.52
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
52.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-2
1:153

ARTICLE II
Tampering with Public Property and Equipment
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 459 (Ch. VI, Part 2, Secs. 13
through 18, of the 1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 299-3. Destruction of public property prohibited.
No person or persons shall destroy or injure in any way whatsoever or
tamper with or deface any public property of the Borough of Girard, within
or without the Borough, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work,
building, streetlight, or water or gas stop box on or in any of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds in the Borough.
§ 299-4. Stakes, posts and monuments.
No person or persons shall in any manner interfere with or meddle with
or pull, drive, change, alter, or destroy any stake, post, monument or other
evidence of any elevation, grade, line, location, corner or angle in the
Borough of Girard made, placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or
caused to be done by the authorities of the Borough in any survey of or in
any street, alley or public ground in the Borough to evidence the location,
elevation, line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk,
curb, gutter, drain or other public work, matter or thing.
§ 299-5. Warning lamps, signs and barricades.
No person or persons shall wilfully or maliciously destroy or remove or
deface or obliterate or cover up any lamp, warning sign or barricade
erected by the authorities of the Borough or by any person, firm or
corporation doing work by permission of the authorities of the Borough on
any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or bridges in the Borough or on any
public grounds of the Borough, within or without the Borough, as a warning
of danger.
§ 299-6. Taking materials from public property prohibited.
No person or persons shall take any earth, stone, trees or shrubbery, or
other material, from any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in the
Borough.
§ 299-7. Exceptions.
This article shall not apply to normal activities in connection with the
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds, and the structures and fixtures located thereon, or to
incidental results of work done thereon upon permit from or by authority of
the Borough.
§ 299-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 299-8
1:155
§ 299-8. Violations and penalties.53
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
53.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 299-8 GIRARD CODE § 299-8
1:156
Chapter 311
RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR EMERGENCY SERVICES
§ 311-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE PROVIDER — The Volunteer Fire
Company of A.F. Dobler Hose and Ladder Company, or designee of A.F.
Dobler Hose and Ladder Company, providing emergency medical services
or providing services pursuant to a dispatch under the E-911 system and
any other emergency medical service provider providing emergency
medical services under a mutual aid agreement with the Fire Company or
its designee.
FIRE COMPANY — The Volunteer Fire Company of Girard Borough, A.F.
Dobler Hose and Ladder Company, which provides fire protection and
related services under agreements with the Borough and shall include,
for purposes of authorization to invoice and recover fees for services by
designees or contractors of such Company, any fire company of another
municipality providing services under any mutual aid agreement or dispatch
under the E-911 system.
PERSONS — Any natural person(s), partnership, corporation, limitedliability
partnership or corporation, association, firm, insurance carrier,
servicing agent or other legal entity.
§ 311-2. Authorization to recover costs and expenses.
A. The Fire Company or provider is hereby authorized, pursuant to the
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, any agreements between
the Borough and the Fire Company and this chapter, to recover the
usual, reasonable and customary costs of materials used and expended
and to recover a fee for the use of equipment, hazardous situation
abatement materials and personnel costs used in or devoted to any fire,
safety, rescue and/or hazardous waste abatement incident, these
including but not limited to those caused by vehicular accidents and/or
fires.
B. Emergency medical service providers are hereby authorized, pursuant
to the laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, agreements between
the Borough of Girard and the A.F. Dobler Hose and Ladder Company
and any provider pursuant to this chapter, to recover the usual,
reasonable and customary costs of materials used and expended, use of
equipment, personnel services and transport costs used in or devoted to
the providing of emergency medical services and emergency transport.
C. The Fire Company and emergency medical service providers shall
establish schedules of fees and costs for their respective services,
which may be amended from time to time. Such schedules of fees and
§ 299-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-2
1:157
§ 311-3. Collection procedures.
§ 311-4. Violations and penalties.
costs shall be posted at the Company's or provider's business offices
and shall be made available to persons upon request. The costs and
expenses authorized by this chapter shall be submitted at least annually
by the emergency medical service provider and the Fire Company to
the Borough Council for approval by resolution as needed. Except for
extraordinary situations involving charges not regularly incurred by the
emergency medical service providers or Fire Company, only charges
approved by motion at a public meeting shall be deemed reasonable
and eligible for reimbursement.
A. Costs, expenses and fees authorized in § 311-2C of this chapter shall be
charged, collected and recovered directly by A.F. Dobler Hose and
Ladder Company, the emergency medical service provider and/or their
appointed designee or agent. The person invoiced for such costs,
expenses and fees, and/or that person's insurance carrier, servicing
agent or other representative, shall remit payment of invoiced costs,
expenses and fees directly to A.F. Dobler Hose and Ladder Company or
the emergency medical service provider, as is applicable.
B. In addition to such costs, expenses and fees, the Fire Company and the
emergency medical service provider are authorized to impose interest
or finance charges upon invoice amounts not paid within 30 days after
the invoice date, at such rates as are authorized by the laws of
Pennsylvania.
C. In addition to such costs, expenses and fees, in the event the Fire
Company and the emergency medical services provider are compelled
to initiate private collection or legal proceedings to collect sums due,
such provider, in addition to all costs, expenses, fees and interest or
service charges due, shall be entitled to recover in such proceeding all
attorneys' fees, collection agency fees, filing fees and litigation
expenses reasonably incurred in the proceeding.
A. Any person violating the provisions of § 311-3A and/or B of this chapter
shall violate this chapter.
B. Any party invoiced pursuant to this chapter who fails to pay the
expenses within 30 days shall be subject to a civil enforcement
proceeding resulting in a penalty of $600 per violation and, if not timely
paid, additional daily penalties for continuing violations, plus court
costs and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough.
§ 311-2 GIRARD CODE § 311-4
1:158
Chapter 320
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360. Water — See Ch. 414.
§ 311-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 311-4
1:159

ARTICLE I
Sanitary Sewer System
[Adopted 12-17-1979 by Ord. No. 517 (Ch. XX, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 320-1. Definitions; word usage.
A. Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following words
and terms used in this article shall have the following meanings:
ABNORMAL INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any industrial waste having a
suspended solid content or BOD appreciable in excess of that normally
found in municipal sewage. For the purposes of this article, any
industrial waste containing more than 350 milligrams per liter of
suspended solids, or having a BOD in excess of 300 milligrams per
liter, shall be considered an abnormal industrial waste, regardless of
whether or not it contains other substances in concentrations differing
appreciably from those normally found in municipal sewage.
BOD OF SEWAGE OR INDUSTRIAL WASTE (BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN
DEMAND) — The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical
oxidation of the organic matter in said sewage or industrial waste
under standard laboratory procedure in five days at 20° C. (under
aerobic conditions), expressed in milligrams per liter by weight. It
shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described in the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," cited below.
BOROUGH — Girard Borough, situated in Erie County, Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH'S AGENT — The Borough Manager. The Borough's
inspector shall be the Borough Street Superintendent.
COMBINED SEWER — A sewer designed to receive both sewage and
stormwater runoff which has been approved for such purpose.
COUNCIL — The elected officials of the Girard Borough Council.
GARBAGE — Solid wastes from the preparation, cooking and
dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of produce.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES — Any liquid, gaseous or waterborne wastes
from industrial processes or commercial establishments, as distinct
from sanitary sewage.
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings
or animals, and from which structure sanitary sewage and industrial
wastes, or either thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Includes natural persons, partnerships, associations and
corporations, public or private.
pH — The logarithm to the base 10 of the reciprocal of the hydrogen
ion concentration expressed in moles per liter. It shall be determined
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-1
1:161
by one of the acceptable methods described in the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the
American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control
Federation.
POLLUTED INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any water or waste, generated by
any establishment other than a residential dwelling unit, containing
any of the following: emulsified grease or oil; pH less than 6.0 or
greater than 9.0; phenols or other substances imparting taste and
odor to receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution; obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain
not more than 750 milligrams per liter by weight of dissolved solids,
of which not more than 250 milligrams per liter shall be as chloride
and not more than 10 milligrams per liter each of suspended solids and
BOD. The color shall not exceed five color units. Analyses for any of
the above-mentioned substances shall be made in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," cited above.
PREMISES ACCESSIBLE TO THE PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE
SYSTEM — Any real estate abutting on or adjoining or having access
to any street, alley or right-of-way in which a sewer is located which
ultimately connects to the public sanitary sewage system.
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE — The wastes from the preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale
of produce that have been shredded to such degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in
public sewers, with no particle greater than 1/2 inch in any dimension.
PUBLIC SANITARY SEWAGE SYSTEM (sometimes called the "sewer
system") — All sanitary or combined sewers, all pumping stations,
all force mains, all sewage treatment works, and all other sewerage
facilities owned or leased and operated by the Borough for the
collection, transportation and treatment of sanitary sewage and
industrial wastes, together with their appurtenances, and any additions
or improvements thereto. It shall also include sewers within the
Borough's service area which serve one or more persons and discharge
into the public sanitary sewerage system even though those sewers
may not have been constructed by the Borough and are not owned or
maintained by the Borough. It does not include separate storm sewers
or culverts which may have been constructed for the sole purpose of
carrying storm and surface runoff, the discharge from which is not and
does not become tributary to the sewage treatment facilities.
SANITARY SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet
wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial
and commercial establishments, exclusive of stormwater runoff, surface
water or groundwater.
§ 320-1 GIRARD CODE § 320-1
1:162
§ 320-2. Connection requirements.
SANITARY SEWER — A sewer which carries sewage and to which
stormwater, surface water and groundwater are not intentionally
admitted.
SEWAGE — A combination of water-carried wastes from residences,
business buildings, institutions and industrial and commercial
establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water or
stormwater as may be present.
SEWER — A pipe or conduit for carrying sewage.
STORM SEWER — A sewer which is intended to carry stormwater
runoff, surface waters, groundwater drainage, etc., but which is not
intended to carry any sanitary sewage or polluted industrial waste.
STORMWATER RUNOFF — That portion of the rainfall which reaches a
channel, trench, sewer or sink.
SUSPENDED SOLIDS — Solids that either float on the surface or are
in suspension in water, sewage, industrial waste or other liquids and
which are removable by laboratory filtration. The quantity of suspended
solids shall be determined by one of the acceptable methods described
in the latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water
and Wastewater," cited above.
UNPOLLUTED WATER OR WASTE — Any water or waste containing
none of the following: free or emulsified grease or oil; pH less than 6.0
or greater than 9.0; phenols or other substances imparting taste and
odor to receiving waters; toxic or poisonous substances in suspension,
colloidal state or solution; obnoxious or odorous gases. It shall contain
not more than 750 milligrams per liter by weight of dissolved solids,
of which not more than 250 milligrams per liter shall be as chloride
and not more than 10 milligrams per liter each of suspended solids and
BOD. The color shall not exceed five color units. Analyses for any of
the above-mentioned substances shall be made in accordance with the
latest edition of "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and
Wastewater," cited above.
B. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected within the
Borough's service area upon premises accessible to the public sanitary
sewage system shall, at their own expense, make connection with the
public sanitary sewage system. Any presently unoccupied building shall
be connected before occupancy will be permitted.
B. All persons owning any premises within the Borough's service area
accessible to the public sanitary sewage system upon which an
occupied building is subsequently erected shall, at the time of erection
of such building, and at their own expense, make connection with the
public sanitary sewage system.
§ 320-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-2
1:163
§ 320-3. Stormwater runoff.
§ 320-4. Industrial wastes.
C. All persons owning any occupied building within the Borough's service
area upon premises which subsequently become accessible to the
public sanitary sewage system shall, at their own expense, make
connection with the public sanitary sewage system within the time
period stipulated after proper notice to do so has been given in
accordance with applicable law.
D. All connections to the public sanitary sewage system shall be made in
accordance with § 320-9 hereof.
E. No privy, vault, cesspool, septic tank, mine hole or similar receptacle for
human excrement shall presently or at any time hereafter be connected
with the public sanitary sewage system.
A. The discharge of stormwater runoff to sanitary sewers is prohibited.
B. All persons connecting to the public sanitary sewage system shall
provide adequate means for excluding stormwater runoff at their own
expense.
C. No person connected to a sanitary sewer shall connect any roof drain or
foundation drain thereto or permit any such drains to remain connected
thereto, nor shall he permit, allow or cause to enter into any sanitary
sewer any springwater or surface water from any other source.
D. The provisions of this article do not prohibit the present or future
discharge of stormwater runoff to storm sewers or to natural
watercourses within the Borough's service area.
A. The economy and desirability of the combined treatment of industrial
wastes and sanitary sewage is recognized. In general, any and all
industrial wastes may be discharged to the public sanitary sewage
system, except those which are deemed harmful to the system or are
specifically prohibited by this article. However, it is also recognized that
the treatment of abnormal industrial wastes may add to the cost of
operating and maintaining the public sanitary sewage system. Such
additional cost must therefore be borne by the person or persons
receiving the benefit of such treatment.
B. The Borough reserves the right to refuse connection to the public
sanitary sewage system for deleterious industrial wastes or to compel
discontinuance of the use of the system for such wastes or to require
pretreatment and/or equalization to flow thereof in order to prevent
harmful or adverse effects upon the system. The design, construction
and operation of such pretreatment and/or flow equalization facilities
shall be made at the sole expense of the person discharging said wastes
and shall be subject to the approval of Council or its designated
representative.
§ 320-2 GIRARD CODE § 320-4
1:164
§ 320-5. Prohibited discharges.
C. In general, industrial waste shall be considered harmful to the public
sanitary sewage system if it may cause any of the following damaging
effects:
(1) Chemical reaction, either directly or indirectly, with the materials
of construction or the public sanitary sewage system in such a
manner as to impair the strength of durability of any sewerage
structures.
(2) Mechanical action that will damage any sewerage structures.
(3) Restriction of the hydraulic capacity of any sewerage structures.
(4) Restriction of the normal inspection or maintenance of any
sewerage structures.
(5) Danger to public health and safety.
(6) Obnoxious conditions inimical to the public interest.
D. When required by Council, any person discharging to the public
sanitary sewage system any industrial wastes, or industrial wastes and
sanitary sewage together, shall install a suitable manhole or manholes
or metering chamber on his connecting sewer or sewers to facilitate
observation, sampling and measurement of the combined flow or
wastes from his premises. Such manhole or manholes or metering
chamber shall be accessible and safely located and shall be constructed
in accordance with plans approved by Council or its designated
representative. The manhole or manholes or metering chamber shall be
installed by such person at his expense and shall be maintained by him
so as to be safe and accessible to Council or its designated
representative at all times. The construction and maintenance of such
manhole or metering chamber shall be mandatory for the producers of
abnormal industrial wastes, and, if deemed necessary by Council, flows
from such manhole or metering chamber shall be continuously
monitored, transmitted and recorded by means of an approved
receiving device to be located at the treatment plant.
A. The discharge of excessive amounts of unpolluted water or waste to a
sanitary sewer is expressly prohibited. However, such discharges to
storm sewers will be permitted wherever such sewers are of adequate
capacity. The Council reserves the right to define the amount it deems
excessive in each particular instance.
B. The discharge of garbage to the public sanitary sewage system is
expressly prohibited, unless the garbage is first properly shredded.
C. No sanitary sewage or industrial waste from any property other than
that for which a permit has been issued as provided in § 320-9 hereof
shall be discharged to the public sanitary sewage system.
§ 320-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-5
1:165
D. No person shall discharge to the public sanitary sewage system any
sanitary sewage or industrial wastes having any of the following
characteristics:
(1) Wastes containing liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of their
nature or quality, may cause fire, explosions, or be in any other way
injurious to persons, the structures of the public sanitary sewage
system or its operation.
(2) Wastes having a temperature in excess of 150° F. or less than 32°
F.
(3) Wastes having a pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 9.0 or having any
corrosive properties capable of causing damage or hazards to
structures, equipment or personnel of the public sanitary sewage
system. Where the Council deems it advisable, it may require any
person discharging industrial wastes to install and maintain, at his
own expense, in a manner approved by Council or its designated
representative, a suitable device to continuously measure and
record the pH of the wastes so discharged.
(4) Wastes containing any noxious or malodorous gas or substance
which, either singly or by interaction with sewage or other wastes,
is, in the opinion of Council, likely to create a public nuisance or
hazard to life or prevent entry to sewerage structures for their
maintenance and repair.
(5) Wastes containing ashes, cinders, sand, mud, straw, shavings,
metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, plastics, wood, hair, chemical or
paint residues, greases, lime slurry or viscous materials of such
character or in such quantity that, in the opinion of Council, they
may cause an obstruction to the flow in the sewers or otherwise
interfere with the proper operations of the public sanitary sewage
system. Attention is called to the fact that the maximum
permissible concentration will vary throughout the public sanitary
sewage system depending upon the size of the particular sewer
receiving the same and the flows therein.
(6) Wastes containing insoluble, nonflocculent substances having a
specific gravity in excess of 2.65.
(7) Wastes containing soluble substances in such concentration as to
cause the specific gravity of the waste to be greater than 1.1.
(8) Wastes containing any of the following substances in solution or in
suspension in concentrations exceeding those shown in the
following table:
§ 320-5 GIRARD CODE § 320-5
1:166
§ 320-6. Sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges.
Substance
Maximum Possible
Concentration
(mg/l)
Phenolic compounds as C5H6OH 1.0
Cyanides as CN 0.00
Cyanates as CNO 0.00
Iron as Fe 0.3
Trivalent chromium as Cr, plus hexavalent
chromium as Cr
0.5
Nickel as Ni 1.00
Copper as CU 0.03
Lead as Pb 0.5
Zinc as Zn 0.15
Manganese as Ms 0.05
(9) Wastes containing more than 90 mg/l by weight of fat, oil or grease.
(10)Wastes containing more than 10 mg/l of any of the following gases:
hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, nitrous oxide, or any of the
halogens.
(11)Wastes containing gases or vapors, either free or occluded, in
concentrations toxic or dangerous to humans or animals.
(12)Wastes containing toxic substances in quantities sufficient to
interfere with the biochemical processes of the sewage treatment
works or that will pass through the treatment process and still
exceed the state and federal requirements for the receiving stream.
(13)Wastes containing radioactive material without a special permit.
A. There is imposed upon the owners of or the users of water in or on all
properties served by the public sanitary sewage system sewage
collection, transportation and treatment charges for the use of said
system, payable in the amounts and as provided in the Sewer Rate
Resolution and as it is hereinafter from time to time adopted, amended,
and modified by Council. Said owners and users will be jointly and
severally liable for the payment of said sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charges and the penalties therein
prescribed for delinquent payments thereof.
B. All bills for sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges
shall be due when rendered and shall be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in the Borough's Sewer Rate Resolution. Owners
and, where adequate arrangements have been made with Council,
§ 320-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-6
1:167
users will be billed periodically for the sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charges in accordance with the billing
practices of the Borough.
C. The Borough's current sewage collection, transportation and treatment
charges are based upon water usage. The Council may, if it deems it
advisable, elect at some time in the future to impose, in whole or in
part, the sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges on
such other basis as it may determine. When water usage is used as the
basis for said charges, the volume of water to be used for billing
purposes shall be based upon water meter readings by the Borough or
its designated representative. In the absence of such readings, charges
shall be based upon estimates made by the Borough or flat rate
charges.
D. When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then if any owner or
user obtains part or all of the water used in or on a property from
sources other than the Borough, such owner or user shall be charged on
the flat-rate basis, in accordance with the Borough's Sewer Rate
Resolution.
E. When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then, if it is
established to the satisfaction of the Council that a portion of the water
used in or on any property served by the public sanitary sewage system
does not and cannot enter said system, and in the event that the total
water used in or on said property exceeds 100,000 gallons per quarter,
Council may determine, in such manner and by such method as it may
deem practical, the percentage of the water entering the public
sanitary sewage system, or Council may require or permit the
installation of additional meters in such manner as to determine either
the quantity of water excluded from the public sanitary sewage system
or the quantity of water, sewage or industrial waste actually entering
the public sanitary sewage system, exclusive of stormwater runoff. In
such case, the sewage collection, transportation and treatment charge
shall be based upon the quantity of water estimated, measured or
computed by Council to be actually entering the public sanitary sewage
system, exclusive of stormwater runoff, since stormwater runoff is
prohibited from entering into a sanitary sewer.
F. When water usage is used as the basis of charges, then any person
requesting consideration for a reduction of the amount of the sewage
collection, transportation and treatment charges because of water not
entering the public sanitary sewage system shall make written
application to Council for such consideration, giving the name of such
person, his address and setting forth supporting data fully describing
other sources of water, if any, as well as the disposition of water alleged
not to be entering the public sanitary sewage system. The application
shall be accompanied by a sketch, to approximate scale, showing the
plan of the property, the water distribution system, sewer layout,
existing meters, and proposed meters in the scheme to determine the
quantity of flow entering, or not entering, the public sanitary sewage
§ 320-6 GIRARD CODE § 320-6
1:168
§ 320-7. Surcharge for certain industrial wastes.
system. The cost of furnishing, installing and maintaining any meters
other than those utilized to measure water purchased from the Borough
shall be borne by the applicant. The type, size, location, arrangement
and maintenance of such meters shall be subject to the approval of the
Council.
A. Although the sewage treatment works will be capable of treating
certain abnormal industrial wastes as heretofore defined in § 320-1, the
actual treatment of such wastes may increase the cost of operating and
maintaining the public sanitary sewage system. Therefore, there will be
imposed upon each person discharging such industrial waste into the
public sanitary sewage system a surcharge, or surcharges, which is
intended to cover such additional cost. Such surcharges shall be in
addition to the regular sewage collection, transportation and treatment
charges set forth in the Sewer Rate Resolution of the Borough and shall
be payable as therein provided.
B. The strength of any industrial waste, the discharge of which is to be
subject to surcharge, shall be determined monthly, or more frequently
as the Council shall determine, from samples taken either at the
manhole or metering chamber referred to in § 320-4D hereof or at any
other sampling point mutually agreed upon by Council and the
producer of such waste. The frequency and duration of the sampling
period shall be such as, in the opinion of Council, will permit a
reasonably reliable determination of the average composition of such
waste, exclusive of stormwater runoff. Samples shall be collected or
their collection supervised by a representative of Council and shall be in
proportion to the flow of waste, exclusive of stormwater runoff, and
composited for analysis in accordance with the latest edition of
"Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater,"
cited above. Except as hereinafter provided, the strength of the waste
so found by analysis shall be used for establishing the surcharge or
surcharges. However, Council may, if it so elects, accept the results of
routine sampling and analyses by the producer of such wastes in lieu of
making its own samplings and analyses.
C. BOD surcharge rate.
(1) In the event any industrial waste is found by Council to have a BOD
in excess of 300 milligrams per liter, the producer of said waste
shall be surcharged an amount equal to the product of the actual
volume of wastes in thousand gallons per billing period, exclusive
of stormwater runoff, discharged to the public sanitary sewage
system and the BOD surcharge rate. The BOD surcharge rate shall
be determined by the following formula:
§ 320-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-7
1:169
Rc = 0.00834 P (C-300)
Where:
Rc = the BOD surcharge rate in cents per 1,000 gallons of
waste discharged.
P = the average annual fixed, operating and maintenance
cost of secondary treatment processes per pound of
BOD received at the treatment works.
C = the average BOD of the industrial waste expressed in
milligrams per liter as determined in accordance with
Subsection B of this section.
(2) The figure 300 appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum BOD permissible without surcharge. The figure 0.00834
is the factor to convert milligrams per liter to pound per 1,000
gallons. No discount will be permitted for sewage or industrial
wastes having a BOD less than 300 milligrams per liter.
D. Suspended solids surcharge rate.
(1) In the event any industrial waste is found by Council to have an
average suspended solids concentration in excess of 350
milligrams per liter, the producer of such waste shall be surcharged
an amount equal to the product of the actual volume of wastes in
thousand gallons per billing period, exclusive of stormwater runoff,
discharged to the public sanitary sewage system and the
suspended solids surcharge rate. The suspended solids surcharge
rate shall be determined by the following formula:
Rs = 0.00834 x B (S-350)
Where:
Rs = the suspended solids surcharge rate in cents per 1,000
gallons of waste discharged.
B = the average annual fixed, operating and maintenance
cost of the sludge digestion, sludge drying and sludge
disposal operations per pound of suspended solids
received at the treatment works.
S = the average suspended solids concentration of the
abnormal industrial waste expressed in milligrams per
liter as determined in accordance with Subsection B of
this section.
(2) The figure 350 appearing in the above formula corresponds to the
maximum suspended solids concentration permissible without
surcharge. The figure 0.00834 is the factor to convert milligrams
per liter to pounds per 1,000 gallons. No discount will be permitted
for sewage or industrial wastes having a suspended solids
concentration less than 350 milligrams per liter.
§ 320-7 GIRARD CODE § 320-7
1:170
§ 320-8. Billing and collection.
Bills and notices relating to the sewage collection, transportation and
treatment charges and surcharges will be mailed or delivered to the
property owner's last address or, where proper arrangements have been
made with Council, to the user's last address, as shown on the billing books
of Council.
§ 320-9. Connection standards and restrictions.
E. The surcharges provided for in this section shall be added to the
sewage collection, transportation and treatment charges imposed by
Council under the Sewer Rate Resolution.
A. Application for connection to the public sanitary sewage system shall be
made to Council or a designated agency upon the permit form to be
formulated and furnished by Council.
B. All information requested on said form shall be furnished by the
applicant, including the character and use of each structure located
upon the property.
C. Any tap connection and inspection fees required by the Sewer Rate
Resolution shall be paid at the time of making application for
permission to make a connection.
D. No work shall commence before the payment of any aforementioned tap
connection and inspection fee and issuance of the aforementioned
connection permit.
E. Unless written permission is obtained from Council, separate
connections and corresponding tap connection and inspection fees will
be required for each individual occupied building, whether constructed
as a detached unit or as one of a pair or row, but a single connection
with payment of the tapping fees for the appropriate number of actual
units served will be permitted to serve a school, factory, apartment
house or other permanent multiple-unit structure whose individual
apartments or units may not be subject to separate ownership.
F. Connections to sanitary sewers shall be completed within 60 calendar
days after receipt of approved permit. The "day of receipt" shall be
defined as five consecutive calendar days after the date of issuance of
the permit. In the event that the connection is not completed within this
time, the applicant must file an application for a new permit and pay all
costs associated therewith, including a second connection fee as
defined in the current Sewer Rate Resolution. Previously paid fees will
be forfeited unless waived by Council.
G. All connections to the sanitary sewers shall be subject to certain
restrictions as to unacceptable sanitary sewage, which are set forth
herein in § 320-5.
§ 320-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-9
1:171
§ 320-10. Proposed extensions of system by developers.
H. The designated inspector of Council shall be given at least 24 hours'
notice of the time when such connection shall be made in order that
said inspector can be present to inspect and approve the work of
connection. The inspector shall signify his approval on the
aforementioned connection permit in the possession of the permittees.
I. At the time of inspection of the connection, the owner or owners of
properties shall permit the inspector full and complete access to all
sanitary and drainage arrangements and facilities in each building and
in and about all parts of the property. No building sewer line shall be
covered over, or in any manner concealed, until after it is inspected and
approved by said inspector.
J. It is the intention of this article that the entire connection be inspected
at one time; however, if the property owner feels that special conditions
warrant more than one inspection, he may request the same subject to
such additional inspection fees as Council shall determine.
K. All construction materials and methods must comply with the current
set of construction standards of the Borough.
L. Maintenance and repair of all building sewers shall be the
responsibility of the property owner.
A. Prior to submittal of any proposed development, the developer shall
arrange for a preliminary meeting with the designated agent of Council.
It is the intention of this meeting for the developer to become aware of
the procedure for processing and the requirements of the Borough for a
development.
B. Five copies of plans for proposed extensions shall be submitted to
Council on twenty-four-inch by thirty-six-inch sheets showing plan
views to a scale of one inch equals 50 feet and profiles to a scale of one
inch equals 10 feet vertically and one inch equals 50 feet horizontally, a
North point, a suitable title block, date and the name of the engineer or
surveyor and imprint of his registration seal.
C. All sewers shall be designed in accordance with the Sewerage Manual
of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection, Division
of Sanitary Engineering, and this article.
D. Construction of sewers will not be permitted until the proper state
permits have been obtained.
E. Prior to final acceptance of any sewer extensions by the Council, it will
be necessary for the developer to furnish to the Council as-built plans
showing the angle and distance between manholes, the top and invert
elevation of each manhole and the exact location of all house sewer
connections relative to the nearest manhole both downstream and
upstream.
§ 320-9 GIRARD CODE § 320-10
1:172
§ 320-11. Failure to pay charges, surcharges and penalties;
violations and penalties.
F. Basements shall be recorded in the name of the Borough for all sewers
to be constructed outside of dedicated street rights-of-way.
G. All construction materials and methods must comply with the current
set of construction standards of the Borough.
H. The developer shall also pay in advance to Council in full for all
estimated costs of inspection of construction of all sanitary sewers. The
amount and type of inspection required shall be determined by Council
during construction.
I. No sewer extensions constructed by a developer will be approved for
use and acceptance by Council until said sewers are formally approved
by the Council, and all inspection fees have been paid, and Council has
been reimbursed in full for all inspection costs incurred by the
inspector during construction, testing and approval.
A. Each sewage collection, transportation and treatment charge,
surcharge and penalty imposed by the Sewer Rate Resolution of the
Borough shall be a debt due the Borough and shall be a lien on the
property served and, if not paid within the period prescribed in the
Sewer Rate Resolution after the date of the bill, shall be deemed
delinquent. In such event, Council shall proceed to file a lien in the
office of the Prothonotary of Erie County and collect the same in the
manner provided by law for the filing and collection of municipal
claims. In the event of failure to pay the sewage collection,
transportation and treatment charge or surcharge or penalty after they
become delinquent, Council may also authorize the appropriate
personnel to shut off water service to said property or to remove or
close the sewer connection and to take such steps as may be necessary
to accomplish such shutoff or removal or closing. The expense of such
shutoff or removal or closing, as well as the expense of restoring any
such service, shall likewise be a debt due the Borough and a lien on the
property served and may be filed and collected as hereinabove
provided. Such sewage service shall not be restored until all sewage
collection, transportation and treatment charges, surcharges and
penalties, including the expense of removal, closing and restoration,
shall have been paid or adequate provisions for their payment shall
have been made.
B. All persons violating any provisions of this article shall be given notice
of such violations, either personally or by means of the United States
Mail, and if no action to correct said violation is taken with 30 days of
the date of such notice, water to said premises may be shut off or the
sewer connection may be removed or closed. Reconnection will not be
made until after payment of all monies due the Borough and the costs
for reconnection.
§ 320-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 320-11
1:173
Chapter 325
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
§ 325-1. Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose of this chapter to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the
Borough and to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
the continued deleterious location and concentration of sexually oriented
businesses within the Borough. The provisions of this chapter have neither
the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials.
Similarly, it is not the intent nor effect of this chapter to restrict or deny
access by adults to sexually oriented materials protected by the First
Amendment or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors of sexually
oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor
effect of this chapter to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
§ 325-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ADULT ARCADE — Any place to which the public is permitted or invited
wherein coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or
mechanically controlled still or motion-picture machines, projectors or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or
fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE — A commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for
sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following:
Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter or photographs,
films, motion pictures, videocassettes or video reproductions, slides or
other visual representations which depict or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
A.
Instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designed for use in
connection with specified sexual activities. A commercial establishment
may have other principal business purposes that do not involve the
offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing specified
sexual activities and still be categorized as an adult bookstore or adult
video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to exempt
such commercial establishment from being categorized as an adult
bookstore or adult video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified
B.
§ 320-11 GIRARD CODE § 325-2
1:174
ADULT CABARET — A nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features:
ADULT MOTEL — A hotel, motel or similar commercial establishment
which:
ADULT MOTION-PICTURE THEATER — A commercial establishment
where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, videocassettes,
slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown which are
characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities
or specified anatomical areas.
BOROUGH — Borough of Girard.
ESCORT — A person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a
companion, guide or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to
privately model lingerie or to privately perform a striptease for another
person.
ESCORT AGENCY — A person or business association who furnishes, offers
to furnish or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary business
purposes for a fee, tip or other consideration.
NUDE MODEL STUDIO — Any place where a person who appears in a state
of nudity or displays specified anatomical areas is provided to be observed,
sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted
by other persons who pay money or any form of consideration.
NUDITY or A STATE OF NUDITY — The appearance of a human bare
buttock, anus, male genitals, female genitals or female breast.
PERMITTEE and/or LICENSEE — A person in whose name a permit and/or
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been issued, as well as
materials which depict or describe specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
A. Persons who appear in the state of nudity.
Live performances which are characterized by the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
B.
Films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
C.
Offers accommodations to the public for any form of consideration;
provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; and has
a sign visible from the public right-of-way which advertises the
availability of this adult type of photographic reproduction.
A.
Offers sleeping rooms for rent four or more times in one calendar day
during five or more calendar days in any continuous thirty-day period.
B.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-2
1:175
the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a permit and/or
license.
PERSON — An individual, proprietorship, partnership, corporation,
association or other legal entity.
SEMINUDE — A state of dress in which clothing covers no more than the
genitals, pubic region and areola of the female breast, as well as portions of
the body covered by supporting straps or devices.
SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER — A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration:
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS — An adult arcade, adult bookstore or
adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motion-picture theater,
adult theater, escort agency, nude model studio or sexual encounter center.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — The male genitals in a state of sexual
arousal and/or the vulva or more intimate parts of the female genitals.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Includes any of the following:
SUBSTANTIAL ENLARGEMENT OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS
— The increase in floor area occupied by the business by more than 25%, as
the floor area exists on the date of enactment of this chapter.
TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OR CONTROL OF A SEXUALLY ORIENTED
BUSINESS — Any of the following:
Physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between persons
of the opposite sex.
A.
Activities between male and female persons and/or persons of the same
sex when one or more of the persons is in the state of nudity or
seminude.
B.
The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks, anus or female breasts.
A.
Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy.
B.
C. Masturbation, actual or simulated.
Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities
set forth in Subsections A through C above.
D.
A. The sale, lease or sublease of the business.
The transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the
business, whether by sale, exchange or similar means.
B.
The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar legal device which
transfers the ownership or control of the business, except for transfer
C.
§ 325-2 GIRARD CODE § 325-2
1:176
§ 325-3. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
§ 325-4. Permit requirements.
by bequest or other operation of law upon the death of the person
possessing the ownership or control.
A. Adult arcades.
B. Adult bookstores or adult video stores.
C. Adult cabarets.
D. Adult motels.
E. Adult motion-picture theaters.
F. Adult theaters.
G. Escort agencies.
H. Nude model studios.
I. Sexual encounter centers.
A. Any person who operates a sexually oriented business without a valid
permit issued by the Borough is guilty of a violation of Chapter 425,
Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of Girard.
B. An application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business must
be made on a form provided by the Borough Manager of the Borough.
The application must be accompanied by a sketch or diagram showing
the floor plan and plot plan configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by the business. The sketch or
diagram need not be professionally prepared but must be drawn to a
designated scale or drawn with marked dimensions of the interior of the
premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six inches.
C. The applicant must be qualified according to the provisions of this
chapter, and the premises must be inspected and found to be in
compliance with the law by the Borough Manager.
D. If any person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an
individual, he must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is other than
an individual, each individual who has a ten-percent or greater interest
in the business must sign the application for a permit as applicant. If a
corporation is listed as owner of a sexually oriented business, each
individual having a direct or indirect interest of 10% or greater in the
corporation must sign the application for a permit as applicant.
§ 325-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-4
1:177
§ 325-5. Issuance of permit.
E. The fact that a person possesses other types of Borough permits does
not exempt the person from the requirement of obtaining a sexually
oriented business permit.
A. The Borough Manager shall approve the issuance of a permit to an
applicant within 30 days after receipt of an application, unless he finds
one or more of the following to be true:
(1) An applicant is under 18 years of age.
(2) An applicant or an applicant's spouse is overdue in his payment to
the Borough of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against him
or imposed upon him in relation to a sexually oriented business.
(3) An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably
necessary for issuance of the permit or has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the application form.
(4) An applicant is residing with a person who has been denied a
permit by the Borough to operate a sexually oriented business
within the preceding 12 months or residing with a person whose
license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked
within the preceding 12 months.
(5) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have
been reviewed and have been disapproved by either the Borough
Manager, Borough Engineer or the Fire Chief as not being in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(6) The permit fee required by this chapter has not been paid.
(7) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is
not in compliance with any of the provisions of this chapter.
(8) An individual applicant or any individual holding a direct or indirect
interest of more than 10% of a corporate applicant or any of the
officers and directors of a corporate applicant, if the applicant is a
corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if
the applicant is a partnership, or the manager or other person in
charge of the operation of the applicant's business has or have
been convicted of an offense involving sexual misconduct within
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, including, but not limited to,
prostitution, obscenity and possession of child pornography, or
convicted of any offense in any jurisdiction other than the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that would have constituted an
offense involving sexual misconduct if committed within the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. In order for approval to be denied
pursuant to this subsection, the person's or persons' conviction or
release in connection with the sexual misconduct offense must have
occurred with two years of the date of application in the event of a
§ 325-4 GIRARD CODE § 325-5
1:178
§ 325-6. Fees.54
The annual fee for a sexually oriented business permit shall be as set from
time to time by resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 325-7. Inspections.
§ 325-8. Expiration of permit; renewal.
§ 325-9. Suspension of permit.
The Borough Manager shall suspend a permit for a period not to exceed 30
days if he determines that a permittee or an employee of a permittee has:
misdemeanor and within five years of the date of application in the
event of a felony.
B. The permit, if granted, shall state on its face the name of the person or
persons to whom it is granted, the expiration date, and the address of
the sexually oriented business. The permit shall be posted in a
conspicuous place at or near the entrance to the sexually oriented
business so that it may be easily read at all times.
C. The Borough Manager shall complete a certification that the premises
are in compliance or not in compliance within 20 days of receipt of the
application by the Borough Manager.
A. An applicant or permittee shall permit representatives of the Police
Department, Fire Department, Borough Manager or other Borough
departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a sexually oriented
business for the purpose of insuring compliance with the law at any
time that the sexually oriented business is occupied or open for
business.
B. A person who operates a sexually oriented business or his agent or
employee violates Chapter 425, Zoning, of the Code of the Borough of
Girard if he refuses to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at
any time it is occupied or open for business.
A. Each permit shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be
renewed only by making application as provided in § 325-5. Application
for renewal should be made at least 30 days before the expiration date;
the pendency of the application will not prevent the expiration of the
permit.
B. If the Borough Manager denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall
not be issued a permit for one year from the date of denial, except that
after 90 days have elapsed since the date of denial, the applicant may
be granted a permit if the Borough Manager finds that the basis for
denial of the renewal permit has been corrected or abated.
54.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 325-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-9
1:179
§ 325-10. Revocation of permit.
A. Violated or is not in compliance with any section of this chapter.
B. Engaged in excessive use of alcoholic beverages while on the sexually
oriented business premises.
C. Refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business
premises as authorized by this chapter.
D. Knowingly permitted gambling by any person on the sexually oriented
business premises.
E. Failed to man manager's stations and/or maintain viewing rooms as set
forth in § 325-13.
A. The Borough Manager shall revoke a permit if a cause of suspension set
forth in § 325-9 occurs and the permit has been suspended within the
preceding 12 months.
B. The Borough Manager shall revoke a permit if he determines that:
(1) A permittee, or any of the persons specified in § 325-5A(8), is or has
been convicted of the offenses specified in § 325-5A(8).
(2) A permittee gave false or misleading information in the material
submitted to the Borough during the application process.
(3) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises.
(4) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
prostitution on the premises.
(5) A permittee or an employee of a permittee knowingly operated the
sexually oriented business during a period of time when the
permittee's permit was suspended.
(6) A permittee or an employee of a permittee has knowingly allowed
any act of sexual intercourse, sodomy, oral copulation,
masturbation or other explicit sexual conduct to occur in or on the
permitted premises.
(7) A permittee is delinquent in payment to the Borough or state of any
taxes or fees relating to sexually oriented businesses.
C. When the Borough Manager revokes a permit, the revocation shall
continue for one year, and the permittee shall not be issued a sexually
oriented business permit for one year from the date revocation became
effective, except that, if the revocation is pursuant to Subsection B(1)
above, the revocation shall be effective for two years in the event of a
misdemeanor or five years in the case of a felony.
§ 325-9 GIRARD CODE § 325-10
1:180
§ 325-11. Transfer of permit.
A permittee shall not transfer his permit to another person. A permittee
shall not operate a sexually oriented business under the authority of a
permit at any place other than the address designated in the application.
§ 325-12. Location requirements.
D. After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application,
or suspension or revocation of a permit, the applicant or licensee or
permittee shall have the right to appeal said action and to seek prompt
judicial review of such administrative action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
A. A person is guilty of a violation of Chapter 425, Zoning, if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business outside of the
district in which a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. No
sexually oriented businesses shall be located outside a district in which
a sexually oriented business is a permitted use. Sexually oriented
businesses as defined herein shall be permitted in the Commercial
Highway Zoning District (C-2) as a special exception.
B. A person is guilty of a violation of Chapter 425, Zoning, if he operates or
causes to be operated a sexually oriented business within 1,000 feet of:
(1) A church.
(2) A public or private pre-elementary, elementary or secondary
school.
(3) A public library.
(4) A child-care facility or nursery school.
(5) A public park adjacent to any residential district.
C. A person is guilty of a violation of Chapter 425, Zoning, if he causes or
permits the operation, establishment, substantial enlargement or
transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented business within
5,000 feet of another sexually oriented business.
D. A person is guilty of a violation of Chapter 425, Zoning, if he causes or
permits the operation, establishment or maintenance of more than one
sexually oriented business in the same building, structure or portion
thereof or the increase of floor area of any sexually oriented business in
any building, structure or portion thereof containing another sexually
oriented business.
E. For the purpose of this chapter, measurement shall be in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building or structure used as a part of the premises
where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property line of the premises of a church, public or private pre-
§ 325-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-12
1:181
§ 325-13. Exhibition of sexually explicit films or videos.
elementary, elementary or secondary school, public library, child-care
facility or nursery school or to the nearest boundary of an affected
public park.
F. For purposes of Subsection C of this section, the distance between any
two sexually oriented businesses shall be measured in a straight line,
without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest
exterior wall of the structure in which each business is located.
G. Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating on date of enactment
of this chapter that is in violation of Subsections A through G of this
section shall be deemed a nonconforming use. Such nonconforming
uses shall not be increased, enlarged, extended or altered, except that
the use may changed to a conforming use. In the event that two or more
sexually oriented businesses are within 5,000 feet of one another and
otherwise in a permissible location, the sexually oriented business
which was first established and continually operating at a particular
location is the conforming use and the later-established business is
nonconforming.
H. A sexually oriented business lawfully operating as a conforming use is
not rendered a nonconforming use by the location, subsequent to the
grant or renewal of the sexually oriented business permit, of a church,
public or private pre-elementary, elementary, or secondary school,
public library, child-care facility, nursery school or public park within
1,000 feet of the sexually oriented business. This provision applies only
to the renewal of a valid permit and does not apply when an application
for a permit is submitted after a permit has expired or has been
revoked.
A. A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business, other than an adult motel, which exhibits on the premises, in
a viewing room of less than 150 square feet of floor space, a film or
videocassette or other video or other image production or reproduction
which depicts specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas
shall comply with the following requirements:
(1) The application for a permit to operate a sexually oriented business
shall be accompanied by a floor plan and plot plan diagram of the
premises showing a plan thereof, specifying the location of one or
more manager's stations, the location of all overhead lighting
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which
patrons will not be permitted. A manager's station may not exceed
32 square feet of floor area. The diagram shall also designate the
place at which the permit will be conspicuously posted, if granted.
A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer's or
architect's blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram
should be oriented to the north or to some designated street or
object and should be drawn to a designated scale or with marked
§ 325-12 GIRARD CODE § 325-13
1:182
dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of
all areas of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or
minus six inches. The Borough Manager may waive the foregoing
diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a diagram
that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration
of the premises has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the
applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager's station
may be made without the prior approval of the Borough Manager
or his designee.
(4) It is the duty of the owners and operators of the premises to ensure
that at least one employee is on duty and situated in each
manager's station at all times that any patron is present inside the
premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of each
area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose, excluding rest rooms. Rest rooms may not contain
video reproduction or viewing equipment. If the premises has two
or more manager's stations designated, then the interior of the
premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an
unobstructed view of each area of the premises to which any patron
is permitted access for any purpose from at least one of the
manager's stations. The view required in this subsection must be by
direct line of sight from the manager's station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators, and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present on the premises, to
ensure that the view area specified in Subsection A(5) remains
unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
other materials at all times and to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted in the
application filed pursuant to Subsection A of this section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more than one person at any
time. No connections or openings to an adjoining viewing room
shall be permitted.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of
sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one footcandle
as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the owners and operators and it shall also be
the duty of any agents and employees present in the premises to
§ 325-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 325-13
1:183
§ 325-14. Exemptions.
It is a defense to prosecution under §§ 325-5 and 325-13 that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
§ 325-15. Violations and penalties.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented
business without a valid permit or in violation of this chapter is subject to
an action in equity or a suit for injunction, as well as citations for violation
of Chapter 425, Zoning.
Chapter 331
SIGNS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Advertising material distribution — See Ch.
100.
Signs — See § 425-17.
ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all
times that any patron is present in the premises.
B. A person having a duty under Subsection A(1) through (9) is guilty of a
violation of Chapter 425, Zoning, if he knowingly fails to fulfill that duty.
A. By a proprietary school, licensed by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, or a college, junior college or university supported
entirely or partly by taxation.
B. By a private college or university which maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college,
junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation.
C. In a structure:
(1) Which has no sign visible from the exterior of the structure and no
other advertising that indicates a nude person is available for
viewing.
(2) Where, in order to participate in a class, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class.
(3) Where no more than one nude model is on the premises at any one
time.
§ 325-13 GIRARD CODE § 325-15
1:184
ARTICLE I
Political Signs
[Adopted 11-21-1994 by Ord. No. 633 (Ch. XXI, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 331-1. Permit required.
A sign pertaining to the candidacy of any person for public office shall not
be erected within the Borough of Girard until such individual obtains a
permit from the Borough of Girard.
§ 331-2. Time limits.
Such signs shall be erected no sooner than 30 days prior to the date of the
primary election, and 30 days to the general election, and must be removed
within 10 days following the election date.
§ 331-3. Location restrictions.
No signs shall be posted on property belonging to the Borough of Girard.
Political signs may be posted on private property only after obtaining the
consent of the owner or tenant lawfully in possession or occupancy thereof.
§ 331-4. Notification of removal.
The candidate or representative shall notify the Borough of Girard upon the
complete removal of signs within the Borough.
§ 331-5. Violations and penalties.55
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 331-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 331-5
1:185
Chapter 354
SOLID WASTE AND RECYCLING
§ 354-1. Title.
This chapter shall be named and referred to as the "Girard Borough
Municipal Waste and Recycling Ordinance."
§ 354-2. Incorporation of recitals.
The recitals above are hereby incorporated in this chapter as though
restated herein.56
§ 354-3. Definitions.
A. Definitions established in the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., shall apply and extend
to terms within this chapter by reference, unless expressly modified in
this chapter.
B. Words not specifically defined in the Act or in this chapter shall be given
their reasonable and customary meanings.
C. For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall be defined as
follows:
ACT — The Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste Reduction
Act, 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq., as the same may in the future be
amended.
ALUMINUM, STEEL AND BIMETALLIC CANS — Includes beverage
cans, metal food containers and soup cans; shall not include flatware or
metal cookware.
ASHES — Includes coal ashes, coke ashes, wood ashes and ashes
resulting from other fuels used for cooking and heating purposes and
shall be deemed included within the term "municipal waste."
BOROUGH-DESIGNATED BAGS/BAGS DESIGNATED BY BOROUGH —
Those bags for separation and placement for collection of leaf waste of
a type as shall be designated from time to time by Girard Borough.
CLEAR AND COLORED GLASS — Includes glass beverage bottles,
food jars and containers; shall not include mirrors, ceramic materials,
crystal, light bulbs, glass ovenware, drinking glasses, clay pots or
window glass.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — The place at which any business
within the boundaries of Girard Borough is conducted by any person
which, in the operation of such business, has or accumulates municipal
56.Editor's Note: A complete copy of Ord. No. 711, including the recitals, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 331-5 GIRARD CODE § 354-3
1:186
waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste in or about its place(s)
of business or elsewhere. For purposes of this chapter, a commercial
establishment shall include any PRD, business, institutional, industrial
or other use, excepting only a residential use.
COMMERCIAL PICKUP — Includes all properties aside from residential
properties having four or fewer residential or family units within a
single structure. That a residential use may be deemed a commercial
pickup does not alter its use.
CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS — Includes wood, piping, metal,
plastics, concrete, cement and other man-made products used in
construction which is generated in any business or in the course of
construction or renovation of dwellings or other buildings. The
exclusion of construction materials from materials to be collected by
the residential contractor shall not extend to such materials in small
quantities generated in the ordinary course by occupants of residential
dwellings.
DISPOSAL — Includes the deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of solid or municipal waste into or on the land
or water in a manner that the constituent of the waste enters the
environment, is emitted into the air or is discharged into the ground or
to the waters of the commonwealth.
DISPOSITION — A generic reference to the proper disposal of
municipal waste, recycling and marketing of recyclable materials and/
or composting of leaf waste in the manner prescribed in this chapter.
FAMILY — Includes any person or group of persons maintaining a
separate dwelling, apartment or other habitation unit within the limits
of the Borough of Girard.
GARBAGE — Includes all vegetable and animal waste, including offal,
carcasses, fat, bone, swill and animal and vegetable matter or other
organic substance subject to fermentation or decay, resulting from
the storage, handling, consumption and/or preparation of food. The
term shall not be deemed to include dishwater or other soapy water.
"Garbage" shall be deemed included within the term "municipal waste."
HAULER/HAULING FIRM — Includes, without limitation, any person,
firm, entity or contractor engaged in the collection, transportation
and/or disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf
waste in Girard Borough.
HOUSEHOLD RUBBISH — Includes old furniture, such paper as is not
included in recyclable materials, trunks, stoves, furnace pipe, water
boilers, light bulbs, crockery, nonrecyclable cans, bottles and
containers, hedge and tree trimmings, garden residues, shrubbery and
similar material, grass clippings, pipe and all other rubbish which may
accumulate in the ordinary course of use of a residential dwelling,
but excluding dirt, trees, tree limbs over four feet in length and
construction materials as defined above. The term shall not include
§ 354-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-3
1:187
designated recyclable materials and is included within the term
"municipal waste."
LEAF WASTE — Includes only leaves, garden residue, shrubbery and
tree trimmings, and similar material, but not including grass clippings.
LICENSED TRANSPORTER — Includes any person, firm, entity or
contractor engaged in the collection, transportation and/or disposition
of municipal waste and/or residual waste and subject to licensure and
regulation by the Department of Environmental Protection under the
Waste Transportation Safety Act.57
MIXED CARDBOARD — Includes noncorrugated packaging such as
cereal boxes, gift boxes, shoe boxes, tablet backers and the like; shall
not include milk cartons, waxed paper or any material contaminated by
food or other municipal waste.
MIXED PAPER — Includes white paper, envelopes and like paper
material, including junk mail, office mix and brown bags; shall not
include waxed paper or any material contaminated by food or other
municipal waste.
MUNICIPAL RECYCLING PROGRAM — A source-separation and
collection program for recycling recyclable materials or a program for
designated dropoff points or collection centers for recycling municipal
waste or source-separated recyclable materials that is operated by
or on behalf of a municipality. The term shall include any sourceseparation
and collection program for composting leaf and yard waste.
The term shall not include any program for recycling construction or
demolition waste and/or sludge from sewage treatment plants or water
supply treatment plants. Under this chapter, the franchised residential
hauling contractor would be designated to operate a recycling program
in lieu of Girard Borough operating such program.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Includes and means any garbage, refuse,
industrial lunchroom or nonrecyclable office waste or other material,
including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous material,
resulting from operation or use of any residential dwelling or unit and/
or any commercial establishment and/or other use or activity and any
sludge not meeting the definition of "residual or hazardous waste" in
the Act (35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.) from a municipal, commercial or
institutional water supply treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant
or air pollution control facility. Does not include recyclable materials
and leaf waste.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
PERSON — Includes any individual, partnership, corporation,
association, institution, cooperative enterprise, municipality, municipal
authority, federal government or agency, state government, agency or
institution (including but not limited to the Department of General
Services and State Public School Building Authority), or any other
57.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 354-3 GIRARD CODE § 354-3
1:188
legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by law as the subject of
rights and duties. In any provisions of this chapter prescribing a duty,
prohibition, fine or penalty, or any combination of the foregoing, the
term "person" shall include the officers and directors of any corporation
or other entity having officers, managers, partners and/or directors.
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Includes clear glass and colored glass;
aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans; recyclable plastics; newspapers
tied, bundled or separated in paper or other bags authorized by the
hauler; magazines tied, bundled or separated in paper or other bags
authorized by the hauler; corrugated cardboard tied or bundled; mixed
paper; and mixed cardboard.
RECYCLABLE PLASTICS — Includes plastic beverage bottles, ketchup
bottles, milk and juice jugs, laundry and dish soap containers and the
like. The term shall not include plastic dishware, drinking glasses or
toys.
RECYCLING — Includes the separation from municipal waste at the site
of generation, collection, recovery and sale or reuse of metals, glass,
newspapers, magazines, corrugated cardboard, mixed paper and mixed
cardboard and other materials which would otherwise be disposed of
as municipal waste or the mechanized separation and treatment of
municipal waste (other than through combustion) and creation and
recovery of reusable materials other than as fuel for the operation of
energy.
RESIDENT — Includes every resident, owner, householder, tenant,
responsible party or person owning or occupying a dwelling,
apartment, condominium, mobile home or place of residence within
Girard Borough generating municipal waste, recyclable materials and/
or leaf waste, excluding only those persons residing in dwellings having
more than four residential units within the same structure and so
deemed within the term "commercial pickup."
RESIDENTIAL RECYCLING — Includes source separation, placement
for collection, collection, transportation, recovery and sale or reuse
of recyclable materials generated within all dwellings and residential
units or uses in Girard Borough, whether such unit is deemed included
within the Borough's contract for residential collection or is deemed a
commercial pickup.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — Includes all persons responsible for
compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including but not limited
to provisions regulating collection, transportation and disposition of
municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste. The term shall
include residents, owners and/or landlords of multifamily rental or
condominium residential properties and their agents; mobile home
owners, tenants and/or occupants; condominium unit owners, tenants
and/or occupants of multiple-unit residential dwellings; and owners,
landlords, managers, occupants and/or tenants and their respective
agents of commercial, institutional, industrial and public properties.
§ 354-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-3
1:189
§ 354-4. General duties and prohibitions.
RUBBISH — Consists of mixed and waste fragments resulting from the
use of household necessities, including but not limited to nonrecyclable
glass, metal, tin and wood, china, leather, rubber, carpeting, prunings
from vines and other foreign matter, but excepting ashes and garbage;
shall be deemed included within the term "municipal waste" and shall
not include leaf waste and/or materials designated as recyclable under
this chapter.
SOLID WASTE — Defined as set forth in the Act.
SOURCE-SEPARATED RECYCLABLE MATERIALS — Materials which
are separated from municipal waste at the point of origin for the
purpose of recycling; shall generally be deemed to include recyclable
materials and leaf waste.
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary
basis in such a manner as not to constitute disposal of such waste.
It shall be presumed that the containment of any municipal waste
in excess of one year constitutes disposal; said presumption may be
overcome only by clear and convincing evidence to the contrary.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste,
recyclable materials and/or leaf waste at any time after generation.
A. General duties.
(1) Requirements in this chapter that municipal waste, recyclable
materials and/or leaf waste be separated at the source, placed for
collection, collected, transported, that municipal waste be disposed
of, recyclable materials marketed and sold for reuse and leaf waste
composted shall apply to all properties in Girard Borough and to all
owners, residents, tenants and/or occupants of such properties and
their managers or agents and to all firms or entities, waste
disposal, recycling and composting facilities.
(a) Owners, residents, tenants and/or occupants of residential
properties having four or fewer dwelling units within the same
building shall comply with duties imposed under this chapter
by contracting with the firm or entity under contract with
Girard Borough for the collection, transportation and proper
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf
waste.
(b) The owner, landlord, manager and/or agent therefor of a
residential property having more than four dwelling units
within the same structure, otherwise within the definition of a
"commercial pickup," shall be deemed responsible parties as to
such properties and obligated to make provision and contract
for collection, transportation and proper disposition of
municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste
generated upon and about the premises, unless they provide in
§ 354-3 GIRARD CODE § 354-4
1:190
proper and written fashion that tenants and/or occupants of
each unit shall be the responsible party, in which event each
such tenant and/or occupant shall be obligated to contract for
services with the firm or entity under contract with Girard
Borough for the collection, transportation and proper
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf
waste. Any written notice required under this subsection shall
be delivered promptly to the Borough and its contractor and
shall include the names and addresses of affected tenants/
occupants and units.
(c) Responsible parties for properties deemed a commercial
establishment and/or commercial pickup must contract with a
firm or entity for collection, transportation and proper
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf
waste generated at or upon said properties and make adequate
provision for proper source separation and placement of said
materials for collection.
[1] Responsible parties of properties not served by the
Borough's residential collection contract shall, on or
before January 1, 2011, or within 30 days after occupancy
of a property, whichever first occurs, notify Girard
Borough of either:
[a] The decision by the owner and/or landlord of a
residential property having four or more dwelling
units, with written agreement by the residential
contractor, that tenants or occupants thereof shall be
deemed responsible parties, any such notice to be in
writing and identify the names, service and mailing
addresses of all tenants, occupants and residential
units thereby deemed responsible parties; or
[b] The name and address of the firm with which said
owner, landlord, manager and/or agent has contracted
for the collection, transportation and proper
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials
and leaf waste.
[2] Any changes in determination of responsible parties for
residential properties and/or the firm(s) retained for
collection, transportation and disposition of municipal
waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste must be
confirmed by written notice to Girard Borough within 30
days after such change is effective.
(2) Reporting requirements established in this chapter shall govern
and extend to the contractor retained by the Borough for general
residential collection services and to all persons or firms
contracting to provide service to multiunit residential, commercial,
§ 354-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-4
1:191
industrial, institutional, public and other properties in Girard
Borough.
B. General prohibitions.
(1) This section shall not limit or modify provisions of this chapter
which identify and make provision for specific violations.
(2) In addition to specific obligations imposed in this chapter, the
following acts and/or omissions are hereby declared unlawful and
are prohibited, subject to the fines and/or penalties imposed in this
chapter:
(a) No materials shall be allowed to accumulate on the ground nor
be deposited on the streets or highways, vacant lots, homes,
nor on any land publicly or privately owned, nor be thrown into
any stream or body of water in the Borough of Girard other
than as is expressly permitted in this chapter or by state or
local laws.
(b) There shall be no doubling up of families by which more than
one residence or family uses a common container(s), except in
the case of a commercial pickup and only then by persons
intended to be included within such service.
(c) Where a residence, apartment, condominium or other
residential building is arranged for occupancy by more than
four separate dwelling units, failure or refusal by the owner,
landlord or manager of said property or agent(s) thereof to
furnish proper collection services for municipal waste,
recyclable materials and leaf waste generated upon said
property, unless said owner, landlord or manager has in proper
fashion designated tenants or occupants responsible parties
and issued notices required in this section.
(d) Failure or refusal by the owner, landlord, manager, tenant or
occupant of a nonresidential property in the Borough or
agent(s) thereof to furnish proper collection services for
municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste
generated upon said property.
(e) No person shall place recyclable materials for disposal as
municipal waste or leaf waste.
(f) No person shall burn or cause to be burned any recyclable
materials or municipal waste. [Amended 12-20-2010 by Ord.
No. 713]
(g) No person shall place upon any other property municipal
waste, recyclable materials or leaf waste not generated upon
that property, except for placement of recyclable materials for
§ 354-4 GIRARD CODE § 354-4
1:192
§ 354-5. Collection and disposal.
collection upon one's own property and/or placement of
materials at a licensed recycling or composting facility.
(h) No person shall collect from any property located in Girard
Borough any municipal waste or recyclable materials.
C. Exceptions.
(1) Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit any person from
building or maintaining a compost pile consisting of grass
clippings, leaves, weeds, soil, hedge and/or shrubbery clippings
and other organic material, so long as a nuisance does not result
from said activity.
(2) This chapter shall not be construed to prevent or prohibit any
person from taking to a licensed recycling or composting facility
recyclable materials and/or leaf waste for which general collection
is provided for in this chapter.
A. All municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste generated at
and upon all properties located in Girard Borough shall be separated,
placed for collection, collected, transported, disposed of, marketed for
recycling and/or composted in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter.
B. It shall be the responsibility of the resident, person and/or responsible
party upon each property in Girard Borough generating municipal
waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste to separate from
municipal waste recyclable materials and leaf waste as required in this
chapter and to place the same for collection by the residential
contractor retained by the Borough or, if applicable, by such firm or
entity retained to provide services to a commercial pickup property.
C. All municipal waste, source-separated materials and leaf waste
generated by or upon all residential properties and/or units in Girard
Borough other than those designated and maintained as a commercial
pickup shall be collected, removed and disposed, marketed for
recycling or composted only by the contractor retained under the
Articles of Agreement (Borough contract), under the terms and
conditions set forth in said contract, this chapter and the contract
specifications and bid blank.
(1) It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person other than the
entity retained under the Borough contract to collect, remove,
transport or dispose of municipal waste and source-separated
recyclable materials generated by residential units in Girard
Borough other than those designated and maintained as a
commercial pickup.
§ 354-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-5
1:193
§ 354-6. Collection at source.
(2) Contracts for the collection, removal, transportation and proper
disposition of municipal waste, source-separated recyclable
materials and/or leaf waste under this chapter shall, from time to
time, be let to the lowest responsible bidder, with or without
advertising, which contract(s) shall contain, in addition to the
requirements of this chapter, such other provisions not in conflict
with this chapter as may be deemed advisable by the Girard
Borough Council to incorporate therein, and it shall be executed by
the Borough Manager. No contract therefor shall be awarded for a
period exceeding five years.
(3) Owners of premises which constitute properties subject to the
residential collection contract and are leased to others shall, by a
date established by the Borough Manager, provide the contractor
and the Borough with written notice setting forth names and
residence addresses of all tenants and shall supplement that notice
to the contractor within 10 days after termination or
commencement of any lease. Failure to do so shall render the
owner the party responsible for collection, transportation and
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste
generated on the property.
A. All persons (including adults, parents, owners, occupants, heads of
households, residents, responsible parties, operators, landlords,
tenants or agents) of all properties of any type located in Girard
Borough shall separate or be responsible for the separation of
municipal waste from recyclable materials and leaf waste generated
upon or about such property and for the proper temporary storage of
such source-separated materials until placement for collection by the
Borough's residential contractor or, as to commercial pickups, by the
retained registered hauling contractor therefor in the manner
prescribed in this chapter or by the owner of a commercial pickup
property and its hauling contractor.
B. All owners and occupants of properties of any type located in Girard
Borough shall provide and maintain containers, as required in this
chapter, for all municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste
generated or accumulated upon such properties.
(1) The following requirements shall apply generally to all properties
and to their owners, occupants, landlords, tenants, managers,
residents and agents:
(a) Garbage or municipal waste containers (garbage containers)
shall be used only for garbage and municipal waste materials,
as defined in this chapter.
(b) All garbage shall be wrapped in paper or within a plastic bag
prior to being placed in a garbage container.
§ 354-5 GIRARD CODE § 354-6
1:194
(c) No more water shall be allowed nor permitted in municipal
waste than naturally accumulates from the refuse materials.
(d) All garbage cans and receptacles shall be kept in a sanitary
condition, in places accessible to the collector and with
sufficient shelter to prevent their freezing to the ground.
(e) All municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste shall
be kept in places accessible to the collector and in such
containers or bags to be provided by the resident, owner,
landlord, tenant or occupant of the property so that said
materials may be readily and properly removed by the
collector.
(f) All items designated in this chapter as recyclable materials
shall be separated from municipal waste and leaf waste, shall
be clean of food waste and foreign material and shall be
separated for proper collection as required in this chapter or,
as to commercial pickups, as required by the hauling
contractor and responsible party.
(g) Leaf waste shall be separated from municipal waste and
recyclable materials and shall be placed for proper collection
as required in this chapter or, as to commercial pickups, as
required by the hauling contractor and responsible party and,
in all cases, shall be stored and placed for collection in
Borough-designated bags distinguishing leaf waste from
municipal waste and/or recyclable materials.
(h) It shall be a violation of this chapter and unlawful for any
person to accumulate or store or allow accumulation or storage
of municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste in
such manner as to give rise to a nuisance, and any such
accumulation or storage shall constitute violations of this
chapter and be subject to provisions of general municipal law
pertaining to abatement of nuisances and payment of the costs
thereof.
(2) The following requirements shall apply to all residential properties
not designated and maintained as a commercial pickup and
therefore subject to the Girard Borough residential collection
contract:
(a) Excepting only roll-off containers authorized in this section,
containers for the temporary storage of municipal waste and
placement at curbside for collection by the residential
contractor shall have a capacity not exceeding 33 gallons.
(b) Roll-off containers (toters) of approximately ninety-gallon
capacity shall be authorized, provided that all municipal waste
therein shall be placed in secured plastic bags.
§ 354-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-6
1:195
§ 354-7. Recycling requirements.
(c) Garbage and municipal waste containers shall be made of
nonabsorbent material, be watertight and be provided with
handles and closely fitting covers made of nonabsorbent
material. The owner or occupant of the property generating
such municipal waste shall be responsible to keep such
containers watertight at all times.
(d) Regular refuse or municipal waste bags shall be of sturdy
plastic with a minimum thickness of two mills and having a
maximum capacity of 33 gallons.
(e) Containers for the temporary storage of recyclable glass,
plastics and metal cans shall be as specified and provided by
the Borough.
(f) Recyclable materials separated at the source from municipal
waste and leaf waste shall be cleaned of and kept free from all
food and other foreign matter.
(g) Recyclable materials shall be source-separated and placed for
collection in the manner prescribed in § 354-7 of this chapter.
(h) Leaf waste shall be separated from municipal waste and
recyclable materials and placed for collection by the
residential contractor in Borough-designated bags and placed
separately from other materials.
(i) All municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste
shall be set out by the owner or occupant of such residential
property at curbside on the established and scheduled day for
collection thereof by the residential contractor.
(j) No municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste
shall be set out by the owner or occupant of such residential
property for any reason or for the purpose of collection more
than 24 hours prior to the previously established and
scheduled time for collection thereof by the contractor.
A. The following materials are declared to be recyclable materials to be
separated from municipal waste and leaf waste at the source of
generation, placed for collection, collected, transported and placed or
marketed for recycling and reuse:
(1) Clear glass and colored glass;
(2) Aluminum, steel and bimetallic cans;
(3) Recyclable plastics;
(4) Newspapers and newsprint;
§ 354-6 GIRARD CODE § 354-7
1:196
(5) Magazines;
(6) Corrugated cardboard;
(7) Mixed paper; and
(8) Mixed cardboard.
B. All persons shall be obligated to separate or be responsible for the
separation from municipal waste and leaf waste generated at all
properties located in Girard Borough those materials now or hereafter
designated by the Girard Borough Council as recyclable materials and
to place the same for collection, recycling and marketing for reuse as
specified in this chapter.
C. Prior to storage of recyclable materials for collection, the contents
thereof shall be removed from any containers made of recyclable
materials and the containers rinsed clean by the owner or occupant of
the property generating such materials.
D. Where required under this chapter and/or the Borough contract for
residential collection services or, as to commercial pickups, by the
owner of and/or hauling contractor for such property, recyclable
materials shall be separated from one another at the source and placed
for collection in such separate fashion and shall not be commingled
with different types of materials.
E. All recyclable materials placed for collection and recycling shall be free
of foreign matter which itself is not recyclable material or an inherent
part of the recyclable material.
F. All owners, landlords, occupants, tenants, managers, the agents thereof
and responsible parties for properties located in Girard Borough which
are not included within the Borough's residential collection contract
shall be responsible for contracting with a registered firm or entity for
the collection, transportation, recycling and marketing of recyclable
materials.
G. This chapter shall not be construed to preclude the owner or occupant
of any property from donating or selling his, her, their or its sourceseparated
recyclable materials generated upon or about such property
to any profit or nonprofit entity; provided, however, that such person
shall deliver said source-separated recyclable materials to a collection
point under the direct operation or control of said entity.
H. This chapter shall not be construed to impair ownership of separated
recyclable materials by the generator unless and until such materials
are placed for collection by the residential or commercial pickup
hauling contractor.
I. Owners, occupants, residents and other persons generating recyclable
materials within residential properties in Girard Borough subject to the
§ 354-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-7
1:197
Borough's residential collection contract shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) Recyclable clear and colored glass, plastics and aluminum, steel
and bimetallic cans shall be stored and placed for collection in
plastic containers supplied by Girard Borough or in a like container
clearly identified as containing such recyclable materials.
(2) Newspapers and newsprint shall be tied, bundled or placed in
paper bags separate from all other materials and placed in such
manner for collection.
(3) Magazines shall be tied, bundled or placed in paper bags separate
from all other materials and placed in such manner for collection.
(4) Corrugated cardboard shall be flattened, tied and bundled separate
from all other materials and placed in such manner for collection.
(5) Mixed paper and mixed cardboard shall be placed in clear plastic
tied bags separate from all other materials and placed in such
manner for collection.
J. Owners, landlords, managers, occupants, tenants and other persons
within properties in Girard Borough which are designated and/or
maintained as a commercial pickup shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) The owner, landlord, manager and/or agent thereof shall be
responsible for establishing a system of source separation and
collection by occupants of the property of recyclable materials
designated in this chapter and their placement for collection and
proper removal, transportation and marketing for recycling by the
contracted hauler for the premises.
(2) Such source-separation and collection system must include the
following:
(a) Provision for separation and collection of all designated
recyclable materials established in this chapter or otherwise
by the Borough Council;
(b) Provision of suitable containers for collecting and sorting
materials;
(c) Easily accessible locations for the containers; and
(d) Written instructions to all occupants of the premises
concerning designation of recyclable materials, their proper
separation at the source of generation and the proper use and
availability of the collection system.
K. All owners of properties deemed a commercial pickup and firms or
entities collecting and transporting recyclable materials from said
§ 354-7 GIRARD CODE § 354-7
1:198
§ 354-8. Leaf waste.
properties shall be obligated to submit in a timely fashion all reports to
Girard Borough pertaining to recycling matters as are required in this
chapter.
L. For purposes of this chapter, the Borough's residential recycling
program shall include not only recycling of recyclable materials
generated upon residential dwellings served by the contractor retained
by Girard Borough, but also those generated upon all residential
properties of any type or nature. Owners of and firms or entities serving
all residential properties shall submit to the Borough all reports and
records required as to residential recycling under this chapter or other
applicable law.
A. All owners, occupants, landlords, tenants, managers and agents of
properties located in Girard Borough shall separate from municipal
waste and recyclable materials leaf waste generated at or upon the said
properties for purposes of a separate collection and composting
thereof.
B. Owners, occupants, residents and other persons generating leaf waste
within residential properties in Girard Borough subject to the
Borough's residential collection contract shall comply with the
following requirements:
(1) All leaf waste shall be accumulated and stored prior to placement
for collection by the residential contractor in tied Boroughdesignated
bags and shall be free of all other materials.
(2) Such leaf waste in tied Borough-designated bags shall be placed at
curbside for collection by the residential contractor not more than
24 hours prior to the scheduled time for collection thereof.
C. Owners, landlords and managers of properties designated and/or
maintained as a commercial pickup shall be responsible to contract
with a registered hauler for collection, transportation and proper
composting of leaf waste generated upon each such property and for
establishing procedures for the proper source separation, temporary
storage and placement of leaf waste by tenants and all other occupants
of the premises for collection by the firm or entity retained to provide
such service.
(1) Such source-separation and collection system must include the
following:
(a) Assumption by the owner, landlord and/or manager of
responsibility for collection, storage and proper disposition for
composting of leaf waste generated upon the property if such
leaf waste is accumulated and collected within the owner's or
landlord's obligations; or
§ 354-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-8
1:199
§ 354-9. Collection, transportation and disposition.
(b) Written instructions to tenants and other occupants of the
premises should they be obligated to accumulate and dispose
of leaf waste, which instructions shall, at a minimum, set forth
the requirements for source separation and collection of leaf
waste and identify easily accessible locations for storage and/
or placement of such materials and the dates or times of their
scheduled collection.
(2) Bags or other containers utilized for storage and collection of leaf
waste shall be as established by the owner or other responsible
party and the retained hauling contractor and shall be detailed
within instructions given to occupants and/or tenants of the
premises.
(3) The owner and/or retained registered hauling contractor shall
retain and produce to the Borough upon its request all records
required by this chapter regarding collection and composting of
leaf waste.
A. All persons, firms or corporations collecting municipal waste,
recyclable materials and/or leaf waste in Girard Borough and
transporting the same upon the streets of the Borough shall collect and
transport such materials only in conveyances and receptacles tightly
closed on the bottom and sides, so as to prevent such materials from
spilling, dropping or falling to the streets, alleys or highways.
B. All vehicles and conveyances transporting municipal waste, recyclable
materials and/or leaf waste shall be so operated and covered as to
prevent offensive odors from escaping therefrom and to prevent said
materials from being blown or spilled upon any street, sidewalk, alley or
property of the Borough.
C. Every vehicle or conveyance shall have plainly printed thereon the
name of the registrant issued therefor and shall be kept in a sanitary
condition at all times.
D. All municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste shall be
collected from properties in the Borough only between the hours of
6:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m.
E. Municipal waste and recyclable materials generated and placed by
owners and occupants for collection from residential premises subject
to the Borough's residential contract shall be collected simultaneously
by the residential contractor once per each calendar week.
F. Leaf waste generated upon and placed for collection at residential
properties in Girard Borough subject to the Borough's residential
collection contract shall be placed by owners and occupants for
collection and collected and transported by the residential contractor to
a composting facility in accordance with the residential contractor's
§ 354-8 GIRARD CODE § 354-9
1:200
contract with Girard Borough on a weekly basis during a six-week
period in the spring and fall of each calendar year as shall be
determined by the Girard Borough Council with a recommendation
of the residential contractor. Residents shall be given due notice of
the six-week leaf waste collection period, and owners and occupants
of residences served under the Borough's residential contract shall,
during said six-week period, set their leaf waste at curbside on the
day established in each week for collection of municipal waste and
recyclable materials.
G. Leaf waste generated upon properties in Girard Borough designated
and maintained as a commercial pickup shall be collected by the firm or
entity retained by the owner or responsible party for said property in
accordance with the schedule established by the owner and hauler,
such schedule to assure full and proper collection and disposal at a
licensed composting facility of all such leaf waste.
H. All materials, source-separated recyclable materials and leaf waste
shall be disposed of by the residential contractor, any registrant or any
other collector in such manner as not to endanger or interfere with the
health, safety and comfort of any of the inhabitants of Girard Borough
and in compliance with all federal, state and local laws, ordinances,
regulations and rules.
I. The residential contractor retained by Girard Borough and all
registered hauling entities or firms for collection, transportation and
proper disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf
waste shall be required, at such person's, firm's or corporation's
expense, to furnish, maintain and operate all vehicles, machinery and
equipment necessary for the proper performance of the Borough's
residential contract and all contracts for services to properties deemed
a commercial pickup, except that such person, firm or corporation shall
not be required to furnish receptacles or containers, receptacles or
containers to be provided by owners and occupants of properties served
by the residential contract or by owners, landlords, managers or their
agents of commercial pickup properties.
J. No municipal waste, source-separated recyclable materials and/or leaf
waste shall be collected from residential properties in Girard Borough
having four or fewer units within the same dwelling, nor transported
over the streets and thoroughfares of the Borough by any person(s)
other than the residential contractor retained by the Borough for
provision of such residential services, subject only to the following
exceptions:
(1) This subsection shall not prohibit transportation on state highways
or Borough collector streets of such materials collected from
properties in other municipalities.
(2) This subsection shall not prohibit collection and transportation of
such materials from properties in Girard Borough not included
§ 354-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-9
1:201
within the residential collection contract (i.e., commercial pickups)
if collected and transported by a duly registered person, firm or
corporation under contract or agreement to provide such services.
K. The ultimate disposal facility or facilities utilized for the disposal of
municipal waste generated and collected from all properties located in
Girard Borough must be included in the Erie County Act 101 Municipal
Solid Waste Plan and must have a reservation of waste disposal capacity
agreement with Erie County during the effective term of Girard
Borough's contract with the residential contractor and the registration
term of any registrant.
L. All recyclable materials collected from properties located in Girard
Borough shall be transported by the residential contractor or registrant
and directed only to a materials recycling facility for processing,
marketing and reuse as mandated in the Act and this chapter. Such
facility must possess and maintain such license(s) as are required under
federal, state and/or local laws and regulations.
M. As the Act requires that Girard Borough retain responsibility for its
recycling program, the residential contractor shall, upon the
contractor's bid, identify the facilities to be used for disposal or
disposition of municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste.
(1) Girard Borough shall be a party in interest as to all contracts
between the residential contractor or registrants and facilities
utilized for disposition of municipal waste, separation and
marketing of recyclable materials and composting of leaf waste and
shall be entitled to written notice in the event of termination of
such contracts and to reports of tonnages and types of materials
disposed by the contractor and/or registrants with each such
facility.
(2) In the event the residential contractor or a registrant should,
during the term of the contract or registration, enter into contracts
with facilities other than those designated in the contractor's bid or
registrant's applications for registration, the contractor or
registrant shall assure that Girard Borough is a party in interest as
to such new contract(s) and shall further, within 10 days after
entering into such new contract(s), notify Girard Borough in
writing of the name, mailing address and telephone number of the
new facility and the substance of the new contract's provisions.
(3) As the residential contractor and all registrants are obligated to
assure the proper separation, disposition and marketing for reuse
of recyclable items, mere disposition of such items at a third party's
facility shall not, alone, satisfy such contractor's or registrants'
duties, the contractor and registrants remaining obligated to
assure the proper processing and marketing of such materials by
the facility at which said materials have been disposed.
§ 354-9 GIRARD CODE § 354-9
1:202
§ 354-10. Residential contractors.
N. Once municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste are
placed at a property in Girard Borough for collection, they shall become
the property of the collector and shall not be taken or removed by third
parties. It shall be a violation of this chapter, subject to penalties
prescribed herein, for any person other than the residential contractor
or registered hauling contractor, as applicable, to remove municipal
waste, recyclable materials and/or leaf waste which has been placed as
designated for collection.
A. Girard Borough, by its Borough Council, shall designate one entity
which shall be responsible for the collection, transportation, disposal,
recycling and/or composting of all municipal waste, recyclable
materials and leaf waste resulting from or generated by all single-family
residential units located in Girard Borough, exclusive of those meeting
the definition of a "commercial pickup" under this chapter, as required
by state and local laws and regulations.
B. The Girard Borough Council shall, through appropriate advertisement
and solicitation of bids, award to a person or entity (residential
contractor) who qualifies as the lowest financially responsible bidder
meeting all specifications and demonstrating its capability of
performing the contract a contract for a term not to exceed five years to
collect, transport and haul municipal waste, recyclable materials and
leaf waste generated upon all such residential properties and dispose
municipal waste, market recyclable materials for recycling and reuse
and deposit leaf waste for composting at the Borough's composting
facility, for which services the contractor may bill and collect a fee from
residential customers as authorized in § 354-11.
C. The residential contractor shall provide a weekly pickup or collection of
municipal waste and recyclable materials from all residential units in
Girard Borough, exclusive of commercial pickups, and shall notify each
head of household of the day of the week for the scheduled collection of
municipal waste and recyclable materials. This collection shall, at the
election of the resident, be either:
(1) An all-inclusive collection method, including unlimited bags or
containers of municipal waste per week and unlimited collection of
recyclable materials; or
(2) A per-bag collection of municipal waste with unlimited collection as
to volume of recyclable materials.
D. The collection of recyclable materials shall be separate from collection
of municipal waste, but both shall be collected at the same time and on
the same day of each week for each residential household.
(1) It shall be unlawful for the residential contractor to commingle
municipal waste and recyclable materials.
§ 354-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-10
1:203
(2) This subsection shall not preclude the residential contractor from
utilizing combination, one-pass vehicles for collection of municipal
waste and recyclable materials so long as each is collected and
maintained for transportation and disposition in separate
compartments without commingling.
E. While recyclable glass, plastics and cans and mixed paper and
cardboard, respectively, may be commingled for collection, it shall be
the responsibility of the residential contractor to separate or ensure
proper separation of each of the recyclable materials prior to their
ultimate disposition and marketing for reuse.
F. Leaf waste shall be collected weekly from each residential household
customer, but shall be limited to a six-week period in the spring and/or
autumn of each calendar year of the residential contract. The precise
six-week period for leaf waste collection in any given year shall be as
determined by the Borough Council after discussion with the residential
contractor.
(1) The all-inclusive and per-bag service options shall each include
unlimited leaf waste collection service during such designated sixweek
period.
(2) Residents shall be given due notice by the Borough and the
residential contractor of the six-week leaf waste collection period,
and residential customers shall, during said designated periods, set
out their leaf waste generated upon such properties at curbside in
tied clear plastic bags for collection.
(3) Leaf waste shall be collected by the residential contractor from
each customer's property on the same day as the customer's
scheduled collection of municipal waste and recyclable materials,
but shall be collected separately from municipal waste and
recyclable materials.
(a) It shall be unlawful for the residential contractor to commingle
leaf waste with municipal waste and/or recyclable materials in
collection, transportation or disposition.
(b) All leaf waste collected by the residential contractor shall be
directed for disposition only to a licensed composting facility.
(4) The residential contractor shall be solely responsible for the proper
collection, transportation and disposition for composting of leaf
waste for the life of its contract with Girard Borough and shall
provide for composting itself or at a licensed composting facility in
conformity with applicable state and local law, regulations and the
contract.
G. It shall be unlawful and constitute a violation of this chapter for any
person or entity other than the residential contractor to collect, pick up,
transport or dispose of municipal waste, recyclable materials and/or
§ 354-10 GIRARD CODE § 354-10
1:204
leaf waste generated at or upon residential properties located in Girard
Borough, excluding only those defined herein and maintained as a
commercial pickup.
H. Every resident, owner, occupant or responsible party for a residential
dwelling not deemed a commercial pickup shall have their municipal
waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste collected, removed,
transported and disposed of only by the residential contractor under
contract with Girard Borough and shall pay to the residential contractor
such fee as is established under such contract for the service method
elected by the resident, plus such fees as are assessed for additional
services requested.
I. The residential contractor shall, at its expense, provide in quarterly
billings to residential customers and/or through publications in
newspapers of general circulation in Girard Borough, as designated by
the Girard Borough Council, the specifications and contract notices to
residents concerning scheduled leaf waste collection periods and
educational information on recyclable materials and their proper
recycling.
J. It shall be a violation of this chapter and unlawful, subject to fines and
penalties prescribed in this chapter, for any person to place at his or her
residence curbside for collection by the residential contractor
municipal waste and/or leaf waste not generated upon such property in
ordinary residential use thereof.
(1) Municipal waste and/or leaf waste generated upon another
property shall not be deemed included within the all-inclusive
residential service intended under this chapter and the contract
awarded by the Girard Borough Council.
(2) Construction materials and other municipal waste and/or leaf
waste generated by or arising from a person's business enterprise
shall be disposed of or composted, as applicable, by the person
generating the same in accordance with the requirements of this
chapter applicable to persons and properties deemed a commercial
pickup.
K. Construction materials in substantial quantity generated at or upon a
residential property otherwise subject to the residential contract
through construction or renovation or the improvement(s) on the
property shall be disposed of by the construction contractor, owner or
occupant through separate arrangement or contract with a registered
hauling contractor, at the expense of the contractor, owner or occupant,
and shall not be deemed within the all-inclusive residential service
contract. This subsection shall not be deemed to exclude the following
from all-inclusive residential service collection:
(1) Wood and related products generated in ordinary residential use,
so long as nails and protruding objects are removed or rendered
safe for collection;
§ 354-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-10
1:205
(2) Replaced guttering and fence boards and the like, so long as they
are rendered safe for collection, not longer than six feet and, in any
substantial quantities, tied or bundled;
(3) Other items excluded from the definition of "construction
materials" in § 354-3C generated upon the residential property in
the ordinary course of its use.
L. The Borough and the residential contractor shall cooperate in
disseminating to the public information regarding the contract,
services, service options, obligations of residents and the contractor
and definition and proper preparation of recyclable materials to
encourage the effective reuse of such resources.
M. The residential contractor shall not be obligated to register with the
Borough by virtue of the contract, but shall obtain such registration(s)
for other collection services provided by it to properties deemed a
commercial pickup.
N. The residential contractor shall be subject to the following duties and
obligations throughout the term of any contract with the Borough:
(1) The contractor shall at all times follow, comply with and abide by
the then-applicable contract(s) specifications and bid blank for
collection, transportation, and proper disposition of municipal
waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste.
(2) The contractor shall at all times follow, comply with and abide by
federal, state and local laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and
resolutions, including but not limited to the Solid Waste
Management Act,58 the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and
Waste Reduction Act,59 the Erie County Solid Waste Plan, the Waste
Transportation Safety Act60 and this chapter, as may in the future
be amended.
(3) The contractor shall submit to Girard Borough in full and in a
timely fashion and in the manner or format specified in the contract
all reports, notices and documents required under applicable law,
this chapter and/or said contract and shall retain all records as
required under said contract.
(4) The contractor shall be required at its or his own cost and expense
to furnish, maintain, operate or have access to a municipal waste
disposal facility of sufficient size and capacity to dispose of the
municipal waste collections made by the contractor under the
terms of the residential contract, through the term of such
contract. Lack of capacity at a disposal facility shall not excuse the
contractor's performance under the contract.
58.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
59.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
60.Editor's Note: See 27 Pa.C.S.A. § 6201 et seq.
§ 354-10 GIRARD CODE § 354-10
1:206
§ 354-11. Residential service methods; fees for collection.
(5) The contractor throughout the term of the contract shall be
required at its or his own cost and expense to furnish, maintain,
operate or have access to proper and licensed facilities for the
separation and marketing for reuse of recyclable materials and
shall contract with a licensed composting facility in conformity with
applicable state and local law, regulations and the contract for
composting of leaf waste collected by the contractor under the
terms of the residential contract. Lack of capacity at any facility
shall not excuse the contractor's performance under the contract.
(6) Labor disputes or work stoppages at or affecting the residential
contractor and/or facilities utilized for disposal of municipal waste,
marketing of recyclable materials and/or composting of leaf waste
shall not excuse the contractor's performance under the residential
contract.
(7) The contractor shall empty all Borough-owned street and park
refuse cans once each week at no cost to the Borough. The
contractor shall also provide three roll-off toters to the Girard
Borough office, as well as a dumpster each for the Girard Borough
Public Works Garage, municipal pool and Dobler Hose Fire
Department, at no cost to the Borough. These containers shall be
emptied weekly by the contractor.
A. Every resident owning, occupying or using a residential dwelling in
Girard Borough, excluding only those defined and maintained as a
commercial pickup, may contract only with the Borough's designated
residential contractor for the collection, removal, hauling,
transportation and proper disposition of municipal waste, recyclable
materials and leaf waste generated upon or within the said dwelling.
Every resident contracting for service with the residential contractor
shall be obligated to pay to such contractor the fee(s) assessed for the
service option elected by such resident and for all special or additional
services requested.
B. The residential contractor shall offer all persons and properties subject
to residential collection under the contract the two alternative methods
of service set forth in § 354-10C of this chapter, each method to include
unlimited collection, transportation and proper disposition of recyclable
materials and leaf waste.
(1) Residents electing the per-bag service method shall be authorized
to place municipal waste for collection by the residential contractor
only in those bags authorized by the contractor and purchased from
the contractor. Such bags shall have a minimum capacity of 30
gallons and shall be packaged in minimum quantities of five bags
per package.
§ 354-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-11
1:207
(2) The fee per household for all-inclusive service shall be assessed
and paid on a quarter-annual basis, and it shall be the responsibility
of each resident or responsible party occupying such household to
pay such fee to the residential contractor.
(3) The amounts of the all-inclusive and per-bag service methods shall
be established as a result of the Borough's solicitation of bids and
contract award for residential service.
C. The residential contractor shall provide to residents contracting with it
for all-inclusive or per-bag service who are eligible for and possess a
PACE card a ten-percent senior citizen discount.
(1) Any resident requesting such discount shall be obligated to supply
his or her PACE card and another form of identification in order to
be eligible for the discount.
(2) Any resident who, after receiving benefit of the senior citizen
discount, should become ineligible for a PACE card shall, from the
date of such ineligibility, no longer be eligible for the senior citizen
discount and, within 10 days after receiving notice of PACE
ineligibility, shall notify the residential contractor.
(3) No person shall attempt to obtain a senior citizen discount through
use of a PACE card not belonging to that person.
(4) The senior citizen discount shall apply only to persons who own or
lease the serviced property such as to be the responsible party. No
person not the owner or lessee of the serviced property or the
spouse of such owner or lessee shall apply for a senior citizen
discount, nor shall any responsible party for a property seek to
obtain through another person's eligibility the discount to which
the responsible party is not entitled.
D. For any period in excess of 30 continuous days during which a resident
or responsible party has paid or is obligated to pay the fixed quarterly
fee for unlimited disposal services but his or her household will not
generate municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste during
such period due to the residence not being occupied on account of
relocation to a new residence, extended vacation, lengthy
hospitalization or convalescence or other reason, such responsible
party shall be entitled to a pro rata refund or credit from the residential
contractor for the period of nonoccupancy so long as the responsible
party notifies the contractor of such nonoccupancy not later than seven
days after the period of nonoccupancy begins. If such notice is not given
to the residential contractor within seven days after commencement of
nonoccupancy, the credit shall not be due earlier than seven days prior
to the contractor's receipt of notice.
E. All residents contracting with the residential contractor for provision of
services shall, upon first contracting with the contractor, elect the
method of service desired. All residents shall be obligated to retain the
§ 354-11 GIRARD CODE § 354-11
1:208
service method elected until the next following contract anniversary
date. Residents shall be entitled to elect a different service method
only upon the commencement of service for a property and on each
anniversary date during the contract term. No resident shall be allowed
to avoid these requirements through voluntary termination and later
reinstatement or otherwise, unless the contractor should agree to the
contrary.
F. The residential contractor shall be solely responsible for payment of all
fees and charges assessed or incurred in performing the contract,
including but not limited to collection, transportation, proper disposal
of municipal waste, disposition and marketing of recyclable materials
and composting of leaf waste, and all such costs shall be included in any
price bid for a contract of residential collection service.
G. Special services and fees.
(1) The residential contractor shall provide, for a special service fee or
rental to be paid by residential customers requesting such service,
sale or lease of ninety-gallon roll-off containers or toters. The fee or
rental shall be as established in the contract awarded by the
Borough.
(2) The residential contractor shall collect, transport and dispose of all
municipal waste.
(3) The residential contractor shall provide, for a special service fee to
be paid by residential collection customers requesting such
service, collection, transportation and proper disposal of
appliances containing Freon, which cannot lawfully be disposed of
in landfills under present laws and regulations. The contractor shall
collect such appliances from residential customers requesting the
service and shall transport such appliances to an authorized
recycling center for removal of Freon and proper recycling.
Specifications issued pursuant to this chapter and the residential
contract awarded shall require that this special service be included
in any contract at the fee established in the contractor's bid.
(4) The residential contractor or any other registrant shall be entitled
to contract with owners of or responsible parties for residential
dwellings included within the Borough's residential contract for
collection, transportation and disposal of garbage, household
rubbish, construction materials excluded from residential
collection under this chapter and other municipal waste generated
upon such property in the course of its construction or substantial
renovation, at such fees as the contractor or registrant and the
responsible party shall agree.
H. The provisions of this chapter shall not exclude from the all-inclusive
residential service method materials constituting municipal waste and/
or construction materials which are generated upon or within a
residential dwelling as a consequence of water damage, sewer backups
§ 354-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-11
1:209
created by weather or flood events, where the Girard Borough Council,
by resolution, shall have authorized such inclusion, and insurance
coverage extending to payment of benefits for such service does not
exist. Where the owner or responsible party has insurance affording
such benefits, such owner or responsible party shall contract with the
residential contractor or other registered hauling contractor for service
in collection and disposal of such materials.61
I. It shall be the responsibility of the residential contractor to bill and
collect from each household contracting for its services amounts due
for services rendered by the contractor in performance of the contract,
subject further to the following:
(1) In the event the residential contractor is not paid the quarterly fee
per household assessed for all-inclusive service, is not paid sums
due by residents electing the per-bag service method or is not paid
special service fees due for additional services requested by the
customer, the contractor may proceed to collect such sums in a civil
action against the resident, householder, customer or other
responsible party for such dwelling.
(2) In no event shall Girard Borough be responsible for payment of any
sum due with regard to services rendered by the contractor under
the contract.
J. Miscellaneous provisions.
(1) Should a residential customer place recyclable materials for
collection in such manner that they are not cleaned and/or sourceseparated
from municipal waste or other materials as required by
this chapter and, as presented, are contaminated, the contractor
may decline to collect the same if the contractor gives to the
customer notice of the deficiency and reasons.
(2) Residential customers shall cut, bend or otherwise reduce to a
length not exceeding six feet fence boards, guttering, Christmas
trees, shrubbery, limbs, branches and other materials presented for
collection by the contractor as municipal waste.
(3) The all-inclusive collection service method is not intended to
encompass collection of large appliances and other items in a
quantity not reasonably generated in the incidental and normal use
of a residential premises. Collection of large items from a premises
presented in greater than the volume of one item per week
generated by a residential use may, at the contractor's election, be
subject to a special service fee not exceeding that bid and accepted
by the Borough in the contract award, provided that such fee shall
be assessed only after prior notice to the customer.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 354-11 GIRARD CODE § 354-11
1:210
§ 354-12. Considerations in contract awards.
§ 354-13. Required reports and notices.
(4) Where this chapter specifies a particular type of bag or container
for placement of recyclable materials and/or leaf waste, an
alternative bag or container prescribed or authorized by the
residential contractor or hauler shall be permitted, so long as the
alternative complies with the objectives and requirements of this
chapter.
(5) Those persons or entities responsible for maintenance of private
streets and ways shall ensure that such streets are maintained and
that snow and ice is removed therefrom so as to allow access by the
residential contractor to residences thereon for collection of
municipal waste, recyclable materials and leaf waste. If such
private streets and ways should become impassable, the contractor
will be obligated to collect materials at the passable location
nearest to the residences, and customers in that event shall place
materials for collection at that location.
A. In considering bids received in response to its specifications and
solicitation of bids for residential collection service issued pursuant to
this chapter, the Girard Borough Council shall:
(1) Determine whether each bidder is financially responsible;
(2) Determine whether each bidder is capable of performing all of the
duties and obligations imposed under the proposed contract;
(3) If it has solicited bids for alternative terms or provisions, determine
those terms and provisions to be in the best interests of the
Borough and residential customers;
(4) Look to the fixed quarterly fee bid for the all-inclusive collection,
transportation and disposal of municipal waste, recyclable
materials and leaf waste service method, and not to the per-bag
service method or other service options, as establishing the bid
price for purposes of evaluating the amount or price of bids
received.
B. The Girard Borough Council shall have authority to prepare such
specifications and consider such additional factors as it deems
advisable for the health, safety and welfare of the Borough and
residential customers.
A. All owners, landlords, managers or responsible parties of properties in
Girard Borough which are defined as a "commercial pickup" must give
to Girard Borough such notices regarding identity of retained hauling
contractors as are required in § 354-4A(1)(c)[1] of this chapter.
§ 354-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-13
1:211
B. All persons, firms or entities licensed by PADEP as waste transporters,
contracting with or registered by Girard Borough to collect, transport,
dispose, market for recycling and/or compost municipal waste,
recyclable materials and/or leaf waste generated by owners or
occupants of properties located in the Borough shall be required to
keep and maintain records and to submit to Girard Borough as it may
require all customer lists and reports so as to assure compliance with
federal, state and local laws, rules or regulations and to enable Girard
Borough to comply with its statutory obligations and make full and
proper application for recycling and other grants available to it.
Reports required by the Borough shall serve as a means to apprise the
Borough of the status of disposal, recycling and composting activities
and expenditures.
(1) Such reports shall include, at a minimum:
(a) Certified weight receipts itemizing tonnages of municipal
waste disposed of in solid waste facilities and tipping fees paid
therefor.
(b) Certified weight receipts itemizing tonnages of all recyclable
materials collected, by particular recyclable material.
(c) Certified weight receipts itemizing tonnages of all recyclable
materials sold or marketed for reuse, by particular recyclable
material, and the fees received or paid therefor.
(d) Identity (name, mailing address and telephone number) of all
persons or entities to whom recyclable materials have been
sold, by material.
(e) Material market prices or fees paid, by recyclable material.
(f) Certified weight receipts itemizing tonnages of all leaf waste
collected and delivered for composting during that period.
(g) The identity of each solid waste disposal facility, recycling
facility and/or leaf composting facility utilized, with tonnages,
certified weight receipts and price information applicable to
each.
(h) A listing of all properties serviced by such contractor or
registrant during the period for which the report pertains, the
nature of services provided to each and the identity of property
owners.
(2) Each report and customer list shall be accompanied by a sworn or
verified statement of the contractor, confirming that such
contractor has, during the period to which the report pertains,
assured that:
§ 354-13 GIRARD CODE § 354-13
1:212
§ 354-14. When effective; applicability; repealer.
§ 354-15. Enforcement remedies.
(a) All municipal waste has been disposed of in a solid waste
facility permitted under the Erie County Solid Waste
Management Plan and this chapter; and
(b) All recyclable materials have been separated, marketed for
recycling and proper reuse as required by this chapter and
have not been landfilled, reused in the same form or used for
energy recovery; and
(c) All leaf waste collected has been source-separated and
transported for disposition at a licensed composting facility in
accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
C. All records of the contractor or registrant pertinent to performance of
collection, transportation and disposition services from properties in
Girard Borough shall be retained by such contractor or registrant for a
period of not less than three years after the date of the report for which
such records pertain.
D. Violation by a residential contractor or registrant of Subsections B and
C of this section shall constitute a material breach of obligations owed
to Girard Borough under such contract or registration, shall be subject
to fines and penalties prescribed in this chapter and shall be grounds
for revocation or rescission by Girard Borough of such contract.
E. Customer lists and other reports required to be submitted to Girard
Borough shall be in writing and, upon request by the Borough, also on
computer diskette(s) or CD-ROM in a format prescribed by the
Borough.
A. This chapter shall become effective five days after the date of its
enactment, except as specifically provided in this section.
B. Requirements of this chapter governing registrations, fees and reports
shall become effective as of January 1, 2011.
C. All other standards, regulations and requirements set forth in this
chapter, and the residential contract contemplated in this chapter, shall
be effective on and after January 1, 2011.
D. All registrations issued by Girard Borough for calendar years
commencing January 1, 2011, shall be governed by the provisions of
this chapter.
E. Ordinance No. 613 is repealed as to its provisions pertaining to
registrations, fees and reports and otherwise shall remain in effect until
January 1, 2011, on which date it shall be repealed and superseded by
this chapter.
§ 354-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-15
1:213
§ 354-16. Violations and penalties.
A. Girard Borough, through its Borough Manager, the Girard Borough
Police and code enforcement personnel authorized by the Girard
Borough Council to enforce this chapter, shall have full authority to
investigate alleged violations, issue enforcement notices, impose
administrative fines, commence civil actions for enforcement and/or
collection of fines for violation of this chapter and otherwise enforce
and secure compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Girard Borough Council and code enforcement personnel entrusted
with enforcement of this chapter shall have authority to issue cease and
desist orders, directing persons found to have violated provisions of this
chapter to cease and remedy the said violations, and shall further have
authority to seek equitable and/or injunctive relief to prohibit
violations.
C. Violations of this chapter which are declared in this chapter or in
Chapter 266, Nuisances; Dangerous Buildings, to constitute nuisances
shall be enforced under either chapter, and the Borough Manager shall
have authority to abate nuisances and recover the costs thereby
incurred from the responsible party.
D. Each day that a violation of this chapter is permitted to exist shall
constitute a separate and continuing offense.
E. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity who/which violates
any provision of this chapter shall be liable to administrative and civil
proceedings for enforcement. Upon a determination by the Borough
Manager or other code enforcement personnel that a violation of this
chapter has occurred, an administrative enforcement notice shall be
given to or served upon the violator(s) in accordance with this chapter,
as amended, such notice to impose the administrative fine for such
violation as prescribed in § 354-16 of this chapter. In the event such
administrative fine is not paid by the deadline stated in the enforcement
notice, code enforcement personnel shall institute a civil action in the
District Justice Court having appropriate jurisdiction.
A. Prescribed fine. Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity
violating this chapter shall pay the fines prescribed in this section. The
following fines are hereby prescribed for violation of this chapter:
(1) All violations by the residential contractor, a registrant or hauler
conducting business without registration: $600.
(2) All violations by other persons: $250.
B. The prescribed fines shall be assessed for each day a continuing
violation occurs or is permitted to occur.
C. In the event a violation of this chapter is believed to have occurred, the
Borough shall issue a written enforcement notice, directing that the
§ 354-15 GIRARD CODE § 354-16
1:214
§ 354-17. Sponsored cleanup.
The Borough is authorized, in its discretion, to sponsor for the benefit
of Borough residents a cleanup project once or more frequently per year
involving acceptance and disposition of metals and such other materials
not collected under the residential contract as the Board shall deem
appropriate. The Girard Borough Council shall have authority to contract
with the residential contractor for provision of services with respect to
such cleanup project as a component of the residential collection contract
if the Council should determine that such contract is in the best interests of
the Borough. If not included within the residential collection contract, the
Girard Borough Council shall have authority to contract with any person(s)
or entity(ies) for provision of services related to Borough-sponsored cleanup
projects.
§ 354-18. Authority of Borough Council.
violator take such action as the Borough determines to be necessary to
remedy the violation. If such violation is not remedied within five days
of such notice, the Borough shall commence a civil enforcement action
in the office of the Magisterial District Judge having jurisdiction.
D. Violation by the residential contractor or a registrant of this chapter
may, at the discretion of the Borough Manager, result in revocation or
rescission by the Borough of such contract or registration.
E. All judgments entered in civil actions for enforcement commenced by
the Borough shall, in accordance with ordinances of Girard Borough
governing civil enforcement of ordinances as now in effect or in the
future amended, include the fine prescribed for the violation in
§ 354-16A, plus all court costs and plus all attorneys' fees and costs
incurred by Girard Borough in such matter. A person found to have
violated this chapter shall be responsible for payment of all attorneys'
fees and costs incurred by the Borough in all proceedings related to
enforcement, including appeals taken by the violator.
A. The Girard Borough Council shall have authority to adopt, amend,
implement and administer such policies, procedures and forms as it
deems necessary or appropriate to effectuate this chapter.
B. The Girard Borough Council shall designate such persons to be
responsible for administering and enforcing this chapter as it deems
appropriate.
C. The Girard Borough Council shall have authority to enter into
agreements with such persons or firms as it deems appropriate to
effectuate this chapter and its purposes.
§ 354-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 354-18
1:215
Chapter 360
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Floodplain management — See Ch. 205.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 320.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Water — See Ch. 414.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 354-18 GIRARD CODE § 354-18
1:216
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 360-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Girard Borough
Stormwater Management Ordinance."
§ 360-2. Findings.
The governing body of Girard Borough finds that:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated stormwater runoff resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, overtaxes the
carrying capacity of existing streams and storm sewers, greatly
increases the cost of public facilities to convey and manage stormwater,
undermines floodplain management and flood-reduction efforts in
upstream and downstream communities, reduces groundwater
recharge, threatens public health and safety, and increases nonpoint
source pollution of water resources.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated runoff, is fundamental to the public health, safety, welfare,
and the protection of the people of Girard Borough and all the people of
the commonwealth, their resources, and the environment.
C. Inadequate planning and management of stormwater runoff resulting
from land development and redevelopment throughout a watershed can
also harm surface water resources by changing the natural hydrologic
patterns; accelerating stream flows (which increase scour and erosion
of streambeds and stream banks, thereby elevating sedimentation);
destroying aquatic habitat; and elevating aquatic pollutant
concentrations and loadings such as sediments, nutrients, heavy
metals, and pathogens. Groundwater resources are also impacted
through loss of recharge.
D. Stormwater is an important water resource which provides
groundwater recharge for water supplies and base flow of streams,
which also protects and maintains surface water quality.
E. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater issues.
F. Federal and state regulations require certain municipalities to
implement a program of stormwater controls. These municipalities are
required to obtain a permit for stormwater discharges from their
separate storm sewer systems under the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES).
§ 360-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-2
1:217
§ 360-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote health, safety, and welfare within
Girard Borough, Erie County, by minimizing the harms and maximizing the
benefits described in § 360-2 of this chapter through provisions intended to:
§ 360-4. Statutory authority.
G. Nonstormwater discharges to municipal separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth.
A. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93, to protect, maintain, reclaim,
and restore the existing and designated uses of the waters of the
commonwealth.
B. Manage accelerated runoff and erosion and sedimentation problems
close to their source by regulating activities that cause these problems.
C. Preserve the natural drainage systems as much as possible.
D. Maintain groundwater recharge to prevent degradation of surface
water and groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water
resources.
E. Maintain existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses.
F. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams and prevent
scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.
G. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source, with a minimum
of structures and a maximum use of natural processes.
H. Provide procedures, performance standards, and design criteria for
stormwater planning and management.
I. Provide proper operations and maintenance of all stormwater
management facilities and best management practices (BMPs) that are
constructed and implemented.
J. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.
K. Implement an illicit discharge detection and elimination program in
MS4 permanent urbanized areas to address nonstormwater discharges
into Girard Borough's separate storm sewer system.
A. Primary authority. Girard Borough is empowered to regulate these
activities by the authority of the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act
167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., the "Storm Water Management Act," as
amended, and the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965) 1656, No. 581, 53
P.S. § 45101 et seq., the "Borough Code," as amended.
B. Secondary authority. Girard Borough is also empowered to regulate
land use activities that affect runoff by the authority of the Act of July
§ 360-2 GIRARD CODE § 360-4
1:218
§ 360-5. Applicability; regulated activities.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of Girard Borough, any regulated
activity within Girard Borough, and all stormwater runoff entering into
Girard Borough's separate storm sewer system from lands within the
boundaries of Girard Borough.
§ 360-6. Repealer.
Any ordinance, ordinance provision(s), or regulation of Girard Borough
inconsistent with any of the provision(s) of this chapter is hereby repealed
to the extent of the inconsistency only.
§ 360-7. Effect of other provisions.
Approvals issued and actions taken pursuant to this chapter do not relieve
the applicant of the responsibility to comply with or to secure required
permits or approvals for activities regulated by any other applicable codes,
laws, rules, statutes, or ordinances. To the extent that this chapter imposes
more rigorous or stringent requirements for stormwater management, the
specific requirements contained in this chapter shall be followed.
31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 247, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., the "Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code," as amended.
A. "Regulated activities" are any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff. Regulated activities include, but are
not limited to, the following listed items:
(1) Earth disturbance activities.
(2) Land development.
(3) Subdivision.
(4) Construction of new or additional impervious or semipervious
surfaces.
(5) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(6) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(7) Installation of stormwater management facilities or appurtenances
thereto.
(8) Installation of stormwater BMPs.
B. See § 360-12 of this chapter for exemption/modification criteria.
§ 360-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-8
1:219
§ 360-8. Duty of landowners and developers.
Notwithstanding any provision(s) of this chapter, including exemptions, any
landowner or any person engaged in the alteration or development of land
which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics shall implement such
measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent injury to health, safety,
or other property. Such measures also shall include actions as are required
to manage the rate, volume, direction, and quality of resulting stormwater
runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately protects health, property,
and water quality.
§ 360-9. Liability.
A. Neither the granting of any approval under this chapter nor the
compliance with the provisions of this chapter or with any condition
imposed by a municipal official hereunder shall relieve any person from
any responsibility for damage to persons or property resulting
therefrom, or as otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability
upon Girard Borough for damages to persons or property.
B. The granting of a permit which includes any stormwater management
facilities shall not constitute a representation, guarantee or warranty of
any kind by Girard Borough, or by an official or employee thereof, of the
practicability or safety of any structure, use or other plan proposed and
shall create no liability upon or cause of action against such public
body, official or employee for any damage that may result pursuant
thereto.
§ 360-8 GIRARD CODE § 360-9
1:220
ARTICLE II
Terminology
§ 360-10. Word usage; definitions.
A. For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein
shall be interpreted as follows:
(1) Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the
singular number includes the plural; and the plural number
includes the singular; words of masculine gender include feminine
gender; and words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
(2) The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
(3) The word "person" includes an individual, firm, association,
organization, partnership, trust, company, corporation, or any
other similar entity.
(4) The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
(5) The words "used or occupied" include the words "intended,
designed, maintained, or arranged to be used, occupied or
maintained."
B. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land
through the combined action of human activity and natural processes at
a rate greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.
AGRICULTURAL ACTIVITIES — Activities associated with agriculture
such as agricultural cultivation, agricultural operation, and animal
heavy-use areas. This includes the work of producing crops, tillage,
land clearing, plowing, disking, harrowing, planting, harvesting crops,
or pasturing and raising of livestock and installation of conservation
measures. Construction of new buildings or impervious area is not
considered an agricultural activity.
ALTERATION — As applied to land, a change in topography as a result
of the moving of soil and rock from one location or position to another;
changing of surface conditions by causing the surface to be more or less
impervious; land disturbance.
APPLICANT — A landowner, developer, or other person who has filed
an application for approval to engage in any regulated activities at a
project site within the municipality.
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICES (BMPs) — Activities, facilities,
designs, measures or procedures used to manage stormwater impacts
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:221
from regulated activities, to meet state water quality requirements, to
promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the purposes
of this chapter. Stormwater BMPs are commonly grouped into one
of two broad categories or measures: "nonstructural" or "structural."
Nonstructural BMPs are measures referred to as "operational" and/
or behavior-related practices that attempt to minimize the contact
of pollutants with stormwater runoff, whereas structural BMPs are
measures that consist of a physical device or practice that is installed to
capture and treat stormwater runoff. Structural BMPs include, but are
not limited to, a wide variety of practices and devices, from large-scale
retention ponds and constructed wetlands to small-scale underground
treatment systems, infiltration facilities, filter strips, low-impact design,
bioretention, wet ponds, permeable paving, grassed swales, riparian
or forested buffers, sand filters, detention basins, and manufactured
devices. Structural stormwater BMPs are permanent appurtenances to
the project site.
CHANNEL EROSION — The widening, deepening, and headward
cutting of small channels and waterways due to erosion caused by
moderate to large floods.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank used for storing
rainwater.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Erie County Conservation District.
The Erie County Conservation District has the authority under a
delegation agreement executed with the Department of Environmental
Protection to administer and enforce all or a portion of the regulations
promulgated under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
CULVERT — A structure with appurtenant works that carries a stream
and/or stormwater runoff under or through an embankment or fill.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another
fluid or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad
or other purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or
semifluid.
DESIGNEE — The agent of this municipality and/or agent of the
governing body involved with the administration, review or
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter by contract or
memorandum of understanding.
DESIGN STORM — The magnitude and temporal distribution of
precipitation from a storm event measured in probability of occurrence
(e.g., a twenty-five-year storm) and duration (e.g., 24 hours), used in
the design and evaluation of stormwater management systems. Also see
"return period."
DETENTION BASIN — An impoundment structure designed to manage
stormwater runoff by temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at
a predetermined rate.
§ 360-10 GIRARD CODE § 360-10
1:222
DETENTION VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured and
released into waters of the commonwealth at a controlled rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or any responsible person therein or agent thereof, that
undertakes any regulated activity of this chapter.
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed. Also see "project site."
DISTURBED AREA — An unstabilized land area where an earth
disturbance activity is occurring or has occurred.
DOWNSLOPE PROPERTY LINE — That portion of the property line of
the lot, tract, or parcels of land being developed located such that all
overland or pipe flow from the site would be directed toward it.
DRAINAGE CONVEYANCE FACILITY — A stormwater management
facility designed to convey stormwater runoff and shall include streams,
channels, swales, pipes, conduits, culverts, storm sewers, etc.
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management, drainage,
or conveyance purposes.
DRAINAGEWAY — Any natural or artificial watercourse, trench, ditch,
pipe, swale, channel, or similar depression into which surface water
flows.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human
activity which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited
to, clearing and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, land
development, agricultural plowing or tilling, timber harvesting
activities, road maintenance activities, mineral extraction, and the
moving, depositing, stockpiling, or storing of soil, rock or earth
materials.
EROSION — The movement of soil particles by the action of water,
wind, ice, or other natural forces.
EROSION AND SEDIMENT POLLUTION CONTROL PLAN — A plan
which is designed to minimize accelerated erosion and sedimentation.
EXCEPTIONAL-VALUE WATERS — Surface waters of high quality,
which satisfies Pennsylvania Code Title 25, Environmental Protection,
Chapter 93, Water Quality Standards, § 93.4b(b) (relating to antidegradation).
EXISTING CONDITIONS — The initial condition of a project site prior
to the proposed construction. If the initial condition of the site is
undeveloped land and not forested, the land use shall be considered
as meadow, unless the natural land cover is documented to generate a
lower curve number or rational "C" coefficient.
FEMA — The Federal Emergency Management Agency.
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:223
FLOOD — A general but temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from the overflow of streams,
rivers, and other waters of the commonwealth.
FLOOD-FRINGE — The remaining portions of the one-hundred-year
floodplain outside of the floodway boundary.
FLOODPLAIN — Any land area susceptible to inundation by water
from any natural source or delineated by applicable Department of
Housing and Urban Development, Federal Insurance Administration,
Flood Hazard Boundary Maps as being a special flood hazard area.
Included are lands adjoining a river or stream that have been or may
be inundated by a one-hundred-year flood. Also included are areas that
comprise Group 13 soils, as listed in Appendix A of the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection (PADEP) Technical Manual for
Sewage Enforcement Officers (as amended or replaced from time to
time by PADEP).
FLOODWAY — The channel of the watercourse and those portions of
the adjoining floodplains that are reasonably required to carry and
discharge the one-hundred-year-frequency flood. Unless otherwise
specified, the boundary of the floodway is as indicated on maps and
flood insurance studies provided by FEMA. In an area where no FEMA
maps or studies have defined the boundary of the one-hundred-yearfrequency
floodway, it is assumed, absent evidence to the contrary, that
the floodway extends from the stream to 50 feet landward from the top
of the bank of the stream.
FOREST MANAGEMENT/TIMBER OPERATIONS — Planning and
activities necessary for the management of forestland. These include
timber inventory and preparation of forest management plans,
silvicultural treatment, cutting budgets, logging road design and
construction, timber harvesting, site preparation and reforestation.
FREEBOARD — A vertical distance between the elevation of the design
high water and the top of a dam, levee, tank, basin, or diversion ridge.
The space is required as a safety margin in a tank, pond or basin.
GRADE — A slope, usually of a road, channel or natural ground,
specified in percent and shown on plans as specified herein.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HEC-HMS MODEL CALIBRATED (HYDROLOGIC ENGINEERING
CENTER HYDROLOGIC MODELING SYSTEM) — A computer-based
hydrologic modeling technique adapted to the watershed(s) in Erie
County for the Act 167 plan. The model has been calibrated by
adjusting key model input parameters.
HIGH-QUALITY WATERS — Surface water having quality which
exceeds levels necessary to support propagation of fish, shellfish, and
wildlife and recreation in and on the water by satisfying Pennsylvania
§ 360-10 GIRARD CODE § 360-10
1:224
Code Title 25, Environmental Protection, Chapter 93, Water Quality
Standards, § 93.4b(a).
HYDROLOGIC SOIL GROUP (HSG) — Infiltration rates of soils vary
widely and are affected by subsurface permeability as well as surface
intake rates. Soils are classified into one of four HSG (A, B, C, and
D) according to their minimum infiltration rate, which is obtained for
bare soil after prolonged wetting. The Natural Resources Conservation
Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture defines
the four groups and provides a list of most of the soils in the United
States and their group classification. The soils in the area of interest
may be identified from a soil survey report from the local NRCS office
or the County Conservation District.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS AREA) — A surface that
prevents the infiltration of water into the ground. "Impervious surface"
(or areas) includes, but is not limited to, roofs, additional indoor living
spaces, patios, garages, storage sheds and similar structures, parking
or driveway areas, and any new streets and sidewalks. Any surface
areas proposed to initially be gravel or crushed stone shall be assumed
to be impervious surfaces.
IMPOUNDMENT — A retention or detention basin designed to retain
stormwater runoff and release it at a controlled rate.
INFILTRATION STRUCTURES — A structure designed to direct runoff
into the ground (e.g., french drains, seepage pits, seepage trench, etc.).
INLET — A surface connection to a closed drain; a structure at the
diversion end of a conduit; the upstream end of any structure through
which water may flow.
LAND DEVELOPMENT (DEVELOPMENT) —
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT (LID) — An approach to land
development that uses various land planning and design practices and
technologies to simultaneously conserve and protect natural resource
systems and reduce infrastructure costs. LID still allows land to be
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(a) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of,
or for the purpose of, streets, common areas, leaseholds,
condominiums, building groups, or other features.
(b)
(1)
(2) Any subdivision of land.
Development in accordance with Section 503(1.1) of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.62
(3)
62.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:225
developed, but in a cost-effective manner that helps mitigate potential
environmental impacts.
MAIN STEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other runoff
conveyance facility used as a reach in the Erie County Act 167
watershed hydrologic model(s).
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for
calculation of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g.,
cubic feet per second) in open channels based upon channel shape,
roughness, depth of flow and slope. Open channels may include closed
conduits so long as the flow is not under pressure.
MUNICIPALITY — Girard Borough, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM
(NPDES) — The federal government's system for issuance of permits
under the Clean Water Act,63 which is delegated to PADEP in
Pennsylvania.
NOAA ATLAS 14 — Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States,
Atlas 14, Volume 2, United States Department of Commerce, National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Weather Service,
Hydrometeorological Design Studies Center, Silver Spring, Maryland
(2004). NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed at Internet address
http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
NONPOINT SOURCE POLLUTION — Pollution that enters a water
body from diffuse origins in the watershed and does not result from
discernible, confined, or discrete conveyances.
NRCS — Natural Resources Conservation Service [previously Soil
Conservation Service (SCS)].
OPEN CHANNEL — A drainage element in which stormwater flows
with an open surface. Open channels include, but shall not be limited to,
natural and man-made drainageways, swales, streams, ditches, canals,
and pipes not under pressure.
OUTFALL —
OUTLET — Points of water disposal from a stream, river, lake,
tidewater, or artificial drain.
PADEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection.
(1) Point where water flows from a conduit, stream, or drain;
"Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point where
the municipality's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters
of the commonwealth.
(2)
63.Editor's Note: See 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
§ 360-10 GIRARD CODE § 360-10
1:226
PARKING LOT STORAGE — Involves the use of impervious parking
areas as temporary impoundments with controlled release rates during
rainstorms.
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of stormwater runoff from a
specific storm event.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized by
law as the subject of rights and duties. Whenever used in any section
prescribing or imposing a penalty, the term "person" shall include the
members of a partnership, the officers, members, servants and agents
of an association, officers, agents and servants of a corporation, and the
officers of a municipality or country, but shall exclude any department,
board, bureau or agency of the commonwealth.
PERVIOUS AREA — Any area not defined as "impervious."
PIPE — A culvert, closed conduit, or similar structure (including
appurtenances) that conveys stormwater.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Girard
Borough.
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined, or discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.64
PROBABLE MAXIMUM FLOOD (PMF) — The flood that may be
expected from the most severe combination of critical meteorological
and hydrologic conditions that are reasonably possible in any area.
The PMF is derived from the probable maximum precipitation (PMP)
as determined on the basis of data obtained from the National
Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
PROJECT SITE — The specific area of land where any regulated
activities in the municipality are planned, conducted, or maintained.
QUALIFIED PROFESSIONAL — Any person licensed by the
Pennsylvania Department of State or otherwise qualified by law to
perform the work required by this chapter.
RATIONAL FORMULA — A rainfall-runoff relation used to estimate
peak flow.
REDEVELOPMENT — Earth disturbance activities on land which has
previously been developed.
64.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. See now Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:227
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Any earth disturbance activities or any
activities that involve the alteration or development of land in a manner
that may affect stormwater runoff.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — Activity involving
earth disturbance subject to regulation under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92,65
Chapter 102, or the Clean Streams Law.66
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of predevelopment peak rate of
runoff from a site or subwatershed area to which the post-development
peak rate of runoff must be reduced to protect downstream areas.
RELEASE RATE DISTRICT — Those subwatershed areas in which postdevelopment
flows must be reduced to a certain percentage of
predevelopment flows as required to meet the plan requirements and
the goals of Act 167.
RETENTION BASIN — An impoundment in which stormwater is stored
and not released during the storm event. Stored water may be released
from the basin at some time after the end of the storm.
RETENTION VOLUME/REMOVED RUNOFF — The volume of runoff
that is captured and not released directly into the surface waters of this
commonwealth during or after a storm event.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval, in years, within which a
storm event of a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For
example, the twenty-five-year return period rainfall would be expected
to recur on the average once every 25 years, or, stated in another way,
the probability of a twenty-five-year storm occurring in any one given
year is 0.04 (i.e., a four-percent chance).
RIPARIAN BUFFER — A vegetated area bordering perennial and
intermittent streams and wetlands that serves as a protective filter to
help protect streams and wetlands from the impacts of adjacent land
uses.
RISER — A vertical pipe extending from the bottom of a pond that is
used to control the discharge rate from the pond for a specified design
storm.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the
existing road right-of-way, such as grading and repairing existing
unpaved road surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing
drainage ditches, and other similar activities. Road maintenance
activities that do not disturb the subbase of a paved road (such as
milling and overlays) are not considered earth disturbance activities.
65.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. See now Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 360-10 GIRARD CODE § 360-10
1:228
ROOFTOP DETENTION — Temporary ponding and gradual release of
stormwater falling directly onto flat roof surfaces by incorporating
controlled-flow roof drains into building designs.
RUNOFF — Any part of precipitation that flows over the land surface.
RUNOFF CAPTURE VOLUME — The volume of runoff that is captured
(retained) and not released into surface waters of the commonwealth
during or after a storm event.
SEDIMENT — Soils or other materials transported by surface water as
a product of erosion.
SEDIMENTATION — The process by which mineral or organic matter is
accumulated or deposited by the movement of water.
SEDIMENT BASIN — A barrier, dam, retention or detention basin
located and designed to retain rock, sand, gravel, silt, or other material
transported by stormwater runoff.
SEDIMENT POLLUTION — The placement, discharge, or any other
introduction of sediment into waters of the commonwealth occurring
from the failure to properly design, construct, implement or maintain
control measures and control facilities in accordance with the
requirements of this chapter.
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled
with loose stone or similar coarse material, into which surface water is
directed for infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, or storm
drains) primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.
SHEET FLOW — Runoff that flows over the ground surface as a thin,
even layer, not concentrated in a channel.
SOIL COVER COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by the NRCS that is based on relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called "curve number" (CN).
SPILLWAY (EMERGENCY) — A depression in the embankment of a
pond or basin, or other overflow structure, that is used to pass peak
discharges greater than the maximum design storm controlled by the
pond or basin.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — The regulatory
requirements to protect, maintain, reclaim, and restore water quality
under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law.67
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A reservoir-routing procedure
based on solution of the continuity equation (inflow minus outflow
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:229
equals the change in storage), with "outflow" defined as a function of
storage volume and depth.
STORM FREQUENCY — The number of times that a given storm event
occurs or is exceeded on the average in a stated period of years. See
also "return period."
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes and/or open channels that convey
intercepted runoff and stormwater from other sources, but excludes
domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — Runoff from the surface of the land resulting from
precipitation, snow, or ice melt.
STORMWATER HOTSPOT — A land use or activity that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants than
are found in typical stormwater runoff.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT FACILITIES — Any structure, natural
or man-made, that, due to its condition, design, or construction,
conveys, stores, or otherwise affects stormwater runoff. Typical
stormwater management facilities include, but are not limited to,
detention and retention basins, open channels, storm sewers, pipes and
infiltration facilities.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The Erie County stormwater
management plan for managing stormwater runoff in Erie County as
required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), and known
as the "Storm Water Management Act."68
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SITE PLAN (SWM SITE PLAN) — The
plan prepared by the applicant or his representative indicating how
stormwater runoff will be managed at the project site in accordance
with this chapter.
STREAM ENCLOSURE — A bridge, culvert, or other structure in excess
of 100 feet in length upstream to downstream which encloses regulated
waters of the commonwealth.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel
of land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other
divisions of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose,
whether immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or
building or lot development; provided, however, that the subdivision
by lease of land for agricultural purposes into parcels of more than
10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of access or any
residential dwellings, shall be exempt (Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code, Act of July 31, 1968, P.L. 805, No. 24769).
SUBWATERSHED AREA — The smallest drainage unit of a watershed
for which stormwater management criteria has been established in the
stormwater management plan.
68.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-10 GIRARD CODE § 360-10
1:230
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land that gathers or carries surface
water runoff.
TIMBER OPERATIONS — See "forest management."
TIME OF CONCENTRATION (Tc) — The time for surface runoff to
travel from the hydraulically most distant point of the watershed to a
point of interest within the watershed. This time is the combined total
of overland flow time and flow time in pipes or channels, if any.
(TO) GRADE — To finish the surface of a roadbed, top of embankment
or bottom of excavation.
USDA — The United States Department of Agriculture.
WATERCOURSE — A channel or conveyance of surface water, such as
a stream or creek, having defined bed and banks, whether natural or
artificial, with perennial or intermittent flow.
WATERSHED — Area drained by a river, watercourse, or other surface
water, whether natural or artificial.
WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Rivers, streams, creeks,
rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm sewers, lakes,
dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and other bodies or channels
of conveyance of surface and underground water, or parts thereof,
whether natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
WETLAND — Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface
water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support,
and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of
vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions,
including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. (The term includes
but is not limited to wetland areas listed in the State Water Plan,
the United States Forest Service Wetlands Inventory of Pennsylvania,
the Pennsylvania Coastal Zone Management Plan and a wetland area
designated by a river basin commission. This definition is used by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency and the United States
Army Corps of Engineers.)
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-10
1:231

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Standards
§ 360-11. General requirements.
A. For all regulated activities, unless specifically exempted in § 360-12:
(1) Preparation and implementation of an approved SWM site plan is
required.
(2) No regulated activities shall commence until Girard Borough issues
written approval of a SWM site plan, which demonstrates
compliance with the requirements of this chapter.
(3) The SWM site plan shall demonstrate that adequate capacity will
be provided to meet the volume and rate control requirements, as
described under §§ 360-14 and 360-15 of this chapter.
(4) The SWM site plan approved by Girard Borough shall be on site
throughout the duration of the regulated activities.
B. For all regulated earth disturbance activities, erosion and sediment
control BMPs shall be designed, implemented, operated, and
maintained during the regulated earth disturbance activities (e.g.,
during construction) to meet the purposes and requirements of this
chapter and to meet all requirements under Title 25 of the Pennsylvania
Code (including, but not limited to, Chapter 102, Erosion and Sediment
Control) and the Clean Streams Law.70 Various BMPs and their design
standards are listed in the Erosion and Sediment Pollution Control
Program Manual (E&S Manual), No. 363-2134-008 (April 15, 2000), as
amended and updated.
C. For all regulated activities, stormwater BMPs shall be designed,
installed, implemented, operated, and maintained to meet the purposes
and requirements of this chapter and to meet all requirements under
Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code and the Clean Streams Law, conform
to the state water quality requirements, and meet all requirements
under the Storm Water Management Act71 and any more stringent
requirements as determined by Girard Borough.
D. Girard Borough may, after consultation with PADEP and the
Conservation District, approve measures for meeting the state water
quality requirements other than those in this chapter, provided that
they meet the minimum requirements of, and do not conflict with, state
law, including, but not limited to, the Clean Streams Law.
E. All regulated activities shall include, to the maximum extent
practicable, measures to:
70.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
71.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 360-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-11
1:233
(1) Protect health, safety, and property.
(2) Meet the water quality goals of this chapter by implementing
measures to:
(a) Minimize disturbance to floodplains, wetlands, natural slopes,
existing native vegetation and woodlands.
(b) Create, maintain, or extend riparian buffers and protect
existing forested buffers.
(c) Provide trees and woodlands adjacent to impervious areas
whenever feasible.
(d) Minimize the creation of impervious surfaces and the
degradation of waters of the commonwealth and promote
groundwater recharge.
(e) Protect natural systems and processes (drainageways,
vegetation, soils, and sensitive areas) and maintain, as much as
possible, the natural hydrologic regime.
(f) Incorporate natural site elements (wetlands, stream corridors,
mature forests) as design elements.
(g) Avoid erosive flow conditions in natural flow pathways.
(h) Minimize soil disturbance and soil compaction.
(i) Minimize thermal impacts to waters of the commonwealth.
(j) Disconnect impervious surfaces by directing runoff to pervious
areas, wherever possible, and decentralize and manage
stormwater at its source.
F. Impervious areas.
(1) The measurement of impervious areas shall include all of the
impervious areas in the total proposed development, even if
development is to take place in stages.
(2) For developments taking place in stages, the entire development
plan must be used in determining conformance with this chapter.
G. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated and discharged onto
adjacent property, the applicant must document that adequate
downstream conveyance facilities exist to safely transport the
concentrated discharge, or otherwise prove that no erosion,
sedimentation, flooding, or other harm will result from the
concentrated discharge.
(1) The applicant must provide an easement for proposed concentrated
flow across adjacent properties to a drainageway or public right-ofway.
§ 360-11 GIRARD CODE § 360-11
1:234
(2) Such stormwater flows shall be subject to the requirements of this
chapter.
H. Stormwater drainage systems shall be provided in order to permit
unimpeded flow along natural watercourses, except as modified by
stormwater management facilities or open channels consistent with this
chapter.
I. Where watercourses traverse a development site, drainage easements
(with a minimum width of 20 feet and include the one-hundred-year
water surface) shall be provided conforming to the line of such
watercourses. The terms of the easement shall prohibit excavation, the
placing of fill or structures, and any alterations that may adversely
affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the easement. Also,
maintenance, including mowing of vegetation within the easement, may
be required, except as approved by the appropriate governing
authority.
J. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainageways on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open
channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line and
grade of such natural drainageways.
K. Design storm volumes and precipitation intensities to be used in the
analysis of discharge or runoff shall be obtained from either of the
following sources:
(1) The Precipitation-Frequency Atlas of the United States, Atlas 14,
Volume 2, Version 3.0, United States Department of Commerce,
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA),
National Weather Service, Hydrometeorological Design Studies
Center, Silver Spring, Maryland. NOAA's Atlas 14 can be accessed
at: http://hdsc.nws.noaa.gov/hdsc/pfds/.
(2) The Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Drainage Manual,
Publication 584, Chapter 7, Appendix A.
L. Minimization of impervious surfaces and infiltration of runoff through
seepage beds, infiltration trenches, etc., are encouraged, where soil
conditions and geology permit, to reduce the size or eliminate the need
for detention facilities.
M. Infiltration BMPs should be dispersed throughout the site, made as
shallow as practicable, and located to maximize use of natural on-site
infiltration features while still meeting the other requirements of this
chapter.
N. The design of facilities over karst shall include an evaluation and
implementation of measures to minimize adverse effects.
O. Roof drains should not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm
sewers, or roadside ditches.
§ 360-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-11
1:235
§ 360-12. Exemptions; modifications.
P. Applicants are encouraged to use low-impact development practices to
reduce the costs of complying with the requirements of this chapter and
the state water quality requirements.
Q. When stormwater management facilities are proposed within 1,000 feet
of a downstream municipality, the developer shall notify the
downstream municipality and provide a copy of the SWM plan, if
requested, for review and comment.
A. Under no circumstance shall the applicant be exempt from
implementing such measures as necessary to:
(1) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(2) Protect health, safety, and property.
(3) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and exceptionalvalue
(EV) watersheds.
B. The applicant must utilize the following BMPs to the maximum extent
practicable to receive consideration for the exemptions:
(1) Design around and limit disturbance of floodplains, wetlands,
natural slopes over 15%, existing native vegetation, and other
sensitive and special value features.
(2) Maintain riparian and forested buffers.
(3) Limit grading and maintain nonerosive flow conditions in natural
flow paths.
(4) Maintain existing tree canopies near impervious areas.
(5) Minimize soil disturbance and reclaim disturbed areas with topsoil
and vegetation.
(6) Direct runoff to pervious areas.
C. The applicant's proposed development/additional impervious area may
not adversely impact the following:
(1) Capacities of existing drainageways and storm sewer systems.
(2) Velocities and erosion.
(3) Quality of runoff if direct discharge is proposed.
(4) Existing known problem areas.
(5) Safe conveyance of the additional runoff.
(6) Downstream property owners.
§ 360-11 GIRARD CODE § 360-12
1:236
D. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 360-12A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter according to the following table:
New Impervious Area1,2
(square footage) Applicant Must Provide
0 to 1,000
1,000 to 2,500 Documentation of impervious
area3
2,500 to 5,000 Volume controls and small project
SWM application3
< 5,000 Rate controls, volume controls
and SWM site plan
NOTES:
1 New impervious area since the date of adoption of this chapter.
2 Gravel in existing condition shall be considered pervious, and gravel
in proposed condition shall be considered impervious.
3 The small project stormwater management application included in
Appendix E72 may be used for projects under 5,000 square feet
of new impervious surface and single-family home construction.
The small project SWM application allows documentation of new
impervious surface, credits through disconnection of impervious
surfaces and tree planting, and sizing of volume control BMP's that
may be required.
E. Single-family residential activities are exempt from these requirements,
provided the construction:
(1) Complies with §§ 360-11G and 360-12A, B and C; and
(2) Has buildings set back 75 feet from downstream property lines;
and
(3) Driveways:
(a) Runoff must discharge onto pervious surface with a gravel
strip or other spreading device.
(b) No more than 1,000 square feet of paved surface may
discharge to any one point.
(c) The length of flow on the pervious surface must exceed the
length of the paved surface flow.
72.Editor's Note: Appendix E is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-12
1:237
§ 360-13. Waivers.
(4) Girard Borough can require more information or require mitigation
of certain impacts through installation of stormwater management
BMP's if there is a threat to property, health, or safety.
F. An applicant proposing regulated activities, after demonstrating
compliance with § 360-12A, B and C, may be exempted from various
requirements of this chapter if documentation can be provided that a
downstream man-made water body (i.e., reservoir, lake, man-made
wetlands, or other BMP) has been designed or modified to address the
potential stormwater flooding and volume impacts of the proposed
development.
G. The purpose of this section is to ensure consistency of stormwater
management planning between local ordinances and NPDES permitting
(when required) and to ensure that the applicant has a single and clear
set of stormwater management standards to which the applicant is
subject. Girard Borough may accept alternative stormwater
management controls under this section, provided that:
(1) Girard Borough, in consultation with the PADEP (or delegated
authority), determines that meeting the volume control
requirements (See § 360-14.) is not possible or places an undue
hardship on the applicant.
(2) The alternative controls are documented to be acceptable to PADEP
(or delegated authority) for NPDES requirements pertaining to
post-construction stormwater management requirements.
(3) The alternative controls are in compliance with all other sections of
this chapter, including but not limited to §§ 360-11D and 360-12A to
C.
H. Agricultural activity is exempt from the rate control and SWM site plan
preparation requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are
performed according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
I. Forest management and timber operations are exempt from the rate
and volume control requirements and SWM site plan preparation
requirements of this chapter, provided the activities are performed
according to the requirements of 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102. It should be
noted that temporary roadways are not exempt.
J. Girard Borough may deny or revoke any exemption pursuant to this
section at any time for any project that the municipality believes may
pose a threat to public health, safety, property or the environment.
A. Waiver requests.
§ 360-12 GIRARD CODE § 360-13
1:238
(1) All waiver requests must meet the provisions of § 360-13F and G.
Waivers shall not be issued from implementing such measures as
necessary to:
(a) Meet state water quality standards and requirements.
(b) Protect health, safety, and property.
(c) Meet special requirements for high-quality (HQ) and
exceptional-value (EV) watersheds.
(2) Girard Borough will then consider waivers in accordance with
§ 360-11D, except that waiver requests for relief from the design
requirements of § 360-18B and C will be processed by Girard
Borough at its sole discretion.
B. When the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the governing
body of Girard Borough that a requirement of this chapter causes
undue hardship as it applies to a proposed project, and that an alternate
design produces equal or better results in meeting the purpose and
requirements of this chapter, the governing body of Girard Borough,
after completing a thorough technical review consistent with
Subsection A above, may grant a waiver request.
C. Applicants shall submit requests for waivers in writing, and these
requests shall be included as part of a permit application submission. In
the request for waiver, the applicant shall state in full the facts of undue
hardship on which the request is based, identify the provision or
provisions of this chapter that are causing such undue hardship, and
state the minimum waiver or relief that is necessary. The applicant shall
state how the proposal in the applicant's waiver request provides equal
or better results in meeting the purpose and requirements of this
chapter.
D. Girard Borough shall keep a written record of all actions on waiver
requests in the project file.
E. Girard Borough may charge applicants fees for waiver requests
sufficient to cover all costs incurred by the Girard Borough to process
the requests.
F. In processing waiver requests, Girard Borough may impose reasonable
conditions that will, in its sole judgment, resolve the undue hardship
while meeting the purpose and requirements of this chapter.
G. Girard Borough may grant requests for waivers when the following
findings are made by the municipality, when each is determined solely
by Girard Borough to be applicable and relevant:
(1) That the waiver shall result in an equal or better means of
complying with the purpose and requirements of this chapter.
§ 360-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-13
1:239
§ 360-14. Volume controls.
(2) That the waiver is the minimum necessary to provide relief from
undue hardship.
(3) That the applicant is not requesting a waiver based solely on cost
considerations.
(4) That existing downgradient stormwater problems will not be
exacerbated by the proposed waiver request.
(5) That runoff is not being diverted to a different drainage area in a
manner that may cause hardship to others.
(6) That increased flooding or ponding on off-site properties or
roadways will not be caused by the waiver request.
(7) That potential icing conditions will not be caused by the waiver
request.
(8) That increased or unusual municipal maintenance expenses will
not result from the waiver request.
(9) That operation and maintenance requirements are not reduced by
the waiver request.
A. The low-impact development practices provided in the BMP Manual
and in Appendix B73 of this chapter shall be utilized for all regulated
activities to the maximum extent practicable.
B. Stormwater runoff volume controls shall be implemented using the
Design Storm Method or the Simplified Method as defined below. For
regulated activity areas equal or less than one acre that do not require
hydrologic routing to design the stormwater facilities, this chapter
establishes no preference for either method; therefore, the applicant
may select either method on the basis of economic considerations, the
intrinsic limitations on applicability of the analytical procedures
associated with each methodology, and other factors.
(1) The Design Storm Method (CG-1 in the BMP Manual) is applicable
to any sized regulated activity. This method requires detailed
modeling based on site conditions.
(a) Do not increase the post-development total runoff volume for
all storms equal to or less than the two-year twenty-four-hour
storm.
(b) For hydrologic modeling purposes:
73.Editor's Note: Appendix B is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-13 GIRARD CODE § 360-14
1:240
[1] Existing nonforested pervious areas must be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations.
[2] Twenty percent of existing impervious area, when present
within the proposed project site, shall be considered
meadow (good condition) for predevelopment hydrologic
calculations for redevelopment.
(2) The Simplified Method (CG-2 in the BMP Manual) is independent of
site conditions and should be used if the Design Storm Method is
not followed. This method is not applicable to regulated activities
greater than one acre or for projects that require detailed design of
stormwater storage facilities. For new impervious surfaces:
(a) Stormwater facilities shall capture at least the first two inches
of runoff from all new impervious surfaces.
(b) At least the first one inch of runoff from new impervious
surfaces shall be permanently removed from the runoff flow,
i.e., it shall not be released into surface waters of the
commonwealth. Removal options include reuse, evaporation,
transpiration, and infiltration.
(c) Wherever possible, infiltration facilities should be designed to
accommodate infiltration of the entire permanently removed
runoff; however, in all cases, at least the first 0.5 inch of the
permanently removed runoff should be infiltrated.
(d) Actual field infiltration tests at the location of the proposed
elevation of the stormwater BMPs are required. Infiltration
tests shall be conducted in accordance with the BMP Manual.
A minimum forty-eight-hour notification to Girard Borough
shall be provided to allow witnessing of the testing.
(3) In cases where it is not possible or desirable to use infiltrationbased
best management practices to partially fulfill the
requirements in either § 360-14B(1) or (2), the following procedure
shall be provided to allow witnessing of the testing:
(a) At a minimum, the following documentation shall be provided
to justify the decision to reduce the use of infiltration BMPs:
[1] Description of and justification for field infiltration/
permeability testing with respect to the type of test and
test locations.
[2] An interpretive narrative describing existing site soils and
their structure as these relate to the interaction between
soils and water. In addition to providing soil and soil profile
descriptions, this narrative shall identify depth to seasonal
high-water tables and depth to bedrock, and provide a
§ 360-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-14
1:241
§ 360-15. Rate controls.
description of all subsurface elements (fragipans and other
restrictive layers, geology, etc.) that influence the
direction and rate of subsurface water movement.
[3] A qualitative assessment of the site's contribution to
annual aquifer recharge shall be made, along with
identification of any restrictions or limitations associated
with the use of engineered infiltration facilities.
[4] The provided documentation must be signed and sealed by
a professional engineer or geologist.
[5] A professional opinion stating that the proposed
groundwater recharge is consistent with natural recharge,
is reasonable, and is consistent with this chapter.
(b) The following water quality pollutant load reductions will be
required for all disturbed areas within the proposed
development:
Pollutant Load Units
Required
Reduction
(%)
Total suspended solids
(TSS)
Pounds 85%
Total phosphorous (TP) Pounds 85%
Total nitrate (NO3) Pounds 50%
(c) The performance criteria for water quality best management
practices shall be determined from the Pennsylvania
Stormwater Best Management Practices Manual, most current
version.
C. The applicable worksheets from the BMP Manual must be used in
calculations to establish volume control.
A. Lands contained within Erie County that have not had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
(1) Post-development discharge rates shall not exceed the
predevelopment discharge rates for the one-, two-, ten-, twentyfive-,
fifty-, and one-hundred-year storms.
B. Lands contained within Erie County that have had release rates
established under an approved Act 167 stormwater management plan:
(1) The post-development peak discharge rates shall be in accordance
with the approved release rate map for the following watersheds:
(See appendixes for Release Rate Map.74)
§ 360-14 GIRARD CODE § 360-15
1:242
§ 360-16. Sensitive areas; stormwater hotspots.
(a) Lake Erie watersheds.
A. Sensitive areas and water quality sensitive developments, as defined
below, which require special consideration with regard to stormwater
management.
(1) "Sensitive areas" are defined as those areas that, if developed, have
the potential to endanger a water supply. These areas consist of the
delineated one-year zone of contribution and direct upslope areas
tributary to the water supply wells. Girard Borough may update the
sensitive area boundaries based on new research or studies as
required.
(2) "Stormwater hotspots" are defined as a land use that generates
higher concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals, or toxicants
than are found in typical stormwater runoff. As such, they have a
high potential to endanger local water quality, and could potentially
threaten groundwater reservoirs. Girard Borough will determine
what constitutes these classifications on a case-by-case basis. The
PADEP wellhead protection contaminant source list shall be used
as a guide in these determinations. Industrial manufacturing site
and hazardous material storage areas must provide NAICS codes.
B. Performance standards.
(1) The location of the boundaries of sensitive areas is set by drainage
areas tributary to any public water supply. The exact location of
these boundaries as they apply to a given development site shall be
determined using mapping at a scale which accurately defines the
limits of the sensitive area. If the project site is within the sensitive
area (in whole or in part), two-foot contour interval mapping shall
be provided to define the limits of the sensitive area. If the project
site is adjacent to but within 500 linear feet of a defined sensitive
area, a five-foot contour interval map defining the limits of the
sensitive area shall be included in the stormwater management
plan to document the site's location relative to the sensitive area.
(2) Applicants for projects involving stormwater hotspots may be
required to prepare and implement a stormwater pollution
prevention plan and file notice of intent as required under the
provisions of the EPA Industrial Stormwater NPDES Permit
Requirements.
(3) Drainage from stormwater hotspots must use an acceptable
pretreatment BMP prior to volume control and/or rate control
BMPs. Acceptable pretreatment BMPs for these developments
74.Editor's Note: Said appendixes are on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-16
1:243
include those based on filtering, settling, or chemical reaction
processes such as coagulation.
(4) Projects involving stormwater hotspots and development in
sensitive areas must include riparian buffers as defined in § 360-10.
§ 360-16 GIRARD CODE § 360-16
1:244
ARTICLE IV
Erosion and Sedimentation Standards
§ 360-17. Requirements during earth disturbance activities.
A. The applicant shall meet requirements as contained in 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 9275 and 102, as required and applicable as follows:
(1) The implementation and maintenance of erosion and sediment
control BMPs.
(2) Development of written plans.
(3) Submission of plans for approval.
(4) Obtaining erosion and sediment control and NPDES permits.
(5) Maintaining plans and permits on site.
B. Evidence of any necessary plan or permit approval for earth
disturbance activities from PADEP or the Erie County Conservation
District must be provided to Girard Borough.
C. A copy of the approved erosion and sediment control plan and any other
permit, as required by PADEP or the Erie County Conservation District,
shall be available at the project site at all times if required under
Chapter 102.
D. Construction of temporary roadways (e.g., for utility construction,
timber harvesting, etc.) shall comply with all applicable standards for
erosion and sedimentation control and stream crossing regulations
under 25 Pa. Code Chapters 102 and 105. The erosion and
sedimentation control plan shall be submitted to the Erie County
Conservation District for approval and shall address the following, as
applicable:
(1) Design of the roadway system, including haul roads, skid roads,
landing areas, trails, and storage and staging areas.
(2) Runoff control structures (e.g., diversions, culverts, detention
ponds, etc.).
(3) Stream crossings for both perennial and intermittent streams.
(4) Access to public roadways, including design of rock construction
entrance for mud and debris control.
(5) A remediation plan for restoring the disturbed area through
regrading, topsoil placement, reseeding, and other stabilization
techniques, as required.
75.Editor's Note: Chapter 92 of Title 25 of the Pennsylvania Code was reserved 10-8-2010,
effective 10-9-2010. See now Chapter 92a, National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System Permitting, Monitoring and Compliance.
§ 360-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-17
1:245
E. Additional erosion and sedimentation control design standards and
criteria that must be applied where infiltration BMPs are proposed
include the following:
(1) Areas proposed for infiltration BMPs shall be protected from
sedimentation and compaction during the construction phase, so as
to maintain their maximum infiltration capacity.
(2) Infiltration BMPs shall be protected from receiving sediment-laden
runoff.
(3) The source of protection for infiltration BMPs shall be identified
(i.e., orange construction fence surrounding the perimeter of the
BMP).
§ 360-17 GIRARD CODE § 360-17
1:246
ARTICLE V
Design Criteria
§ 360-18. Stormwater management and drainage facilities.
A. General design guidelines.
(1) Stormwater shall not be transferred from one watershed to
another, unless the watersheds are subwatersheds of a common
watershed which join together within the perimeter of the
property; the effect of the transfer does not alter the peak rate
discharge onto adjacent lands; or easements from the affected
landowner(s) are provided.
(2) Consideration shall be given to the relationship of the subject
property to the drainage pattern of the watershed. A concentrated
discharge of stormwater to an adjacent property shall be within an
existing watercourse or confined in an easement or returned to a
predevelopment flow-type condition.
(3) Innovative stormwater BMPs and recharge facilities are
encouraged (e.g., rooftop storage, dry wells, cisterns, recreation
area ponding, diversion structures, porous pavements, holding
tanks, infiltration systems, in-line storage in storm sewers, and
grading patterns). They shall be located, designed, and constructed
in accordance with the latest technical guidance published by
PADEP, provided they are accompanied by detailed engineering
plans and performance capabilities and supporting site-specific
soils, geology, runoff and groundwater and infiltration rate data to
verify proposed designs. Additional guidance from other sources
may be accepted at the discretion of Girard Borough. (A
preapplication meeting is suggested.)
(4) All existing and natural watercourses, channels, drainage systems
and areas of surface water concentration shall be maintained in
their existing condition unless an alteration is approved by the
appropriate regulatory agency.
(5) The design of all stormwater management facilities shall
incorporate sound engineering principles and practices. Girard
Borough shall reserve the right to disapprove any design that
would result in the continuation or exacerbation of a documented
adverse hydrologic or hydraulic condition within the watershed, as
identified in the plan.
(6) The design and construction of multiple-use stormwater detention
facilities are strongly encouraged. In addition to stormwater
management, facilities should, where appropriate, allow for
recreational uses, including ball fields, play areas, picnic grounds,
etc. Consultation with Girard Borough and prior approval are
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:247
required before design. Provision for permanent wet ponds with
stormwater management capabilities may also be appropriate.
(a) Multiple-use basins should be constructed so that potentially
dangerous conditions are not created.
(b) Water quality basins or recharge basins that are designed for a
slow release of water or other extended detention ponds are
not permitted for recreational uses, unless the ponded areas
are clearly separated and secure.
(7) Should any stormwater management facility require a dam safety
permit under PADEP Chapter 105,76 the facility shall be designed in
accordance with Chapter 105 and meet the regulations of Chapter
105 concerning dam safety.
B. Stormwater management facility design considerations. All stormwater
management facilities shall meet the following design requirements:
(1) No outlet structure from a stormwater management facility, or
swale, shall discharge directly onto a municipal or state roadway
without approval from Girard Borough or PennDOT.
(2) The top, or toe, of any slope of stormwater management facilities
shall be located a minimum of 10 feet from any property line.
(3) The minimum horizontal distance between any stormwater holding
facility and a building/structure shall be 25 feet. The lowest floor
elevation of any structure constructed immediately adjacent to a
detention basin or other stormwater facility shall be a minimum of
two feet above the one-hundred-year water surface elevation.
(4) Stormwater management facility bottom (or surface of permanent
pool) elevations must be greater than adjacent floodplain
elevations (FEMA or HEC-RAS analysis). If no floodplain is defined,
bottom elevations must be greater than existing ground elevations
50 feet from top of stream bank in the facility's vicinity.
(5) Basin outflow culverts discharging into floodplains must account
for tailwater. Tailwater corresponding to the one-hundred-yearfloodplain
elevation must be used for all design storms, or the
applicant may elect to determine flood elevations of the adjacent
watercourse for each design storm. The floodplain is assumed to be
50 feet from top of stream bank in areas where a floodway is not
designated or no other evidence is provided.
(6) The invert of all stormwater management facilities and
underground infiltration/storage facilities shall be located a
minimum of two feet above the seasonal high groundwater table.
The invert of stormwater facilities may be lowered if adequate
76.Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
§ 360-18 GIRARD CODE § 360-18
1:248
subsurface drainage is provided. Flows from underdrains need not
be accounted for in volume or rate control calculations.
(7) Whenever possible, the side slopes and basin shape shall be
amenable to the natural topography. Vertical side slopes and
rectangular basins shall be avoided whenever possible.
(8) Exterior slopes of compacted soil shall not exceed 3:1 and may be
further reduced if the soil has unstable characteristics.
(9) Interior slopes of the basin shall not exceed 3:1.
(10) Unless specifically designed as a volume control facility, all
stormwater management facilities shall have a minimum slope of
2% extending radially out from the principal outlet structure.
Facilities designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs may have a
bottom slope of zero.
(11) Impervious low-flow channels are not permitted within stormwater
management facilities.
(12) Unless specifically designed as a volume control or water quality
facility, all stormwater management facilities must empty over a
period of time not less than 24 hours and not more than 72 hours
from the end of the facility's inflow hydrograph. Infiltration tests
performed at the facility locations and proposed basin bottom
depths, in accordance with the BMP Manual, must support time-toempty
calculations if infiltration is a factor.
(13) Energy dissipaters and/or level spreaders shall be installed at
points where pipes or drainageways discharge to or from basins.
Discharges to drainage swales shall be dissipated, or piped, to an
acceptable point.
(14) Landscaping and planting specifications must be provided for all
stormwater management basins and be specific for each type of
basin.
(a) Minimal maintenance, saturation-tolerant vegetation must be
provided in basins designed as water quality/infiltration BMPs.
(15) A safety fence may be required, at the discretion of Girard
Borough, for any stormwater management facility. The fence shall
be a minimum of four feet high and of a material acceptable to
Girard Borough. A gate with a minimum opening of 10 feet shall be
provided for maintenance access.
(16) Principal outlet structures. The primary outlet structure shall be
designed to pass all design storms (up to and including the onehundred-
year event) without discharging through the emergency
spillway. All principal outlet structures shall:
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:249
(a) Be constructed of reinforced concrete or an alternative
material approved by Girard Borough. When approved for use,
all metal risers shall:
[1] Be suitably coated to prevent corrosion.
[2] Have a concrete base attached with a watertight
connection. The base shall be sufficient weight to prevent
flotation of the riser.
[3] Provide a trash rack or similar appurtenance to prevent
debris from entering the riser.
[4] Provide an anti-vortex device, consisting of a thin vertical
plate normal to the basin berm.
(b) Provide trash racks to prevent clogging of primary outflow
structure stages for all orifices.
(c) Provide outlet aprons and shall extend to the toe of the basin
slope at a minimum.
(17) Emergency spillways. Any stormwater management facility
designed to store runoff shall provide an emergency spillway
designed to convey the one-hundred-year post-development peak
rate flow with a blocked primary outlet structure. The emergency
spillway shall be designed per the following requirements:
(a) The top of embankment elevation shall provide a minimum one
foot of freeboard above the maximum water surface elevation.
This is to be calculated when the spillway functions for the onehundred-
year post-development inflow, with a blocked outlet
structure.
(b) Avoid locating on fill areas, whenever possible.
(c) The spillway shall be armored to prevent erosion during the
one-hundred-year post-development flow, with a blocked
primary outlet structure.
[1] Synthetic liners or riprap may be used, and calculations
sufficient to support proposed armor must be provided. An
earthen plug must be used to accurately control the
spillway invert if riprap is the proposed armoring material.
Emergency spillway armor must extend up the sides of the
spillway and continue at full width to a minimum of 10 feet
past the toe of slope.
(d) Girard Borough may require the use of additional protection
when slopes exceed 4:1 and spillway velocities might exceed
NRCS standards for the particular soils involved.
§ 360-18 GIRARD CODE § 360-18
1:250
(e) Any underground stormwater management facility (pipe
storage systems) must have a method to bypass flows higher
than the required design (up to a one-hundred-year postdevelopment
inflow) without structural failure or causing
downstream harm or safety risks.
(18) Stormwater management basins. Design of stormwater
management facilities having three feet or more of water depth
(measured vertically from the lowest elevation in the facility to the
crest of the emergency spillway) shall meet the following additional
requirements:
(a) The maximum water depth within any stormwater
management facility shall be no greater than eight feet when
functioning through the primary outlet structure.
(b) The top of embankment width shall be:
[1] For embankments up to four feet, the width shall be at
least six feet;
[2] For embankments between four and six feet, the width
shall be at least eight feet;
[3] For embankments over six feet, the width shall be at least
10 feet.
(c) A ten-foot-wide access to the basin bottom must be provided
with a maximum longitudinal slope of 10%.
(d) Berms shall be constructed using soils that conform to the
unified soil classification of CH, MH, CL or ML. Soils used shall
be tested to determine its density analysis per ASTM 698. The
embankments will be constructed in a maximum of six-inch
lifts. The lifts will each be compacted to a density at least 98%
of the maximum dry density. Each layer of compacted fill shall
be tested to determine its density per ASTM 2922 or ASTM
3017. One test per 50 cubic yards of material placed (at least
one per layer) shall be performed by an independent testing
agency.
(e) A cutoff and key trench of impervious material shall be
provided under all embankments four feet or greater in height.
The cutoff trench shall run the entire length of the
embankment and tie into undisturbed natural ground.
(f) Anti-seep collars, or a PADEP-approved alternative, must be
provided on all outflow culverts in accordance with the
methodology contained in the latest edition of the PADEP E&S
Manual. An increase in seepage length of 15% must be used in
accordance with the requirements for permanent anti-seep
collars.
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:251
(19) Construction of stormwater management facilities.
(a) Basins used for rate control only shall be installed prior to or
concurrent with any earthmoving or land disturbances which
they will serve. The phasing of their construction shall be noted
in the narrative and on the plan.
(b) Basins that include water quality or recharge components shall
have those components installed in such a manner as to not
disturb or diminish their effectiveness.
(c) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and be
subject to review at all times, with copies being forwarded to
Girard Borough upon request.
(d) Temporary and permanent grasses or stabilization measures
shall be established on the sides and base of all earthen basins
within 15 days of construction.
(20) Exceptions to these requirements may be made at the discretion of
Girard Borough for BMPs that retain or detain water but are of a
much smaller scale than traditional stormwater management
facilities.
C. Stormwater-carrying facilities.
(1) All storm sewer pipes, grass waterways, open channels, swales and
other stormwater-carrying facilities that service drainage areas
within the site must be able to convey post-development runoff
from the ten-year design storm.
(2) Stormwater management facilities that convey off-site water
through the site shall be designed to convey the twenty-five-year
storm event (or larger events, as determined by Girard Borough).
(3) All developments shall include provisions that allow for the
overland conveyance and flow of the post-development onehundred-
year storm event without damage to public or private
property.
(4) Storm sewers.
(a) Storm sewers must be able to convey post-development runoff
without surcharging inlets for the ten-year storm event.
(b) When connecting to an existing storm sewer system, the
applicant must demonstrate that the proposed system will not
exacerbate any existing stormwater problems and that
adequate downstream capacity exists.
(c) Inlets, manholes, pipes, and culverts shall be constructed in
accordance with the specifications set forth in PennDOT's
Publication 408 and as detailed in the PennDOT's Publication
§ 360-18 GIRARD CODE § 360-18
1:252
72M, Standards for Roadway Construction (RC), or other detail
approved by Girard Borough. All material and construction
details (inlets, manholes, pipe trenches, etc.) must be shown
on the SWM site plan, and a note added that all construction
must be in accordance with PennDOT's Publication 408 and
PennDOT's Publication 72M, latest edition. A note shall be
added to the plan stating that all frames, concrete top units,
and grade adjustment rings shall be set in a bed of full mortar
according to Publication 408.
(d) A minimum pipe size of 15 inches in diameter shall be used in
all roadway systems (public or private) proposed for
construction in Girard Borough. Pipes shall be designed to
provide a minimum velocity of 2 1/2 feet per second when
flowing full, but in all cases, the slope shall be no less than
0.5%. Arch pipe of equivalent cross-sectional area may be
substituted in lieu of circular pipe where cover or utility
conflict conditions exist.
(e) All storm sewer pipes shall be laid to a minimum depth of one
foot from subgrade to the crown of pipe.
(f) In curbed roadway sections, the maximum encroachment of
water on the roadway pavement shall not exceed half of a
through travel lane or one inch less than the depth of curb
during the ten-year design storm of five minute duration.
Gutter depth shall be verified by inlet capture/capacity
calculations that account for road slope and opening area.
[1] Inlets shall be placed at a maximum of 400 feet apart.
[2] Inlets shall be placed so drainage cannot cross
intersections or street center lines.
(g) Standard Type "C" inlets with eight-inch hoods shall be used
along curbed roadway networks. Type "C" inlets with ten-inch
hoods that provide a two-inch sump condition may be used
with approval of Girard Borough when roadway longitudinal
slopes are 1.0% or less.
(h) For inlets containing a change in pipe size, the elevation for the
crown of the pipes shall be the same, or the smaller pipe's
crown shall be at a higher elevation.
(i) All inlets shall provide a minimum two-inch drop between the
lowest inlet pipe invert elevation and the outlet pipe invert
elevation.
(j) On curbed sections, a double inlet shall be placed at the low
point of sag vertical curves, or an inlet shall be placed on each
side of the low point at a distance not to exceed 100 feet or at
an elevation not to exceed 0.2 feet above the low point.
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:253
(k) At all roadway low points, swales and easements shall be
provided behind the curb or swale and through adjacent
properties to channelize and direct any overflow of stormwater
runoff away from dwellings and structures.
(l) All inlets in paved areas shall have heavy-duty bicycle-safe
grating. A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site
plan or inlet details therein.
(m) Inlets must be sized to accept the specified pipe sizes without
knocking out any of the inlet corners. All pipes entering or
exiting inlets shall be cut flush with the inside wall of the inlet.
A note to this effect shall be added to the SWM site plan or inlet
details therein.
(n) Inlets shall have weep holes covered with geotextile fabric
placed at appropriate elevations to completely drain the
subgrade prior to placing the base and surface course on
roadways.
(o) Inlets, junction boxes, or manholes greater than five feet in
depth shall be equipped with ladder rungs and shall be
detailed on the SWM site plan.
(p) Inlets shall not have a sump condition in the bottom (unless
designed as a water quality BMP or specifically approved by
Girard Borough). Pipe shall be flush with the bottom of the box,
or concrete channels shall be poured.
(q) Accessible drainage structures shall be located on continuous
storm sewer systems at all vertical dislocations, at all locations
where a transition in storm sewer pipe sizing is required, at all
vertical and horizontal angle points exceeding 5°, and at all
points of convergence of two or more storm sewer pipes.
(r) All storm drainage piping shall be provided with either
reinforced concrete headwalls or end sections of compatible
material as the pipe involved at its entrance and discharge.
(s) Outlet protection and energy dissipaters shall be provided at
all surface discharge points in order to minimize erosion
consistent with the E&S Manual.
[1] Flow velocities and volumes from any storm sewer shall
not result in a degradation of the receiving channel.
(t) Stormwater roof drains and pipes shall not be connected to
storm sewers or discharge onto impervious areas without
approval by Girard Borough.
(5) Swale conveyance facilities.
§ 360-18 GIRARD CODE § 360-18
1:254
§ 360-19. Calculation methodology.
(a) Swales must be able to convey post-development runoff from a
ten-year design storm with six inches of freeboard to top of the
swale.
(b) Swales shall have side slopes no steeper than 3:1.
(c) All swales shall be designed, labeled on the SWM site plan, and
details provided to adequately construct and maintain the
design dimension of the swales.
(d) Swales shall be designed for stability using velocity or shear
criteria. Velocity criteria may be used for channels with less
than ten-percent slope. Shear criteria may be used for all
swales. Documentation must be provided to support velocity
and/or shear limitations used in calculations.
(e) Where swale bends occur, the computed velocities or shear
stresses shall be multiplied by the following factor for the
purpose of designing swale erosion protection:
[1] When swale bend is 30° to 60°: 1.75.
[2] When swale bend is 60° to 90°: 2.00.
[3] When swale bend is 90° or greater: 2.50.
(f) Manning's "n" values used for swale capacity design must
reflect the permanent condition.
A. All calculations shall be consistent with the guidelines set forth in the
BMP Manual, as amended herein.
B. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Methodology.
Other methods shall be selected by the design professional based on
the individual limitations and suitability of each method for a particular
site and approved by Girard Borough.
C. Rainfall values.
(1) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. The Natural Resources
Conservation Service Type II, twenty-four-hour rainfall distribution
shall be used in conjunction with rainfall depths from NOAA Atlas
14 or be consistent with the following table:
Return Interval
(year)
24-Hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
1 2.13
2 2.56
§ 360-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-19
1:255
Return Interval
(year)
24-Hour Rainfall Total
(inches)
10 3.71
25 4.46
50 5.09
100 5.76
D. Runoff volume.
(1) Rational Method: not to be used to calculate runoff volume.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. This method shall be used to
estimate the change in volume due to regulated activities.
Combining curve numbers for land areas proposed for development
with curve numbers for areas unaffected by the proposed
development into a single weighted curve number is not
acceptable.
E. Peak flow rates.
(1) Rational Method. This method may be used for design of
conveyance facilities only. Extreme caution should be used by the
design professional if the watershed has more than one main
drainage channel, if the watershed is divided so that hydrologic
properties are significantly different in one versus the other, if the
time of concentration exceeds 60 minutes, or if stormwater runoff
volume is an important factor. The combination of Rational Method
hydrographs based on timing shall be prohibited.
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method.
(a) This method is recommended for design of stormwater
management facilities and where stormwater runoff volume
must be taken into consideration. The following provides
guidance on the model applicability:
[1] NRCS's TR-20 or HEC-HMS: no size limitations.
[2] Other models as preapproved by Girard Borough.
(b) The NRCS Antecedent Runoff Condition II (ARC II, previously
AMC II) must be used for all simulations. The use of continuous
simulation models that vary the ARC are not permitted for
stormwater management purposes.
(3) For comparison of peak flow rates, flows shall be rounded to a tenth
of a cubic foot per second (cfs).
F. Runoff coefficients.
(1) Rational Method. Use Table C-1 (Appendix C).77
§ 360-19 GIRARD CODE § 360-19
1:256
(2) NRCS Rainfall-Runoff Method. Use Table C-2 (Appendix C). Curve
numbers (CN) should be rounded to tenths for use in hydrologic
models, as they are a design tool with statistical variability. For
large sites, CNs should realistically be rounded to the nearest
whole number.
(3) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, existing nonforested pervious area conditions shall
be considered as meadow (good condition).
(4) For the purposes of predevelopment peak flow rate and volume
determination, 20% of existing impervious area, when present,
shall be considered meadow (good condition).
G. Design storm.
(1) All stormwater management facilities shall be verified by routing
the proposed one-, two-, ten-, twenty-five-, fifty-, and one-hundredyear
hydrographs through the facility using the Storage Indication
Method or Modified Puls Method. The design storm hydrograph
shall be computed using a calculation method that produces a full
hydrograph.
(2) The stormwater management and drainage system shall be
designed to safely convey the post-development one-hundred-year
storm event to stormwater detention facilities, for the purpose of
meeting peak rate control.
H. Time of concentration.
(1) The time of concentration is to represent the average condition that
best reflects the hydrologic response of the area. The following
time of concentration (Tc) computational methodologies shall be
used unless another method is preapproved by Girard Borough:
(a) Predevelopment: NRCS's Lag Equation:
Time of Concentration = Tc = [(Tlag/.6) *60] (minutes)
Where:
Tlag = Lag time (hours)
L = Hydraulic length of watershed (feet)
Y = Average overland slope of watershed (percent)
S = Maximum retention in watershed as defined by: S
= [(1,000/CN) — 10]
77.Editor's Note: Said appendix is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-19
1:257
CN = NRCS curve number for watershed
(b) Post-development; commercial, industrial, or other areas with
large impervious areas (< 20% impervious area): NRCS
Segmental Method. The length of sheet flow shall be limited to
100 feet. Tc for channel and pipe flow shall be computed using
Manning's Equation.
(c) Post-development; residential, cluster, or other low-impact
designs less than or equal to 20% impervious area: NRCS Lag
Equation or NRCS Segmental Method.
(2) Additionally, the following provisions shall apply to calculations for
time of concentration:
(a) The post-development Tc shall never be greater than the
predevelopment Tc for any watershed or subwatershed. This
includes when the designer has specifically used swales to
reduce flow velocities. In the event that the designer believes
that the post-development Tc is greater, it will still be set by
default equal to the predevelopment Tc for modeling purposes.
(b) The minimum Tc for any watershed shall be five minutes.
(c) The designer must provide computations for all
predevelopment Tc paths. A five-minute Tc can not be assumed
for predevelopment.
(d) Undetained fringe areas (areas that are not tributary to a
stormwater facility but where a reasonable effort has been
made to convey runoff from all new impervious coverage to
best management practices) may be assumed to represent the
predevelopment conditions for purposes of Tc calculation.
I. Drainage areas tributary to sinkholes or closed depressions in areas
underlain by limestone or carbonate geologic features shall be excluded
from the modeled point of analysis defining predevelopment flows. If
left undisturbed during construction activities, areas draining to closed
depressions may also be used to reduce peak runoff rates in the postdevelopment
analysis. New, additional contributing runoff should not be
directed to existing sinkholes or closed depressions.
J. Where uniform flow is anticipated, the Manning's Equation shall be
used for hydraulic computations and to determine the capacity of open
channels, pipes, and storm sewers. Manning's "n" values shall be
obtained from PennDOT's Drainage Manual, Publication 584. Inlet
control shall be checked at all inlet boxes to ensure the headwater
depth during the ten-year design event is contained below the top of
grate for each inlet box.
K. Girard Borough may require that computed existing runoff rates be
reconciled with field observations, conditions and site history. If the
§ 360-19 GIRARD CODE § 360-19
1:258
designer can substantiate, through actual physical calibration, that
more appropriate runoff and time of concentration values should be
utilized at a particular site, then appropriate variations may be made
upon review and recommendation of Girard Borough.
§ 360-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-19
1:259

ARTICLE VI
Site Plan and Report Requirements
§ 360-20. Approval required.
For any of the activities regulated by this chapter and not eligible for the
exemptions provided in § 360-12, the final approval of subdivision and/or
land development plans, the issuance of any building or occupancy permit,
or the commencement of any land disturbance activity may not proceed
until the applicant has received written approval of a SWM site plan from
Girard Borough.
§ 360-21. Contents.
The SWM site plan and SWM site report shall consist of all applicable
calculations, maps, and plans. All SWM site plan materials shall be
submitted to Girard Borough in a format that is clear, concise, legible,
neat and well organized; otherwise, the SWM site plan shall be rejected.
Appropriate sections from Chapter 370, Subdivision and Land Development,
and other applicable local ordinances, shall be followed in preparing the
SWM site plan.
A. The SWM site plan shall include, but not be limited to:
(1) Plans shall be of one size and in a form that meets the requirements
for recording in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Erie County.
(a) Plans for tracts of less than 20 acres shall be drawn at a scale
of one inch equals no more than 50 feet.
(b) Plans for tracts of 20 acres or more shall be drawn at a scale of
one inch equals no more than 100 feet.
(c) All lettering shall be drawn to a size to be legible if the plans
are reduced to half size.
(2) The name of the development; name and location address of the
property site; name, address, and telephone number of the
applicant/owner of the property; and name, address, telephone
number, e-mail address, and engineering seal of the individual
preparing the SWM site plan.
(3) The date of submission and dates of all revisions.
(4) A graphical and written scale on all drawings and maps.
(5) A North arrow on all drawings and maps.
(6) A location map, at a minimum scale of one inch equals 1,000 feet,
that illustrates the project relative to highways, municipalities or
other identifiable landmarks.
(7) Metes and bounds description of the entire tract perimeter.
§ 360-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-21
1:261
(8) Existing and final contours at the following intervals:
(a) Slopes less than 5%: no greater than one foot;
(b) Slopes between 5% and 15%: no greater than two feet;
(c) Steep slopes (greater than 15%): five-foot contour intervals
may be used.
(9) Perimeters of existing water bodies within the project area,
including stream banks, lakes, ponds, springs, field-delineated
wetlands or other bodies of water, sinkholes, flood hazard
boundaries (FEMA-delineated floodplains and floodways), areas of
natural vegetation to be preserved, the total extent of the upstream
area draining through the site, and overland drainage paths. In
addition, any areas necessary to determine downstream impacts,
where required for proposed stormwater management facilities,
must be shown.
(10) The location of all existing and proposed utilities, on-lot
wastewater facilities, water supply wells, sanitary sewers, and
waterlines on and within 50 feet of property lines, including inlets,
manholes, valves, meters, poles, chambers, junction boxes, and
other utility system components.
(11) A key map showing all existing man-made features beyond the
property boundary that may be affected by the project.
(12) Soil names and boundaries with identification of the hydraulic soil
group classification, including rock outcroppings.
(13) Proposed impervious surfaces (structures, roads, paved areas, and
buildings), including plans and profiles of roads and paved areas
and floor elevations of buildings.
(14) Existing and proposed land use(s).
(15) Horizontal alignment, vertical profiles, and cross sections of all
open channels, pipes, swales and other BMPs.
(16) The location and clear identification of the nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(17) The location of all erosion and sedimentation control facilities,
shown separately from the SWM site plan (typically an E&S plan).
(18) A minimum twenty-foot-wide access easement around all
stormwater management facilities that would provide ingress to
and egress from a public right-of-way. In lieu of providing an
easement to the public right-of-way, a note may be added to the
plan granting the municipality or its designees access to all
easements via the nearest public right-of-way.
(19) Construction details for all drainage and stormwater BMPs.
§ 360-21 GIRARD CODE § 360-21
1:262
(20) Construction sequence.
(21) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operations,
and maintenance responsibilities.
(22) Notes and statements:
(a) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or
removed without prior approval by Girard Borough.
(b) A statement referencing the operation and maintenance
(O&M) agreement and stating that the O&M agreement is part
of the SWM site plan.
(c) A note indicating that record drawings will be provided for all
stormwater facilities prior to occupancy or the release of the
surety bond.
(d) The following signature block for the registered professional
preparing the stormwater management plan:
"I, ___________________________, hereby certify that the
stormwater management plan meets all design standards and
criteria of the Girard Borough Stormwater Management
Ordinance."
B. The SWM site report shall include (but not be limited to):
(1) General data, including:
(a) Project name.
(b) Project location (address of the property site).
(c) Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant/owner
of the property.
(d) Name, address, telephone number, e-mail address, and
engineering seal of the individual preparing the SWM site
report.
(e) Date of submission and revisions.
(2) Project description narrative that clearly discusses the project and
provides the following information, where applicable:
(a) Narrative:
[1] Statement of the regulated activity describing what is
being proposed; overall stormwater management concept
with description of permanent stormwater management
techniques, including construction specifications and
§ 360-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-21
1:263
materials to be used for stormwater management
facilities.
[2] Expected project schedule.
[3] Location map showing the project site and its location
relative to release rate districts.
[4] Detailed description of the existing site conditions,
including a site evaluation completed for projects
proposed in areas of carbonate geology or karst
topography, and other environmentally sensitive areas
such as brownfields.
[5] Total site area, pre and post, which must be equal or have
an explanation as to why it is not.
[6] Total site impervious area.
[7] Total off-site areas.
[8] Number and description of stormwater management
facilities.
[9] Type of development.
[10] Predevelopment land use.
[11] Whether site is a water quality sensitive (WQS)
development.
[12] Whether site is in a defined sensitive area.
[13] Types of water quality and recharge systems used, if
applicable.
[14] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural
computations for all stormwater management facilities.
[15] A written maintenance plan for all stormwater features,
including detention facilities and other stormwater
management elements.
[16] Identification of ownership and maintenance responsibility
for all permanent stormwater management facilities.
[17] Other pertinent information, as required.
(b) Summary tables:
[1] Predevelopment hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions,
curve numbers (CN), computation of average slope,
hydraulic length, computed time of concentration.
[2] Existing condition's runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
§ 360-21 GIRARD CODE § 360-21
1:264
[3] Post-development runoff volume and peak rate of runoff.
[4] Undetained areas, areas to ponds.
[5] Land use for each subarea.
[6] Hydrologic soil group (HSG) assumptions, curve numbers
(CN).
[7] Time of concentration computed for each subarea.
[8] Post-development peak rate of runoff routed to ponds and
out.
[9] Pond maximum return period design data, including
maximum water surface elevation, berm elevation, and
emergency spillway elevation.
[10]Water quality depth and volume requirements.
(c) Calculations:
[1] Complete hydrologic, hydraulic and structural
computations, calculations, assumptions, and criteria for
the design of all stormwater BMPs.
[2] Details of the berm embankment and outlet structure
indicating the embankment top elevation, embankment
side slopes, top width of embankment, emergency spillway
elevation, perforated riser dimensions, pipe barrel
dimensions and dimensions and spacing of anti-seep
collars.
[3] Design computations for the control structures (pipe
barrel and riser, etc.).
[4] A plot or table of the stage-storage (volume vs. elevation)
and all supporting computations.
[5] Routing computations.
(d) Drawings:
[1] Drainage area maps for all watersheds and inlets depicting
the time of concentration path for both existing condition
and post-developed condition.
[2] All stormwater management facilities must be located on a
plan and described in detail, including easements and
buffer boundaries.
(3) Reports that do not clearly indicate the above information may be
rejected for review by Girard Borough and will be returned to the
applicant.
§ 360-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-21
1:265
§ 360-22. Submission requirements.
(4) Description of, justification, and actual field results for infiltration
testing with respect to the type of test and test location for the
design of infiltration BMPs.
(5) The effect of the project (in terms of runoff volumes, water quality,
and peak flows) on surrounding properties and aquatic features
and on any existing municipal stormwater collection system that
may receive runoff from the project site.
(6) Description of the proposed changes to the land surface and
vegetative cover, including the type and amount of impervious area
to be added.
(7) Identification of short-term and long-term ownership, operation,
and maintenance responsibilities, as well as schedules and costs
for inspection and maintenance activities for each permanent
stormwater or drainage BMP, including provisions for permanent
access or maintenance easements.
C. Supplemental information to be provided prior to recording of the SWM
site plan, as applicable:
(1) Signed and executed operations and maintenance agreement
(Appendix A78).
(2) Signed and executed easements, as required for all on-site and offsite
work.
(3) An erosion and sedimentation control plan and approval letter from
the Erie County Conservation District.
(4) A NPDES permit.
(5) Permits from PADEP and ACOE.
(6) Geologic assessment.
(7) Soils investigation report, including boring logs, compaction
requirements, and recommendations for construction of detention
basins.
(8) A highway occupancy permit from PennDOT when utilization of a
PennDOT storm drainage system is proposed or when proposed
facilities would encroach onto a PennDOT right-of-way.
A. The applicant shall submit the SWM site plan and report for the
regulated activity.
B. Three copies of the SWM site plan and report shall be submitted and be
distributed as follows:
78.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-21 GIRARD CODE § 360-22
1:266
§ 360-23. Review of plan and report.
§ 360-24. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted SWM site plan and report for a development
site that involves a change in stormwater management facilities or
techniques or that involves the relocation or redesign of stormwater
management facilities or that is necessary because soil or other conditions
are not as stated on the SWM site plan as determined by Girard Borough
shall require a resubmission of the modified SWM site plan in accordance
with this chapter.
(1) Two copies to Girard Borough, accompanied by the requisite
executed review fee reimbursement agreement, as specified in this
chapter.
(2) One copy to the Girard Borough Engineer.
C. Additional copies shall be submitted as requested by Girard Borough or
PADEP.
A. Girard Borough shall require receipt of a complete SWM site plan and
report as specified in this chapter. Girard Borough shall review the
SWM site plan and report for consistency with the purposes,
requirements, and intent of this chapter.
B. Girard Borough shall not approve any SWM site plan and report that is
deficient in meeting the requirements of this chapter. At its sole
discretion and in accordance with this article, when a SWM site plan
and report is found to be deficient, Girard Borough may disapprove the
submission and require a resubmission, or, in the case of minor
deficiencies, Girard Borough may accept submission of modifications.
C. Girard Borough shall notify the applicant in writing within 45 calendar
days whether the SWM site plan and report is approved or disapproved
if the SWM site plan and report is not part of a subdivision or land
development plan. If the SWM site plan and report involves a
subdivision or land development plan, the timing shall following the
subdivision and land development process according to the
Municipalities Planning Code.79
D. The Municipal Building Permit Office shall not issue a building permit
for any regulated activity if the SWM site plan and report has been
found to be inconsistent with this chapter, as determined by Girard
Borough. All required permits from PADEP must be obtained prior to
issuance of a building permit.
79.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-25
1:267
§ 360-25. Resubmission of disapproved plans and reports.
A disapproved SWM site plan and report may be resubmitted, with the
revisions addressing Girard Borough's concerns documented in writing, to
Girard Borough in accordance with this chapter. The applicable municipal
review fee must accompany a resubmission of a disapproved SWM site plan
and report.
§ 360-26. Term of validity of approval.
Girard Borough's approval of a SWM site plan and report authorizes the
regulated activities contained in the SWM site plan for a maximum term
of validity of five years following the date of approval. Girard Borough
may specify a term of validity shorter than five years in the approval for
any specific SWM site plan. Terms of validity shall commence on the date
Girard Borough signs the approval for a SWM site plan. If stormwater
management facilities included in the approved SWM site plan have not
been constructed, or if a record drawing of these facilities has not been
approved within this time, then Girard Borough may consider the SWM site
plan disapproved and may revoke any and all permits or approvals.
§ 360-27. Record drawings; completion certificate; final inspection.
A. The applicant shall be responsible for providing record drawings of all
stormwater BMPs included in the approved SWM site plan. The record
drawing and an explanation of any discrepancies with the approved
SWM site plan shall be submitted to Girard Borough as a prerequisite
for the release of the guarantee or issuance of an occupancy permit.
B. The record drawing shall include a certification of completion signed by
a qualified professional verifying that all permanent stormwater BMPs
have been constructed according to the approved SWM site plan and
report.
(1) Drawings shall show all approved revisions and elevations and
inverts to all manholes, inlets, pipes, and stormwater control
facilities.
(2) Submission shall include a comparison of the constructed stagestorage
(volume vs. elevation) of all aboveground and belowground
stormwater storage facilities to the approved design.
C. After receipt of the record drawing and certification of completion by
Girard Borough, Girard Borough may conduct a final inspection.
§ 360-25 GIRARD CODE § 360-27
1:268
ARTICLE VII
Easements
§ 360-28. Requirements for easements.
A. Easements shall be established to accommodate the existence of
drainageways.
B. Where a tract is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or
stream, there shall be provided an easement paralleling the line of such
watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, with a width adequate to
preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage in the one-hundredyear
floodplain.
C. Easements shall be established for all on-site stormwater management
or drainage facilities, including but not limited to detention facilitates
(above or below ground), infiltration facilities, all stormwater BMPs,
drainage swales, and drainage facilities (inlets, manholes, pipes, etc.).
D. Easements are required for all areas used for off-site stormwater
control.
E. All easements shall be a minimum of 20 feet wide and shall encompass
the one-hundred-year surface elevation of the proposed stormwater
facility.
F. Easements shall provide ingress to, and egress from, a public right-ofway.
In lieu of providing an easement to the public right-of-way, a note
may be added to the plan granting Girard Borough or its designees
access to all easements via the nearest public right-of-way available for
vehicle ingress and egress on grades of less than 10% for carrying out
inspection or maintenance activities.
G. Where possible, easements shall be centered on side and/or rear lot
lines.
H. Nothing shall be planted or placed within the easement which would
adversely affect the function of the easement or conflict with any
conditions associated with such easement.
I. All easement agreements shall be recorded with a reference to the
recorded easement indicated on the site plan. The format and content
of the easement agreement shall be reviewed and approved by Girard
Borough and the Borough Solicitor.
§ 360-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-28
1:269

ARTICLE VIII
Financial Guarantees; Maintenance Requirements
§ 360-29. Financial guarantee.
§ 360-30. Maintenance responsibilities.
A. The applicant shall provide a financial guarantee to Girard Borough for
the timely installation and proper construction of all stormwater
management controls as required by the approved SWM site plan and
this chapter, equal to 110% of the full construction cost of the required
controls in accordance with the Municipalities Planning Code.80
B. At the completion of the project and as a prerequisite for the release of
the financial guarantee, the applicant shall:
(1) Provide a certification of completion from an engineer, architect,
surveyor or other qualified person, verifying that all permanent
facilities have been constructed according to the SWM site plan
and report and approved revisions thereto.
(2) Provide a set of record drawings.
(3) Request a final inspection from Girard Borough to certify
compliance with this chapter, after receipt of the certification of
completion and record drawings by Girard Borough.
A. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall describe the
future operation and maintenance responsibilities. The operation and
maintenance description shall outline required routine maintenance
actions and schedules necessary to ensure proper operation of the
stormwater control facilities.
B. The SWM site plan and report for the project site shall establish
responsibilities for the continuing operating and maintenance of all
proposed stormwater control facilities, consistent with the following
principles:
(1) If a development consists of structures or lots that are to be
separately owned and in which streets, sewers, and other public
improvements are to be dedicated to Girard Borough, stormwater
control facilities/BMPs may also be dedicated to and maintained by
Girard Borough.
(2) If a development site is to be maintained in a single ownership or if
sewers and other public improvements are to be privately owned
and maintained, then the ownership and maintenance of
stormwater control facilities/BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
80.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 360-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-30
1:271
§ 360-31. Maintenance agreements.
(3) Facilities, areas, or structures used as stormwater BMPs shall be
enumerated as permanent real estate appurtenances and recorded
as deed restrictions or easements that run with the land.
(4) The SWM site plan and report shall be recorded as a restrictive
deed covenant that runs with the land.
(5) Girard Borough may take enforcement actions against an applicant
for failure to satisfy any provision of this chapter.
C. Girard Borough, upon recommendation of Girard Borough officials,
shall make the final determination on the continuing maintenance
responsibilities prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report.
Girard Borough may require a dedication of such facilities as part of the
requirements for approval of the SWM site plan. Such a requirement is
not an indication that Girard Borough will accept the facilities. Girard
Borough reserves the right to accept or reject the ownership and
operating responsibility for any portion of the stormwater management
controls.
D. If Girard Borough accepts ownership of stormwater BMPs, Girard
Borough may, at its discretion, require a fee from the applicant to
Girard Borough to offset the future cost of inspections, operations, and
maintenance.
E. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved SWM site plan or to allow the property to
remain in a condition which does not conform to an approved SWM site
plan, unless Girard Borough grants an exception in writing.
A. Prior to final approval of the SWM site plan and report, the applicant
shall sign the operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement (Appendix
A81) covering all stormwater control facilities that are to be privately
owned. The operation and maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be
recorded with the SWM site plan and made a part thereof.
B. Other items may be included in the operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement where determined necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all BMP facilities. The operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement shall be subject to the review and
approval of Girard Borough and the Municipal Solicitor.
C. The owner is responsible for operation and maintenance of the
stormwater BMPs. If the owner fails to adhere to the operation and
maintenance (O&M) agreement, the municipality may perform the
services required and charge the owner appropriate fees. Nonpayment
of fees may result in a lien against the property.
81.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 360-30 GIRARD CODE § 360-31
1:272
ARTICLE IX
Inspections
§ 360-32. Schedule of inspections.
§ 360-33. Right of entry.
A. PADEP or its designees normally ensure compliance with any permits
issued, including those for stormwater management. In addition to
PADEP compliance programs, Girard Borough may inspect all phases of
the installation of temporary or permanent stormwater management
facilities.
B. During any stage of earth disturbance activities, if Girard Borough
determines that the stormwater management facilities are not being
installed in accordance with the approved SWM site plan, Girard
Borough may suspend or revoke any existing permits or approvals until
a revised SWM site plan is submitted and approved as specified in this
chapter.
C. Stormwater BMPs shall be inspected by the landowner or the
landowner's designee according to the inspection schedule described
on the SWM site plan for each BMP.
(1) Girard Borough may require submission of copies of the inspection
reports, in a form as stipulated by Girard Borough.
(2) If such inspections are not conducted or inspection reports not
submitted as scheduled, Girard Borough, or its designee, may
conduct such inspections and charge the owner appropriate fees.
Nonpayment of fees may result in a lien against the property.
(3) Prior to conducting a scheduled inspection, Girard Borough may
inform the owner of its intent to conduct an inspection.
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of Girard Borough may enter at reasonable times upon
any property within Girard Borough to inspect the implementation,
condition, or operations and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs in
regard to any aspect governed by this chapter.
B. Stormwater BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on
behalf of Girard Borough ready access to all parts of the premises for
the purposes of determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of Girard Borough shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any stormwater BMP in Girard Borough such
devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the
discharges from such stormwater BMP.
D. Unreasonable delay in allowing Girard Borough access to a stormwater
BMP is a violation of this chapter.
§ 360-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-33
1:273

ARTICLE X
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 360-34. Notification of violation.
§ 360-35. Adherence to approved plan required.
§ 360-36. Violation deemed public nuisance.
§ 360-37. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.
A. In the event that a person fails to comply with the requirements of this
chapter, an approved SWM site plan, or fails to conform to the
requirements of any permit or approval issued hereunder, Girard
Borough shall provide written notification of the violation. Such
notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and establish a
time limit for correction of these violation(s).
B. Failure to comply within the time specified shall subject such person to
the penalties provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall be
deemed cumulative and shall not prevent Girard Borough from
pursuing any and all other remedies. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner of the real property on which any regulated activity is proposed
to occur, is occurring or has occurred to comply with the terms and
conditions of this chapter.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to undertake
any regulated activity on any property except as provided for by an
approved SWM site plan and pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter.
B. It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any control structure required by
the SWM site plan pursuant to this chapter.
C. It shall be unlawful to allow a property to remain in a condition that
does not conform to an approved SWM site plan.
A. A violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any approval or permit issued by Girard Borough may be suspended or
revoked for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
approved SWM site plan or operation and maintenance (O&M)
agreement.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter or any other applicable
law, ordinance, rule or regulation relating to the regulated activity.
§ 360-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-37
1:275
§ 360-38. Violations and penalties.82
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 360-39. Appeals.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
the regulated activity which constitutes or creates a hazard or
nuisance, pollution, or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended approval or permit may be reinstated by Girard Borough
when:
(1) Girard Borough or its designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the violation(s) that caused the suspension.
(2) Girard Borough is satisfied that the violation(s) has been corrected.
C. An approval that has been revoked by Girard Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new approval under the
provisions of this chapter.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action of Girard Borough or its designee,
relevant to the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to Girard Borough
within 30 days of that action.
B. Any person aggrieved by any decision of Girard Borough, relevant to
the provisions of this chapter, may appeal to the Erie County Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of Girard Borough's decision.
82.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-37 GIRARD CODE § 360-39
1:276
ARTICLE XI
Prohibitions
§ 360-40. Prohibited discharges and connections.
A. Any drain (including indoor drains and sinks) or conveyance, whether
on the surface or underground, that allows any nonstormwater
discharge, including sewage, process wastewater and wash water, to
enter Girard Borough's separate storm sewer system or waters of the
commonwealth is prohibited.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to Girard Borough's separate storm sewer system which has
not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and
approved by Girard Borough is prohibited.
C. No person shall allow, or cause to allow, discharges into Girard
Borough's separate storm sewer system or into surface waters of the
commonwealth which are not composed entirely of stormwater, except
as provided in Subsection D below and discharges allowed under a
state or federal permit.
D. The following discharges are authorized unless they are determined to
be significant contributors to pollution to the waters of the
commonwealth:
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources, including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Air-conditioning condensate.
(5) Springs.
(6) Water from crawl space pumps.
(7) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(8) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundations or from footing drains.
(10) Lawn watering.
(11) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(12) Uncontaminated groundwater.
(13)Water from individual residential car washing.
§ 360-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-40
1:277
§ 360-41. Roof drains and sump pumps.
Roof drains and sump pumps shall discharge to infiltration areas, vegetative
BMPs, or pervious areas to the maximum extent practicable.
§ 360-42. Alteration of BMPs.
(14) Routine external building washdown (which does not use
detergents or other compounds).
(15) Diverted stream flows.
E. In the event that Girard Borough or DEP determines that any of the
discharges identified in Subsection D significantly contribute to
pollution of waters of this commonwealth, Girard Borough or DEP will
notify the responsible person(s) to cease the discharge.
F. Upon notice provided by Girard Borough or PADEP under Subsection E,
the discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by Girard
Borough or PADEP, to cease the discharge.
G. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
commonwealth law.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape, or alter any existing
stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, or structures, unless it is part of an
approved maintenance program, without the written approval of Girard
Borough.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping, or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP, facilities, areas, structures, or within a drainage
easement which would limit or alter the functioning of the BMP without
the written approval of Girard Borough.
§ 360-40 GIRARD CODE § 360-42
1:278
ARTICLE XII
Fees and Expenses
§ 360-43. Municipal review fee.
The fee required by this chapter is the municipal review fee. The municipal
review fee shall be established by Girard Borough to defray review costs
incurred by Girard Borough. The applicant shall pay all fees. Girard
Borough may, from time to time, establish the appropriate municipal review
fee schedule by municipal resolution.
§ 360-44. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall, at a minimum, cover:
A. Administrative and clerical costs.
B. Review of the SWM site plan and report by Girard Borough.
C. Preconstruction meetings.
D. Inspection of stormwater management facilities/BMPs and drainage
improvements during construction.
E. Final inspection upon completion of the stormwater management
facilities/BMPs and drainage improvements presented in the SWM site
plan.
F. Any additional work required to enforce any permit provisions
regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure proper
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
§ 360-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-44
1:279

ARTICLE XIII
Administration
§ 360-45. Recording of plans and related agreements.
A. The owner of any land upon which permanent stormwater BMPs will be
placed, constructed, or implemented, as described in the SWM site
plan, shall record the following documents in the office of the Recorder
of Deeds of Erie County within 30 days of approval of the SWM site plan
by Girard Borough:
(1) Operations and maintenance agreement (Appendix A83), operations
and maintenance plan, and associated drawings.
(2) Easements under § 360-28.
(3) Riparian buffers.84
B. Girard Borough may suspend or revoke any approvals granted for the
project site upon discovery of the failure of the owner to comply with
this section.
83.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough offices.
84.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 360-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-45
1:281
Chapter 366
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 270. Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400.
§ 360-45 GIRARD CODE § 360-45
1:282
ARTICLE I
Riding Bicycles, Motorcycles and Horses on Sidewalks
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 456 (Ch. IV of the 1974 Code of
Ordinances)]
§ 366-1. Definitions.
The following words, for the purposes of this article, shall have the
meanings hereby respectively ascribed thereto:
BICYCLE — Every device propelled by human power upon which any person
may ride, having two tandem wheels, either of which is 20 inches or more
in diameter, but shall not include any such device which shall have training
wheels attached and/or shall be intended for use by children under 10 years
of age.
MOTORCYCLE — Every motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of riders
and designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the
ground; bicycles with motor attached; and scooters.
§ 366-2. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or operate any bicycle, motorcycle
or horse upon any sidewalk in the Borough of Girard.
§ 366-3. Violations and penalties.85
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
85.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 366-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-3
1:283

ARTICLE II
Sidewalk Construction and Repair
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 464 (Ch. XXII, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 366-4. Duty of property owners.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property in the Borough of Girard,
upon notice from Borough Council, to construct, reconstruct or repair
sidewalks in front of or adjoining such property, in compliance with all
applicable requirements of this article and the notice.
§ 366-5. Construction specifications. [Amended 6-19-1989 by Ord.
No. 580]
All sidewalks hereafter constructed, reconstructed or repaired shall be
constructed, reconstructed or repaired of concrete only, with a proper
foundation, with provision at corner sidewalks for handicap approaches and
laid in accordance with the latest standard formula and with specifications
established by the Borough Engineer, provided that the width, grade,
handicap approaches and line of the sidewalks in the Borough shall be as
required from time to time by the Borough Engineer, and provided further
that any sidewalk that was lawfully constructed, prior to the enactment
of this article, of material other than concrete may be repaired of the
same material, but where the condition of any such sidewalk shall be, in
the judgment of the Borough Engineer, such that reconstruction thereof
shall be necessary, and repair shall not be feasible, such sidewalks shall be
reconstructed of concrete as hereinabove specified.
§ 366-6. Failure to comply; work performed by Borough; costs.
In case the owner of any property in the Borough shall fail, neglect or refuse
to construct, reconstruct and/or repair any sidewalk within the time limit
set in the notice from the Borough Council so to do, the Council may, after
notice, cause the said construction, reconstruction or repair, as the case
may be, to be done at the cost of such owner and shall then collect the cost
of such work and 10% additional, together with all charges and expenses,
from such owner and may file a municipal claim therefor or collect the same
by action in assumpsit.
§ 366-7. Violations and penalties.
Any sidewalk or portion thereof constructed, reconstructed or repaired
in violation of this article or of any notice given by the Borough Council
pursuant thereto, or in any respect not in strict conformity with all
applicable provisions of this article and of any notice given by the Borough
Council pursuant thereto, shall, within 10 days of notice by the Borough
Council to the owner of the property abutting thereon, be removed and
reconstructed by such owner, or all necessary steps other than removal
and reconstruction, as directed by Council, shall be taken by such owner
§ 366-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-7
1:285
to rectify such violation or nonconformity, in default of which the Borough
Council may cause such work of reconstruction or rectification to be done
and shall collect the cost thereof, and 10% additional, together with all
charges and expenses, from such owner and may file a municipal claim
therefor or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
§ 366-7 GIRARD CODE § 366-7
1:286
ARTICLE III
Openings and Excavations
[Adopted 7-15-1974 by Ord. No. 465 (Ch. XXII, Part 3, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 366-8. Definitions; word usage.
§ 366-9. Permit required; fee.86
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any excavation or opening in
the surface of any street or sidewalk in the Borough of Girard without first
having obtained a permit therefor from the Borough Secretary and paying
a permit fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough Council,
which shall be for the use of the Borough.
§ 366-10. Application for permit.
No permit shall be issued hereunder until the applicant therefor shall
have filed with the Borough Secretary information as to the purpose of
the opening, the location and approximate area thereof, and the length of
time such street or sidewalk is proposed to be and remain open under the
authority of such permit. Such permit shall state such purpose, location,
approximate area and proposed length of time of opening, and it shall be a
violation of this article to make any opening or to allow the same to remain
open in violation of any of such stated terms and conditions.
§ 366-11. Restoration requirements.
The holder of every permit issued under this article shall be required, at
his own expense, to refill such opening under the direction of the Borough
Council, or any person appointed thereby for the purpose, and to restore the
surface of the street or sidewalk to the same condition in which it was prior
to such opening. In any case where such refilling and/or resurfacing shall
not have been done or shall not have been done properly by such permit
holder on or before the date of expiration of such permit, the Borough
A. The following words, as used in this article, shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed thereto:
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
STREET — Any public street, alley or highway in the Borough of Girard,
except for streets which are portions of or continuations of state
highways.
B. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
86.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 366-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-11
1:287
Council may cause such work of refilling and/or resurfacing to be done by
Borough employes, or by persons hired by the Council for the purpose, and
thereupon shall collect the cost of such work, with an additional amount
of 10%, from such permit holder in default, provided that the Borough
Council reserves the right to refuse to grant any subsequent permit to any
person who shall have, at any time hereafter, failed to properly refill and/or
resurface any street or sidewalk for which a permit shall have been issued
under this article, and provided further that the Borough Council, at its
discretion, shall have authority to require from any public utility or other
person with need to open the streets and sidewalks of the Borough a bond,
in such amount as prescribed by the Council, to cover possible expenses
that might be incurred by the Borough under this section.
§ 366-12. Violations and penalties.87
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
87.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 366-11 GIRARD CODE § 366-12
1:288
ARTICLE IV
Removal of Snow, Ice, Hail and Sleet
[Adopted 10-18-1999 by Ord. No. 668]
§ 366-13. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person, association, firm, partnership,
corporation or any other entity owning, possessing or occupying any
property along any dedicated or undedicated public street or alleyway
within the Borough of Girard to:
§ 366-14. Violations and penalties.88
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 366-15. Violations deemed nuisances; removal costs.
Any matters referred to herein as being unlawful shall be declared to
be nuisances and removable as such. If the cost of such removal is not
promptly paid, a municipal lien shall be filed therefor or such cost otherwise
collected as authorized by law.
A. Deposit snow, ice, hail or sleet on the traveled cartway of any dedicated
or undedicated public street or alleyway within the Borough of Girard.
B. Fail to remove snow, ice, hail or sleet which may obstruct or impede any
fire hydrant, obscure visibility of any fire hydrant or obstruct or impede
access to any fire hydrant. Any responsible person physically unable to
remove snow, ice, hail or sleet which may obstruct or impede any fire
hydrant must notify the Borough office to make arrangements to have
the fire hydrant cleared.
88.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 366-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 366-15
1:289
Chapter 370
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 205.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 259.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 283.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 320.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 366-15 GIRARD CODE § 366-15
1:290
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 370-1. Title; purpose.
This chapter shall be known as the "Girard Borough Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance." Its purpose is to provide for the harmonious
development of the Borough and the creation of conditions favorable to the
health, safety, morals and general welfare of its citizens.
§ 370-2. Definitions. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior to
the start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
CARTWAY — That portion of a street which is an improved surface intended
for vehicular traffic. The cartway shall not include any areas intended for
the conveyance of stormwater.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water
or a combination of land and water within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts
or parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the
number of occupants or tenure; or
(a)
(1)
A.
§ 370-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2
1:291
LOCAL STREET — One intended to serve and provide access to the
properties abutting thereon and not connecting with other streets in such a
manner as to encourage through traffic.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land, established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law, and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22 (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.),
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act."89
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially
or cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of,
streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building
groups or other features.
(b)
(2) A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
B.
§ 370-2 GIRARD CODE § 370-2
1:292
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district, created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PRIMARY STREET — One with considerable continuity, connecting district
centers which serve or will eventually serve large volumes of traffic.
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93 (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.), known as the
"Sunshine Act."90
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
SECONDARY STREET — One which, in addition to having the
characteristics set forth in the definition of "street," connects local streets
to each other and provides a route to community facilities and primary or
major thoroughfares, serving primarily neighborhood traffic.91
STREET — Includes streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, highways,
freeways, parkways, lanes, alleys, viaducts or any other ways used or
intended to be used by vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or
private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and other
public areas;
A.
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly
owned or operated facilities; and
B.
C. Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
89.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
90.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
91.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 370-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-2
1:293
of land, including changes in existing lot lines, for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIALLY COMPLETED — Where, in the judgment of the Borough
Engineer, at least 90% (based on the cost of the required improvements for
which financial security was posted pursuant to the requirements of this
chapter) of those improvements required as a condition for final approval
have been completed in accordance with the approved plan, so that the
project will be able to be used, occupied or operated for its intended use.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within the Borough.
§ 370-2 GIRARD CODE § 370-2
1:294
ARTICLE II
General Requirements
§ 370-3. Conformity required.
No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land in Girard Borough shall
be effected, and no street, sanitary or storm sewer, water main or other
facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out, constructed, opened, or
dedicated for public use and travel for the common use of occupants of
buildings abutting thereon, except in strict accordance with the provisions
of this chapter.
§ 370-4. Plan approval required. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No.
615]
No lot in a subdivision may be sold, no permit to erect, alter or repair
any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued, and no building
may be erected in a subdivision, unless and until a subdivision plan has
been approved and, where required, recorded and until the improvements
required by the Borough Council in connection therewith have either been
constructed or guaranteed as herein provided.
§ 370-5. Requirements for proposed subdivisions.
§ 370-6. Subdivisions requiring street improvements.
Plans for subdivisions wherein lots abut existing streets of insufficient
width or streets proposed to be laid out through unimproved land shall
be subject to approval or disapproval by the Planning Commission and
A. Whoever shall propose to subdivide an unplotted or unrecorded lot
which abuts a street of sufficient width into two or more lots shall
present to the Planning Commission of the Borough of Girard a certified
survey prepared by a registered engineer or surveyor, showing the
proposed division of the lot. Such survey shall conform only to the
provisions of Article IV of this chapter and be subject to the final
approval or rejection of the Planning Commission, with right of appeal
to Borough Council.
B. Whoever shall propose to resubdivide an entire recorded subdivision or
more than one block thereof, for the purpose of recording, in which no
change of location of any street is made shall present to the Planning
Commission and to the Borough Council a plan prepared by a
registered engineer or surveyor, with necessary certificates required
for approval and recording. Such plan shall be subject to approval or
rejection and recorded as provided in Article V hereof.
C. The subdivision of a lot or several lots located in one block in a recorded
subdivision into parcels of a different size than shown on the recorded
plot shall require conformity with this chapter and the approval of the
Planning Commission, with right of appeal to Borough Council.
§ 370-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-6
1:295
Borough Council in compliance with this chapter. In the event such a plan is
rejected, the reasons therefor shall be set forth in writing and given to the
applicant.
§ 370-6 GIRARD CODE § 370-6
1:296
ARTICLE III
Design Standards
§ 370-7. Suitability of land.
Land subject to flooding and land deemed by the Planning Commission to
be unsuitable for human habitation because of health or sanitary problems
shall not be plotted for residential occupancy.
§ 370-8. Street systems.
§ 370-9. Street alignment; grade; sight distances.
A. The plan of streets shall be logically related to the topography of the
land, especially with relation to grades and storm runoff.
B. Proposed streets shall provide for appropriate continuation or
completion of any existing streets.
C. Center lines of streets opening into opposite sides of an intersecting
third street should either meet at a point or be separated from each
other by not less than 200 feet.
D. Streets shall intersect at as nearly right angles with each other as is
practicable. Intersecting street lines shall be rounded by a curve
tangent to both street lines having a radius of not less than 10 feet, and
street lines having an intersecting angle greater than 90° shall be
rounded by a curve having a proportionately greater radius. All lot
dimensions shall be to the intersection of said tangent line.
E. Suitable access and street openings for the subdivision of adjacent
unsubdivided land shall be provided.
F. For dead-end streets, 500 feet shall be a desirable maximum length
unless topography or other conditions justify a greater distance. Such
streets shall be provided with a turnaround having a minimum radius of
50 feet for the right-of-way line and a minimum radius to the edge of the
outside berm of 40 feet.
G. Multiple intersections involving the junction of streets from more than
four directions shall be avoided.
A. Horizontal and vertical alignment shall provide not less than the
minimum safe sight distance for design speeds on similar highways
within the Borough and so noted on the preliminary plan.
B. Design criteria for streets (excluding intersections):
§ 370-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-9
1:297
§ 370-10. Street width.
§ 370-11. Street and subdivision names.
Type of Street
Item Primary Secondary Local
Maximum grade 6% 6% 6%
Minimum grade 0.5% 0.5% 0.5%
Minimum center-line radius 500 feet 300 feet 150 feet
Minimum sight distance 400 feet 250 feet 150 feet
Minimum tangent between
curves
300 feet 150 feet 100 feet
C. Maximum grades greater than 6% may be permitted in exceptional
cases.
D. Vertical parabolic curves shall be used in changes of grade exceeding
an algebraic difference of 0.2% and shall be designed for maximum
visibility.
E. Sight distances shall be measured along the center line of the street
between points located at a height of five feet above the street.
F. Intersections. No street shall have a grade in excess of 3% within 50
feet of an intersection.
A. Local streets shall have a minimum width of 50 feet.
B. Secondary streets shall have a minimum width of 60 feet.
C. Primary streets shall have a minimum width of 80 feet to 100 feet.
D. The minimum width of cartway on all streets shall be 32 feet.
E. The above minimums shall govern, unless a street of greater width is
extended or additional width is deemed desirable.
F. Where a subdivision joins an existing street of improper width or
alignment, the Planning Commission may require the offer of dedication
of land sufficient to widen the street or correct the alignment.
G. The plotting of half streets at the edges of the new subdivision shall be
prohibited, except by concurrent dedication of the remaining half or the
location is a requirement of the official plans.
A. Street and subdivision names shall be shown on the preliminary plan.
B. Street names shall not duplicate or be similar to names of the existing
or planned streets of record within the metropolitan area or a radius of
five miles.
§ 370-9 GIRARD CODE § 370-11
1:298
§ 370-12. Landmarks. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
§ 370-13. Lot size and yard requirements.
Lot sizes and yard requirements must conform to Chapter 425, Zoning, of
the Code of the Borough of Girard as it is in effect at the time the final plan
is submitted to the Borough Council.
§ 370-14. Access to streets.
Each lot shall abut for its full frontage on a street.
§ 370-15. Sidelines of lots.
Sidelines of lots shall normally be at right angles to street lines on straight
streets or radial to street lines on curved streets.
§ 370-16. Subdivision in business, commercial or industrial
districts.
Districts shall have lot sizes commensurate with their use, and in every case
adequate provision shall be made for off-street parking.
C. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the Planning
Commission and Borough Council.
A. Landmarks shall be of stone or concrete with a brass, copper or iron
center and consisting of two parts, viz., the lower marker not less than
six inches by six inches by six inches and an upper marker not less than
six inches by six inches by 24 inches.
B. They shall be set perpendicular in the ground, with the lower marker
carefully set and checked with its top not less than 30 inches below the
surface of the ground and upper marker carefully set with its upper end
flush or slightly below the surface.
C. They shall be set at every intersection of property boundary lines of a
plot, at intersections of street and boundary lines and any other point
necessary for the laying off on the ground of the lines shown on the plot
plan and wherever required by the Planning Commission and their
proposed location shown on the preliminary plan.
§ 370-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-16
1:299

ARTICLE IV
Plan Requirements
§ 370-17. Preparation of plans.
All preliminary and final plans shall be prepared by a registered engineer or
surveyor and certified by him under seal to be true and correct.
§ 370-18. Contents of preliminary plan. [Amended 10-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 615]
Preliminary plans shall show:
A. The boundary lines and acreage of the land to be subdivided based on
an actual balanced survey of second order (1:10,000) accuracy tied into
existing Borough monumentation and bearings and showing all street
lines, zone boundaries and property lines abutting or within 300 feet of
the premises, together with the names and addresses of the owners
thereof, except lots in a subdivision of record, which shall be shown by
lot number and name and map book and page recording of said
subdivision.
B. The topography of the ground, showing buildings, important trees or
wooded areas, streets, water, gas, sewer and drainage facilities in and
within 300 feet of the boundaries, with their elevation based on USGS
sea-level datum or approved local datum, together with the contour of
the land within 100 feet outside of the plot and continued to any street
within 300 feet or more to which the development may possibly
connect. Contour of the land shall be shown by lines having vertical
intervals of not more than two feet for land with an average natural
slope of 4% or less and at vertical intervals of five feet for more steeply
sloping land.
C. The preliminary plan shall show:
(1) The streets, their location, width, grade, sight distance and
probable elevation of final center-line grades, sanitary sewer and
drainage facilities with their probable grade, elevation and final
outlet, waterlines, valves and hydrants.
(2) Easements, their width and purpose.
(3) Lots, their number, design area, scale dimensions and restriction
lines. Corner lots should have sufficient width to permit side yard
restrictions as a continuation of abutting front yards at setback.
(4) Location of proposed control monuments.
(5) Proposed subdivision and street names.
(6) Location and elevation of vertical control bench marks. A minimum
of one temporary bench mark shall be established for every 10
acres or fraction thereof of the property to be developed.
§ 370-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-18
1:301
§ 370-19. Contents of final plan. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No.
615]
D. Title should include names of proposed subdivision, owner and
developer, location, the name and registration of the engineer or
surveyor by whom prepared and the scale of the drawing.
E. Sufficient additional notes to indicate the meridian and datum used and
the total length of streets, sewers, storm sewers, waterlines and other
utilities that may be required.
F. Estimated character and schedule of development and cost of the
required improvements.
G. Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
A. The final plan shall be made in India ink on a permanent reproducible
base, such as a moistureproof tracing cloth, and shall show the property
lines of the subdivision with their course and distance, all existing and
proposed landmarks, streets, alleys, easements, rights-of-way,
crosswalks, building lines, dedications, drainagecourses and buildings
in the land to be subdivided and existing immediately adjacent streets
and property lines, together with the owner's name or lot number,
subdivision name and map book and page or recording. It shall also
show all lot lines and distances along said lines and along the center
lines of all streets, with sufficient included angles and bearings to
determine readily the location and bearing of every street, lot and
boundary line. In all curved streets and lot lines, the radius, central
angle, and length of all curves shall be shown.
B. The final plan shall have endorsed thereon an affidavit executed by the
owner that he owns the land and adopts the plan as his plan of
subdivision, setting forth dedication to public use of land for streets,
parks or other purposes and a release of the Borough from any and all
liability for damages arising from appropriation by it of any land so
dedicated, all of which shall be acknowledged by the owner for the
purpose of recording. The affidavit shall also include a reference to the
book and page where the deed by which the subdivider acquired the
land is recorded or, if acquired otherwise than by deed, the method of
acquisition and place of record or registration. It shall also have
endorsed thereon forms of approval to be signed by the Planning
§ 370-18 GIRARD CODE § 370-19
1:302
§ 370-20. Construction plans.
Commission, the proper officials of the Borough and the Recorder of
Deeds.
C. It shall be accompanied by a separate certificate of a qualified attorney
at law to the effect that the owner has a good and merchantable title to
the premises involved, free of all encumbrances.
D. Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than private
wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within the
subdivision or development, applicants shall present evidence to the
Borough Council that the subdivision is to be supplied by a certified
public utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or
an application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a
commitment or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is
appropriate, shall be acceptable.
A. When the construction of any improvement is required as a condition to
the approval of the plan of a proposed subdivision, construction plans
and profiles shall be prepared showing the existing and final paving
grade along the center line of all proposed streets, crosswalks, alleys,
and easements, if required, together with their cross sections and
abutting lots and restriction lines and locations, grades and elevations
of all sewer, drainage, water and utility lines, with their connections,
valves, inlets and facilities, together with cost estimates and sufficient
details to permit a decision to be made as to their acceptability.
B. These plans shall be revised, if required, after construction is
completed to show the actual location and elevation of the facilities as
constructed.
§ 370-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-20
1:303

ARTICLE V
Procedural Requirements
§ 370-21. Plans for sewage disposal and water supply.
The subdivider shall meet with the Planning Commission and Borough
Council, or their designated representative, regarding methods of sewage
disposal and water supply prior to formal application and shall prepare
suitable sketches and plans sufficient to give a general understanding of his
proposal.
§ 370-22. Submission of preliminary plan.
A preliminary plan in quadruplicate shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for approval, accompanied by a list containing the names
and addresses of the owners of all parcels of land one acre or larger in
area adjacent to the subdivision, together with any proposed subdivision
regulations restricting the use of the lots therein.
§ 370-23. Review of preliminary plan.
§ 370-24. Action by Council.
Within 30 days after receiving the report of the Planning Commission,
the Borough Council shall act thereon, stating, in writing, its approval,
conditional or otherwise, or disapproval. Notification to the subdivider of
the action taken shall be in writing and shall include the specific changes
required, if any, the character and extent of the required improvements
and the amount of construction or improvements, and the amount of the
performance bond or other assurance which it will require.
A. The Planning Commission shall, at its next regular or special meeting,
with the owner or his agent, review the preliminary plan and, after due
investigation of all factors involved, including conformity with this
chapter, Chapter 425, Zoning, of this Code, and its effect on the
abutting properties, suggest such changes or revisions, if any, as may
be in the public interest.
B. Within 10 days of the submission of an acceptable preliminary plan, the
Planning Commission shall notify the abutting landowners, by mail or
otherwise, of the time and place of a meeting to be held, at which said
application will be considered.
C. Within 10 days (after such further revisions or amendment to the
preliminary plans, if required), the Planning Commission shall act and
report thereon to the Borough Council, with a copy to the subdivider,
stating, in writing, its approval, conditional or otherwise, or disapproval
and shall include any further specific changes, the character and extent
of improvements which should be required, and a complete report of
the meeting with the abutting property owners.
§ 370-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-25
1:305
§ 370-25. Approval of preliminary plan.
The approval by the Planning Commission and the Borough Council of a
preliminary plan shall not be construed as an indication of the approval of
the final plan similar to said preliminary plan, nor to the approval of any
feature thereof. The approval of a preliminary plan means only that the
subdivision layout as represented in said plan is tentatively approved as
thus far worked out, for it is obvious that, as further progress is made in
the development of the layout of a subdivision beyond that approved on the
preliminary plan, changes may become necessary in connection with some
feature which has been approved on the preliminary plan, and such changes
would have of necessity been ordered even though said feature or features
had been approved on the preliminary plan.
§ 370-26. Review of final plan.
The original tracing, one process tracing and four prints of the final plan,
together with four prints of the plan profile, shall be presented to the
Planning Commission for its review. The Commission shall, within 20 days,
inform the owner or his agent of any revision or amendment it deems
necessary to protect the public interest, if any be required, and when such
plans are acceptable to signify its approval by signing the original tracing
and two prints to the Borough Council with its recommendations.
§ 370-27. Completion of improvements; financial guarantees.
[Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
A. No plat shall be finally approved unless the streets shown on such plat
have been improved to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, or improved as may be otherwise required by this chapter,
and any walkways, curbs, gutters, streetlights, fire hydrants, shade
trees, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm sewers and other
improvements as may be required by this chapter have been installed in
accordance with this chapter. In lieu of the completion of any
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat,
including improvements or fees otherwise required by this chapter, the
developer may deposit with the Borough financial security in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of such improvements or common
amenities, including basins and other related drainage facilities,
recreational facilities, open space improvements, or buffer or screen
plantings which may be required.
B. When requested by the developer, in order to facilitate financing, the
Borough Council shall furnish the developer with a signed copy of a
resolution indicating approval of the final plat contingent upon the
developer obtaining a satisfactory financial security. The final plat or
record plan shall not be signed nor recorded until the financial
improvements agreement is executed. The resolution or letter of
contingent approval shall expire and be deemed to be revoked if the
financial security agreement is not executed within 90 days, unless a
§ 370-25 GIRARD CODE § 370-27
1:306
written extension is granted by the Borough Council; such extension
shall not be unreasonably withheld and shall be placed in writing at the
request of the developer.
C. Without limitation as to other types of financial security which the
Borough may approve, which approval shall not be unreasonably
withheld, federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution
irrevocable letters of credit and restrictive or escrow accounts in such
lending institutions shall be deemed acceptable financial security for
the purposes of this section.
D. Such financial security shall be posted with a bonding company or
federal- or commonwealth-chartered lending institution chosen by the
party posting the financial security, provided said bonding company or
lending institution is authorized to conduct such business within the
commonwealth.
E. Such bond or other security shall provide for and secure to the public
the completion of any improvements which may be required on or
before the date fixed in the formal action of approval or accompanying
agreement for completion of the improvements.
F. The amount of financial security to be posted for the completion of the
required improvements shall be equal to 110% of the cost of completion
estimated as of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by
the developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
financial security by comparing the actual cost of the improvements
which have been completed and the estimated cost for the completion
of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the 90th day after
either the original date scheduled for completion or a rescheduled date
of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the Borough may require
the developer to post additional security in order to assure that the
financial security equals said 110%. Any additional security shall be
posted by the developer in accordance with this subsection.
G. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the applicant or developer and prepared by a professional
engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and certified by such
engineer to be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The
Borough, upon the recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may
refuse to accept such estimate for good cause shown. If the applicant or
developer and the Borough are unable to agree upon an estimate, then
the estimate shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer. The
estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair and
reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a third
engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer shall be
paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
§ 370-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-27
1:307
H. If the party posting the financial security requires more than one year
from the date of posting of the financial security to complete the
required improvements, the amount of financial security may be
increased by an additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the
first anniversary date from posting of financial security or to an amount
not exceeding 110% of the cost of completing the required
improvements as reestablished on or about the expiration of the
preceding one-year period by using the above bidding procedure.
I. In the case where development is projected over a period of years, the
Borough Council may authorize submission of final plats by sections or
stages of development, subject to such requirements or guarantees as
to improvements in future sections or stages of development as it finds
essential for the protection of any finally approved section of the
development.
J. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
party posting the financial security may request the Borough Council to
release or authorize the release, from time to time, of such portions of
the financial security necessary for payment to the contractor or
contractors performing the work. Any such requests shall be in writing,
addressed to the Borough Council, and the Borough Council shall have
45 days from receipt of such request within which to allow the Borough
Engineer to certify, in writing, to the Borough Council that such portion
of the work upon the improvements has been completed in accordance
with the approved plat. Upon such certification, the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed, or, if the Borough Council
fails to act within said forty-five-day period, the Borough Council shall
be deemed to have approved the release of funds as requested. The
Borough Council may, prior to final release at the time of completion
and certification by its Engineer, require retention of 10% of the
estimated cost of the aforesaid improvements.
K. Where the Borough Council accepts dedication of all or some of the
required improvements following completion, the Borough Council may
require the posting of financial security to secure structural integrity of
said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements in
accordance with the design and specifications as depicted on the final
plat for a term not to exceed 18 months from the date of acceptance of
dedication. Said financial security shall be of the same type as
otherwise required in this section with regard to installation of such
improvements, and the amount of the financial security shall not exceed
15% of the actual cost of installation of said improvements.
L. If water mains or sanitary sewer lines, or both, along with apparatus or
facilities related thereto, are to be installed under the jurisdiction and
pursuant to the rules and regulations of a public utility or municipal
authority separate and distinct from the Borough, financial security to
assure proper completion and maintenance thereof shall be posted in
§ 370-27 GIRARD CODE § 370-27
1:308
§ 370-28. Release from improvement bond. [Added 10-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 615]
accordance with the regulations of the controlling public utility or
municipal authority and shall not be included within the financial
security as otherwise required by this section.
M. If financial security has been provided in lieu of the completion of
improvements required as a condition for the final approval of a plat as
set forth in this section, the Borough shall not condition the issuance of
building, grading or other permits relating to the erection or placement
of improvements, including buildings, upon the lots or land as depicted
upon the final plat upon actual completion of the improvements
depicted upon the approved final plat. Moreover, if said financial
security has been provided, occupancy permits for any building or
buildings to be erected shall not be withheld following the improvement
of the streets providing access to and from existing public roads to such
building or buildings to a mud-free or otherwise permanently passable
condition, as well as the completion of all other improvements as
depicted upon the approved plat, either upon the lot or lots or beyond
the lot or lots in question if such improvements are necessary for the
reasonable use of or occupancy of the building or buildings.
A. When the developer has completed all of the necessary and appropriate
improvements, the developer shall notify the Borough Council, in
writing, by certified or registered mail, of the completion of the
aforesaid improvements and shall send a copy thereof to the Borough
Engineer. The Borough Council shall, within 10 days after receipt of
such notice, direct and authorize the Borough Engineer to inspect all of
the aforesaid improvements. The Borough Engineer shall, thereupon,
file a report in writing with the Borough Council and shall promptly
mail a copy of the same to the developer by certified or registered mail.
The report shall be made and mailed within 30 days after receipt by the
Borough Engineer of the aforesaid authorization from the Borough
Council; said report shall be detailed and shall indicate approval or
rejection of said improvements, either in whole or in part, and if said
improvements, or any portion thereof, shall not be approved or shall be
rejected by the Borough Engineer, said report shall contain a statement
of reasons for such nonapproval or rejection.
B. The Borough Council shall notify the developer, within 15 days of
receipt of the Engineer's report, in writing, by certified or registered
mail, of the action of said Borough Council with relation thereto.
C. If the Borough Council or the Borough Engineer fails to comply with the
time limitation provisions contained herein, all improvements will be
deemed to have been approved, and the developer shall be released
from all liability pursuant to its performance guaranty bond or other
security agreement.
§ 370-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-28
1:309
D. If any portion of the said improvements shall not be approved or shall
be rejected by the Borough Council, the developer shall proceed to
complete the same, and, upon completion, the same procedure of
notification, as outlined herein, shall be followed.
E. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed in limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
F. Where herein reference is made to the Borough Engineer, he shall be as
a consultant thereto.
G. The applicant or developer shall reimburse the Borough for the
reasonable and necessary expense incurred for the inspection of
improvements according to a schedule of fees adopted by resolution of
the Borough Council and as from time to time amended. Such expense
shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and customary
fees charged by the Borough Engineer or consultant for work
performed for similar services in the community, but in no event shall
the fees exceed the rate or cost charged by the engineer or consultant
to the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed on
applicants.
(1) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such expense
in connection with the inspection of improvements, the applicant
shall, within 10 working days of the date of billing, notify the
Borough that such expenses are disputed as unreasonable or
unnecessary, in which case the Borough shall not delay or
disapprove a subdivision or land development application or any
approval or permit related to development due to the applicant's
request over disputed engineer expenses.
(2) If, within 20 days from the date of billing, the Borough and the
applicant cannot agree on the amount of expenses which are
reasonable and necessary, then the applicant and the Borough shall
jointly, by mutual agreement, appoint another professional
engineer licensed as such in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to
review the said expenses and make a determination as to the
amount thereof which is reasonable and necessary.
(3) The professional engineer so appointed shall hear such evidence
and review such documentation as the professional engineer in his
or her sole opinion deems necessary and render a decision within
50 days of the billing date. The applicant shall be required to pay
the entire amount determined in the decision immediately.
(4) In the event that the Borough and applicant cannot agree upon the
professional engineer to be appointed within 20 days of the billing
date, then, upon application of either party, the President Judge of
the Court of Common Pleas of the judicial district in which the
Borough is located (or if, at the time, there be no President Judge,
§ 370-28 GIRARD CODE § 370-28
1:310
§ 370-29. Remedies to effect completion of improvements. [Added
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
In the event that any improvements which may be required have not been
installed as provided in this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plat, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If the proceeds of such bond or other security are insufficient
to pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable action
to recover the moneys necessary to complete the remainder of the
improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the security or
from any legal or equitable action brought against the developer, or both,
shall be used solely for the installation of the improvements covered by such
security, and not for any other Borough purpose.
§ 370-30. Approval of final plan.
Within 30 days thereafter, the Borough Council shall approve or disapprove
the final plan, stating in writing the reason for disapproval, if such be the
case. Approval shall be indicated by the proper officials signing the original
and process tracing in the spaces provided and returning the original
tracing to the owner.
§ 370-31. Recording of plats and deeds. [Amended 10-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 615]
then the senior active Judge then sitting) shall appoint such
engineer, who, in that case, shall be neither the Borough Engineer
nor any professional engineer who has been retained by, or
performed services for, the Borough or the applicant within the
preceding five years.
(5) The fee of the appointed professional engineer for determining the
reasonable and necessary expenses shall be paid by the applicant if
the amount of payment required in the decision is equal to or
greater than the original bill. If the amount of payment required in
the decision is less than the original bill by $1,000 or more, the
Borough shall pay the fee of the professional engineer, but
otherwise, the Borough and the applicant shall each pay 1/2 of the
fee of the appointed professional engineer.
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of
such final approval, record such plat in the office of the Recorder of
Deeds of the county in which the Borough is located. The Recorder of
Deeds shall not accept any plat for recording unless such plat officially
notes the approval of the Borough Council and review by the county
planning agency.
§ 370-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-31
1:311
§ 370-32. Dedication of improvements.
Streets, parks and other improvements shown on a subdivision plan to
be recorded may be offered for dedication to the Borough by formal
notification thereof on the plan. Failure to note that such improvements
have not been offered for dedication shall constitute an offer of dedication.
Every street, park or other improvement shown on a subdivision plan that is
recorded shall be deemed to be a private street, park or improvement until
same has been accepted by the Borough Council or until it is condemned for
public use.
§ 370-33. Fees. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
A. The subdivider's written application for approval of a subdivision shall
be accompanied by a filing fee in such amount and classification of fees
as may from time to time be established by resolution of the Borough
Council. Current fees shall be on file with the Borough Secretary and
shall be furnished upon request.
B. Review fees.
(1) Review fees shall include the reasonable and necessary charges by
the Borough's professional consultants or Engineer for review and
report to the Borough and shall be set by resolution. Such review
fees shall be reasonable and in accordance with the ordinary and
customary charges by the Borough Engineer or consultant for
similar service in the community, but in no event shall the fees
exceed the rate or cost charged by the Engineer or consultant to
the Borough when fees are not reimbursed or otherwise imposed
on applicants.
(2) In the event the applicant disputes the amount of any such review
fees, the applicant shall, within 10 days of the billing date, notify
the Borough that such fees are disputed, in which case the Borough
shall not delay or disapprove a subdivision or land development
application due to the applicant's request over disputed fees.
(3) In the event that the Borough and the applicant cannot agree on
the amount of review fees which are reasonable and necessary,
then the fees shall be recalculated and recertified by another
professional engineer licensed as such in this commonwealth and
chosen mutually by the Borough and the applicant or developer.
The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be presumed fair
and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the event that a
third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said engineer
shall be paid equally by the Borough and the applicant or
developer.
§ 370-31 GIRARD CODE § 370-34
1:312
§ 370-34. Modifications. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
A. The Borough Council may grant a modification of the requirements of
one or more provisions of this chapter if the literal enforcement will
exact undue hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the
land in question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to
the public interest and that the purpose and intent of this chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of this chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. The request for modification shall be referred to the Planning
Commission for advisory comments.
D. The Borough Council shall keep a written record of all action on all
requests for modifications.
§ 370-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-34
1:313

ARTICLE VI
Required Improvements
§ 370-35. Water supply.
A. The subdivider shall construct a system of water mains and connect
with such public water supply system where a public water supply is
available at the plat boundary or within a reasonable distance thereto
(1,000 feet of subdivision). Waterlines shall be so located and of such
size as approved by the Borough Engineer.
B. If a public water supply system is not available under the conditions
stated above, the subdivider may either provide individual wells or a
public water system for a subdivision of less than 25 lots, but must
provide a public water system for a subdivision of 25 lots or more,
which public water system shall be approved by the State Department
of Environmental Protection.
C. Where individual wells provide a water supply in a subdivision of more
than 10 lots, at least one test well shall be drilled in the proposed area
in accordance with the requirements of the State Health Officer. Test
wells shall ordinarily be drilled to a sufficient depth which will produce
safe potable water in sufficient quantity for the use intended and shall
be approved by the State Health Officer.
D. All phases of construction, including minimum size six-inch line,
excavation, trench, type pipe, backfill, hydrants, tees and valves shall
be in accordance with approved construction drawings, State
Department of Environmental Protection standards and inspected by
the Borough Engineer, his Borough representative and/or the authority
or agency representative of the utility company during the entire
construction period.
E. Upon completion of the water supply system, and before any person
uses said water supply, the subdivider shall submit two copies of asbuilt
plans to the Borough. Said as-built plans shall show by stationing
all valves, house taps, length and size of house connections and location
of fire hydrants and position of mains in the right-of-way.
F. All inspection costs, including, but not limited to, the compensation to
be paid to the Borough Engineer, his authorized representative and/or
the authority or agency representative of the utility company, shall be
borne and paid by the subdivider.
G. Construction methods and materials. All construction work and
materials shall conform to the Girard Borough developer standards as
adopted by the Borough Council and as in effect at the time final plans
are submitted to the Borough Council for approval. Should the plans
reflect work not addressed in the developer standards, methodology
and materials for the work shall require special approval of the Borough
Council.
§ 370-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-36
1:315
§ 370-36. Sanitary sewers. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
§ 370-37. Storm sewers.
A. The subdivider shall construct a sanitary sewer system and connect
with such sewer main and provide lateral connections for each lot
where a public sanitary sewer main is available at the plat boundary or
within a reasonable distance thereto (1,000 feet of subdivision). Plans
for such collection/treatment facilities shall be approved by the
Department of Environmental Protection prior to the start of any
construction, and permits for such construction shall be filed with the
Borough. Pipe materials shall also be approved by Borough Council
prior to submission to state or federal agencies.
B. If, in the opinion of the State Health Officer, the Borough Engineer and/
or the Planning Commission, factors exist which would create a public
health and sanitation problem if a certain area is subdivided, the
Borough Council will not approve the subdivision plan of such area until
such factors are corrected by an adequate sanitary sewer system. No
subdivision shall be approved for on-lot disposal unless approval of the
Department of Environmental Protection is provided.
C. All sanitary sewers shall be constructed and installed according to the
standards of the authority or municipal department operating such
sewers. Stormwater and subsurface drainage shall not be permitted to
enter sanitary sewers.
D. All construction work and materials shall conform to the Girard
Borough developer standards as adopted by the Borough Council and
as in effect at the time final plans are submitted to the Borough Council
for approval. Should the plans reflect work not addressed in the
developer standards, methodology and materials for the work shall
require special approval of the Borough Council.
E. In areas where a municipal sewer is planned to be available but not yet
built, laterals shall be extended from the center of the street to the edge
of the right-of-way and trunk lines provided along the center line of the
street to the edge of the subdivision closest to the municipal trunk
location and capped. Until such time as a municipal sewer becomes
available, a project system must be installed. In case of a project
system, a trunk line shall be provided to connect into the municipal
system.
F. Upon completion of sanitary sewer installation, two copies of each of
the plans for such systems as built shall be filed with the Borough; said
as-built plans shall show by stationing all manholes, laterals, length of
laterals and size and location of mains within the right-of-way.
A. A drainage system adequate to serve the needs of the proposed new
streets or the entire subdivision will normally be required in new
subdivisions. When a public storm sewer main is available at the plat
§ 370-36 GIRARD CODE § 370-37
1:316
§ 370-38. Sidewalks.
boundary or within 1,000 feet, the subdivider shall construct a storm
sewer system and connect with such storm sewer main.
B. Bridges or culverts shall be designed to support and carry loads
according to the judgment of the Engineer and be constructed the full
width of the cartway, plus additional length as deemed necessary by the
Engineer to satisfy local drainage patterns. Where bridges or culverts
cross streams which fall within the control of the Department of
Environmental Protection or where structures fall in streets which will
become eligible for state aid, approvals from the proper state agencies
shall be provided by the subdivider.
C. Where open watercourses are planned, adequate safety, erosion
control, drainage (stagnant water), protection of capacity and
appearance measures shall be taken by the subdivider to insure proper
safe, healthful disposal of stormwater.
D. Minimum grade of drainagecourses shall be designed to create a
cleaning effect (velocity of five feet per second), except that a minimum
cleaning effect (velocity of three feet per second) may be permitted by
the Borough Engineer where greater grade cannot be achieved.
E. Location of storm sewers shall be in accordance with existing systems
or in accordance with standards suitable to the Borough Engineer.
F. All construction work and materials shall conform to the Girard
Borough developer standards as adopted by the Borough Council and
as in effect at the time final plans are submitted to the Borough Council
for approval. Should the plans reflect work not addressed in the
developer standards, methodology and materials for the work shall
require special approval of the Borough Council.
G. On completion of the storm sewer systems, and before any person uses
said storm sewers, subdividers shall submit as-built plans to the
Borough. All inspection costs, including, but not limited to,
compensation to be paid to the Borough Engineer or his authorized
representative or any other Borough costs arising out of the inspection,
shall be borne by the subdivider.
A. General.
(1) Sidewalks shall be provided when considered necessary by the
Planning Commission and/or Borough Council for the protection of
the public or wherever it is determined that the potential volume of
pedestrian traffic or safety consideration requires.
(2) Sidewalks shall be provided on all newly established streets or
where streets or a proposed subdivision are extensions of existing
streets having sidewalks on one or both sides.
§ 370-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-38
1:317
§ 370-39. Streets, subgrade, subdrains, pavement and curbs.
All construction work and materials shall conform to the Girard Borough
developer standards as adopted by the Borough Council and as in effect
at the time final plans are submitted to the Borough Council for approval.
Should the plans reflect work not addressed in the developer standards,
methodology and materials for the work shall require special approval of
the Borough Council.
§ 370-40. Construction methods and materials.
All construction work and materials shall conform to the Girard Borough
developer standards as adopted by the Borough Council and as in effect
at the time final plans are submitted to the Borough Council for approval.
Should the plans reflect work not addressed in the developer standards,
methodology and materials for the work shall require special approval of
the Borough Council.
§ 370-41. Utilities; street signs; street trees.
(3) Sidewalks will be normally required on both sides of the street,
except that the Borough Council may authorize sidewalks on one
side only of U-shaped streets, culs-de-sac or where character of use
does not require pedestrian access on both sides of the street.
(4) The minimum width for sidewalks shall be four feet, but the
Borough Council may require a greater width in the vicinity of
shopping centers, schools and recreation facilities, or where
similar intensive urban uses exist.
(5) Sidewalks, where provided, shall be within the rights-of-way and in
residential areas, where conditions permit, one foot from the edge
thereof. Sidewalks should line up with adequate walks in adjoining
subdivisions.
(6) Sidewalks shall be constructed immediately upon occupancy of any
dwelling within the approved subdivision. Upon occupancy of 75%,
by number of lots, of the subdivision, the developer must install all
the remaining sidewalks shown on the approved plans.
B. Construction methods and materials. All construction work and
materials shall conform to the Girard Borough developer standards as
adopted by the Borough Council and as in effect at the time final plans
are submitted to the Borough Council for approval. Should the plans
reflect work not addressed in the developer standards, methodology
and materials for the work shall require special approval of the Borough
Council.
A. Other utilities. Gas, electric and telephone utilities shall be located in a
subdivision in accordance with utility company practice and be
approved by the Borough Engineer or Superintendent.
§ 370-38 GIRARD CODE § 370-41
1:318
B. Street signs. Street name signs shall be installed by the developer at
each street intersection in accordance with standards established by
the Borough Council.
C. Street trees. Should the subdivider plan to provide trees, their
proposed locations, spacing and species must be submitted for
recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the
Borough Council. Trees will not be permitted within the right-of-way
but are to be placed inside the property lines.
§ 370-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-41
1:319

ARTICLE VII
Acceptance of Public Improvements
§ 370-42. Acceptance.
All improvements required or provided for shall, upon completion, become
public improvements and in each instance a part of the Borough system of
improvements.
§ 370-43. Prerequisites to acceptance.
Construction of all improvements in a subdivision shall be subject to the
following regulations:
A. Each improvement shall be constructed according to plans and
specifications approved by the Borough Engineer and shall be subject
to his inspection in the course of the work and his final approval.
B. Upon completion, the subdivider shall furnish such plans, specifications
and profiles to the Borough for its permanent records, corrected to
represent the improvements as actually built, together with date of
completion and name of contractor.
C. Upon final approval by the Borough Engineer, the Borough Council, by
resolution, shall accept such improvement, and ownership thereof shall
vest in the Borough, such acceptance to constitute a dedication to
public use. Thereafter, no additions or connections to the improvement
shall be made by any person without approval of the Borough Council.
§ 370-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-43
1:321

ARTICLE VIII
Enforcement and Penalties
§ 370-44. Preventive remedies. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 615]
§ 370-45. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 615]
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of this chapter. This authority to deny such a
permit or approval shall apply to any of the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
knowledge of the violation.
C. As an additional condition for issuance of a permit or the granting of an
approval to any such owner, current owner, vendee or lessee for the
development of any such real property, the Borough may require
compliance with the conditions that would have been applicable to the
property at the time the applicant acquired an interest in such real
property.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a
civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a
judgment of not more than $500, plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District
§ 370-44 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-45
1:323
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership, or corporation
violating this chapter to have believed that there was no such violation,
in which event there shall be deemed to have been only one such
violation until the fifth day following the date of the determination of
a violation by the Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter, each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under this section.
§ 370-45 GIRARD CODE § 370-45
1:324
ARTICLE IX
Amendments
§ 370-46. Amendment procedure. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No.
615]
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting forth
the principal provisions of the proposed amendment and a reference to
the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed amendment
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed amendment shall have been prepared by the
Planning Commission, the Borough Council shall submit the
amendment to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the
hearing on such amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. In addition, at least 30 days
prior to the public hearing on the amendment, the Borough shall submit
the proposed amendment to the county planning agency for
recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of the amendment to the county planning agency.
C. Proposed amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed
enactment is given in the manner set forth in this section and shall
include the time and place of the meeting at which passage will be
considered and a reference to a place within the Borough where copies
of the proposed amendment may be examined without charge or
obtained for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough
Council shall publish the proposed amendment once in a newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days nor less than
seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed amendment
shall include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed amendment shall be filed in the
county law library (or other county office designated by the County
Commissioners).
D. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
amendment, before voting upon enactment, the Borough Council shall,
at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise, in one newspaper of
general circulation in the Borough, a brief summary setting forth all the
provisions in reasonable detail, together with a summary of the
amendments.
§ 370-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 370-46
1:325
Chapter 377
TAXATION
§ 370-46 GIRARD CODE § 370-46
1:326
ARTICLE I
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 1-26-1951 by Ord. No. 270 (Ch. XXV, Part 1, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances); amended in its entirety 1-19-1970 by Ord. No.
399]
§ 377-1. Statutory authority; title; when effective.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Act No. 511 of
1965, effective January 1, 1966 (known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act"),92
as amended, and shall be known as the "Earned Income Tax Ordinance."
The provisions hereof shall become effective on enactment.93
§ 377-2. Incorporation of statute.
The provisions of Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act No. 511 of
1965)94 are incorporated herein by reference, except that, where options
are provided in Section 13, this article designated the option selected, and
except as and where hereinafter specifically provided otherwise.
§ 377-3. Imposition of tax.
A tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of 1% is hereby imposed
on earned income and net profits earned by residents of the Borough of
Girard and persons employed within the Borough of Girard during the
taxable year, beginning on the first day of January, A.D. 1970, and
continuing for each taxable year thereafter.
§ 377-4. Declaration, return and payment of tax.
A. Net profits. Every taxpayer making net profits shall file a declaration of
his estimated net profits for the current year and shall pay the tax due
thereon in quarterly installments and shall file a final return and pay to
the Officer the balance of the tax due, all as provided in Section 13, IIIA(
1), of the Local Tax Enabling Act.95
B. Earned income.
92.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
93.Editor's Note: Sections 1 to 12 of Ord. No. 270 were reduced to eight sections as enacted
by Ord. No. 399. Section 13 of Ord. No. 270 repealed all conflicting ordinances and parts
of ordinances; Section 14 stated that this ordinance was to become effective March 1,
1951. Ordinance No. 270 had been reenacted annually for 1954 through 1967 by Ord. Nos.
287, 294, 302, 307, 314, 320, 323, 329, 337, 342, 346, 352, 360, 366 and 372, all of which
expired by their own terms. Section 9 of Ord. No. 399 repealed all conflicting ordinances
and parts of ordinances.
94.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6913) was repealed
7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective 6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501 et seq.
95.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6913) was repealed
7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective 6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501 et seq.
§ 377-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-4
1:327
§ 377-5. Collection at source.
§ 377-6. Administration.
The Income Tax Officer shall be selected from time to time by resolution
of, and shall receive such compensation for his services and expenses as
determined from time to time by, the Council of the Borough. Such Officer
shall have the powers and duties and be subject to the penalties provided in
the "Local Tax Enabling Act."97
§ 377-7. Applicability.
The tax imposed in § 377-3 of this article shall not be levied on the net
profits of any person, institution, or organization as to whom it is beyond
the power of the Borough to impose said tax under the Constitution of the
United States of America or the Constitution and laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(1) Returns. Every taxpayer shall make and file final returns and pay
the taxes due, all as provided in Section 13, III-B, first paragraph,
of the Local Tax Enabling Act.
(2) Quarterly returns. Every taxpayer who is employed for a salary,
wage, commission or other compensation and who received any
earned income not subject to the provisions relating to collection at
source, shall make and file with the Officer quarterly returns and
shall pay quarter-annually the amount of tax shown as due on such
returns, all as provided in Section 13, III-B(2), of the Local Tax
Enabling Act, and the amount of tax shown as due thereon shall be
paid at the time of filing the return.
A. Every employer having an office, factory, workshop, branch, warehouse
or other place of business within the Borough of Girard shall deduct the
tax imposed by this article on the earned income due to his employee or
employees and shall file quarterly returns and final returns and pay
quarterly returns to the Officer the amount of taxes deducted, all as set
forth in Section 13-IV of the "Local Tax Enabling Act."96
B. Every employer who discontinues business while this article is in effect
shall, within 30 days after discontinuance of business, file returns and
withholding statements and pay the tax due.
C. No employer shall be required to register, deduct taxes, file returns or
pay taxes in the cases of domestic servants.
96.Editor's Note: Section 13 of the Local Tax Enabling Act (53 P.S. § 6913) was repealed
7-2-2008 by P.L. 197, No. 32, § 17, effective 6-30-2012. For current provisions, see 53 P.S.
§ 6924.501 et seq.
97.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 377-4 GIRARD CODE § 377-7
1:328
ARTICLE II
Per Capita Tax
[Adopted 1-19-1970 by Ord. No. 398 (Ch. XXV, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 377-8. Statutory authority; title; when effective.
This article is enacted pursuant to the authority granted by Act No. 511
of 1965, known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act," as amended,98 and shall
be known as the "Per Capita Tax Ordinance." The provisions hereof shall
become effective 30 days from the date of enactment hereof.
§ 377-9. Incorporation of statute.
The provisions of the Local Tax Enabling Act (Act No. 511 of 1965) relating
to the levying and collection of a per capita tax are incorporated herein by
reference.
§ 377-10. Imposition of tax. [Amended 1-21-1974 by Ord. No. 441]
A per capita tax for general revenue purposes in the amount of $5 is hereby
imposed on each natural person who is a resident or inhabitant of the
Borough of Girard and who is 18 years of age or over for the taxable year
beginning on the first day of January 1974 and continuing for each taxable
year thereafter.
§ 377-11. Administration.
The tax hereby imposed shall be collected by the Tax Collector of the
Borough of Girard, and he shall have the powers and duties, and be subject
to the penalties, provided in the "Local Tax Enabling Act."
98.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 377-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-11
1:329

ARTICLE III
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 9-18-1995 by Ord. No. 646 (Ch. XXV, Part 3, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 377-12. Title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of Girard
Borough."
§ 377-13. Statutory authority. [Amended 1-21-2008 by Ord. No.
69999100]
The Borough of Girard adopts the provisions of Article XI-D of the Tax
Reform Code of 1971101 and imposes a realty transfer tax as authorized
under that article, subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed
under this section shall be at the rate of 1%.
§ 377-14. Definitions.102
As used in this article, the words and phrases defined in 72 P.S. § 8101-C
shall have the meanings ascribed to them in said section.
§ 377-15. Imposition of tax; interest.
A. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay, for and in respect to the transaction or any part thereof,
a tax at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by
such document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
B. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
C. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq.,103 so that if any other political
99.Editor's Note: This ordinance provided an effective date of 12-31-2007. In addition, this
ordinance also provided as follows:
100. "(a) As of the effective date of this ordinance, the following ordinances are amended, to
wit: Girard Borough Ord. No. 646, enacted September 18, 1995. (b) The repealed
ordinances enumerated in Subsection (a) remain effective for documents that became
subject to tax prior to the effective date of this ordinance."
101. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 7101 et seq.
102. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-15
1:331
§ 377-16. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 377-17. Excluded transactions.
subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall impose such tax on the same
person or transfer, then the tax levied by Girard Borough under the
authority of that Act shall, during the time such duplication of the tax
exists, except as hereinafter otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate, and
such one-half rate shall become effective without any action on the part
of Girard Borough; provided, however, that Girard Borough and any
other political subdivision which imposes such tax on the same person
or transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to
1/2 of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
D. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due shall be added and collected.
A. The tax imposed by § 377-15 shall not be imposed upon:
(1) A transfer to the commonwealth or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions by gift, dedication or deed in lieu
of condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with
condemnation proceedings or a reconveyance by the condemning
body of the property condemned to the owner of record at the time
of condemnation, which reconveyance may include property line
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year
from the date of condemnation.
(2) A document which Girard Borough is prohibited from taxing under
the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
(3) A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school
district or county of a tax-delinquent property at Sheriff sale or Tax
Claim Bureau sale.
(4) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded, but which does not extend
or limit existing record legal title or interest.
103. Editor's Note: Pursuant to P.L. 197, No. 32, enacted 7-2-2008, sections of the Local Tax
Enabling Act formerly codified in 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. have been revised and renumbered.
See now 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 377-15 GIRARD CODE § 377-17
1:332
(5) A transfer or division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration
of property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in
value than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
(6) A transfer between husband and wife, between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced,
provided the property or interest therein subject to such transfer
was acquired by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to
the granting of the final decree in divorce, between parent and
child or the spouse of such child, between brother or sister or
spouse of a brother or sister and brother or sister or the spouse of a
brother or sister, and between a grandparent and grandchild or the
spouse of such grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the
grantee within one year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor
were making such transfer.
(7) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property
passing by testate or intestate succession from a personal
representative of a decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
(8) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be
exempt if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of
the possible beneficiaries that are entitled to receive the property
or proceeds from the sale of the property under the trust, whether
or not such beneficiaries are contingent or specifically named. A
trust clause which identifies the contingent beneficiaries by
reference to the heirs of the trust settlor as determined by the laws
of the intestate succession shall not disqualify a transfer from the
exclusion provided by this subsection. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of
the trust instrument that clearly identifies the grantor and all
possible beneficiaries.104
(9) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a
living trust from the settlor of the living trust. No such exemption
shall be granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a
copy of the living trust instrument.105
(10) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
an ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled
to receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property
would be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the
property into the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of
real estate from a living trust during the settlor's lifetime shall be
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-17
1:333
considered for the purposes of this article as if such transfer were
made directly from the settlor to the grantee.106
(11) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of
a living trust after the death of the settlor of the trust or from a
trustee of a trust created pursuant to the will of a decedent to a
beneficiary to whom the property is devised or bequeathed.107
(12) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee
of a living trust to the settlor of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settlor.108
(13) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
(14) A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal
and agent or straw party; or from or to an agent or straw party
where, if the agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would
be imposed under this article. Where the document by which title is
acquired by a grantee or statement of value fails to set forth that
the property was acquired by the grantee from, or for the benefit
of, his principal, there is a rebuttable presumption that the
property is the property of the grantee in his individual capacity if
the grantee claims an exemption from taxation under this
subsection.
(15) A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation
of a corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation,
except where the Department reasonably determines that the
primary intent for such merger, consolidation or division is
avoidance of the tax imposed by this article.
(16) A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of
record in the name of the corporation or association where the
grantee owns stock of the corporation or an interest in the
association in the same proportion as his interest in or ownership of
the real estate being conveyed and where the stock of the
corporation or the interest in the association has been held by the
grantee for more than two years.
(17) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that
agency or authority as security for a debt of the grantee or a
transfer to a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
(18) A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or
authority to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if the
grantee shall directly use such real estate for the primary purpose
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
107. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
108. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-17 GIRARD CODE § 377-17
1:334
of manufacturing, fabricating, compounding, processing,
publishing, research and development, transportation, energy
conversion, energy production, pollution control, warehousing or
agriculture; and the agency or authority has the full ownership
interest in the real estate transferred.
(19) A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure or a transfer pursuant to a judicial
sale in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a
mortgage, unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
(20) Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or
persons holding title for a religious organization if such real estate
is not being or has not been used by such transferor for commercial
purposes.
(21) A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954 [68A
Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3)] and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural
or open space opportunities; or a transfer from such a conservancy
to the United States, the commonwealth or to any of their
instrumentalities, agencies or political subdivisions; or any transfer
from such a conservancy where the real estate is encumbered by a
perpetual agricultural conservation easement as defined by the Act
of June 30, 1981 (P.L. 128, No. 43), known as the "Agricultural Area
Security Law," and such conservancy has owned the real estate for
at least two years immediately prior to the transfer.109
(22) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which
directly owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
(23) A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which
family directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the
partnership.110
(24) A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company, family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.111
(25) A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
(26) Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof.
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
110. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-17
1:335
§ 377-18. Taxable documents.
Except as otherwise provided in § 377-17, documents which make, confirm
or evidence any transfer or demise of title to real estate between
associations or corporations and the members, partners, shareholders or
stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the purposes of this article,
corporations and associations are entities separate from their members,
partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 377-19. Acquired companies.
B. In order to exercise any exclusion provided in this section, the true, full
and complete value of the transfer shall be shown on the statement of
value. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of value
may be submitted for this purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals, the statement of value may be limited to an explanation of the
reason such document is not subject to tax under this article.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change:112
(1) Does not affect the continuity of the company; and
(2) Of itself or together with prior changes, has the effect of
transferring, directly or indirectly, 90% or more of the total
ownership interest in the company within a period of three years.
For the purposes of this Subsection A(2), a transfer occurs within a
period of three years of another transfer or transfers if, during the
period:
(a) The transferring party provides a legally binding commitment,
enforceable at a future date, to execute the transfer;
(b) The terms of the transfer are fixed and not subject to
negotiation; and
(c) The transferring party receives full consideration, in any form,
in exchange for the transfer.
B. A family farm business is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
business or when, because of the issuance or transfer of stock in the
corporation or transfer of interests in the association or because of
acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of
agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm
business under this article.113
C. The conveyance of assets held by one family farm business to another
family farm business shall not be considered a transfer of assets under
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
113. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-17 GIRARD CODE § 377-19
1:336
§ 377-20. Credits against tax.
§ 377-21. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
this article if the same individuals hold at least 50% of the ownership
interest in each family farm business.114
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax declaration of acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker, which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is leased by the grantor, a
credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the lease shall be given
the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount of tax due, no refund or carryover credit shall be
allowed.
114. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-22
1:337
§ 377-22. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed shall be fully paid and have priority out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any other obligation,
claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the writ upon which
the sale is made, except the state realty transfer tax, and the Sheriff or
other officer conducting said sale shall pay the tax herein imposed out of the
first moneys paid to him in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the sale
are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed, the purchaser shall be
liable for the remaining tax.
§ 377-23. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
§ 377-24. Statement of value.
Every document lodged or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for recording
shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true, full and
complete value thereof, or shall be accompanied by a statement of value
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by the Act of July 7, 1983
(P.L. 40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for
the local realty transfer tax, including any amount payable to Girard
Borough based on a redetermination of the amount of tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax,
without compensation from Girard Borough.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the tenth of each month, the Recorder shall pay over to
Girard Borough all local realty transfer taxes collected, less 2% for use
of the county, together with a report containing the information as is
required by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania in reporting collections
of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax. The two-percent commission
shall be paid to the county.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the Recorder shall rerecord the deed
or record the additional realty transfer tax form only when both the
state and local amounts and a rerecording or recording fee have been
tendered.
E. If additional realty transfer tax is determined to be due to the
commonwealth, the Recorder of Deeds for Erie County shall collect a
like amount for the Borough of Girard, but without interest and penalty;
if a refund is determined to be due by the commonwealth, the Recorder
of Deeds for Erie County shall refund a like amount, without interest,
and charge said refund to the Borough of Girard on the monthly report
for the month in which the refund is made.
§ 377-22 GIRARD CODE § 377-24
1:338
executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction showing
such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value thereof
or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this section
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 377-25. Civil penalties.
§ 377-26. Lien.
The tax imposed by this article shall become a lien upon the lands,
tenements, or hereditaments, or any interest therein, lying or being
situated, wholly or in part, within the boundaries of Girard Borough, which
lands, tenements, hereditaments or interests therein are described in or
conveyed by or transferred by the deed which is the subject of the tax
imposed, assessed and levied by this article, said lien to begin at the time
when the tax under this article is due and payable and continue until
discharge by payment, or in accordance with the law, and the Solicitor is
authorized to file a municipal or tax claim in the Court of Common Pleas of
Erie County, in accordance with the provisions of the Municipal Claims and
Liens Act of 1923, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., its supplements and amendments.
§ 377-27. Recovery of unpaid taxes.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment.
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed therefor, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character
are recovered.
B. The tax imposed under § 377-13 and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as the
"Local Tax Enabling Act,"115 provided that if the correct amount of the
tax is not paid by the last date prescribed for timely payment, Girard
§ 377-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-27
1:339
§ 377-28. Enforcement and collection.
The Council of Girard Borough is charged with enforcement and collection
of tax and is empowered to promulgate and enforce reasonable regulations
for enforcement and collection of the tax. The regulations which have been
promulgated by the Pennsylvania Department of Revenue under 72 P.S.
§ 8101-C et seq. are incorporated into and made a part of this article.
§ 377-29. Interest. [Added 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 699]
Any tax imposed under § 377-13 that is not paid by the date the tax is
due shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101 et
seq.), as amended, known as the "Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act." The
interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed upon delinquent
commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the Act of April 9, 1929
(P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended, known as the "Fiscal Code,"
or the maximum interest rate permitted under the Municipal Claims and Tax
Liens Act for tax claims.
Borough, pursuant to Section 1102-D of the Tax Reform Code of 1971
(72 P.S. § 8102-D), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue
of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce
the tax, interest and penalties. [Added 1-21-2008 by Ord. No. 699]
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
§ 377-27 GIRARD CODE § 377-29
1:340
ARTICLE IV
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 11-16-2009 by Ord. No. 709]
§ 377-30. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax
Ordinance."
§ 377-31. Statutory authority.
This article is enacted under the authority of Act 511 of 1965, as amended,
known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."116
§ 377-32. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used herein, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
COLLECTOR — The person, public employee or private agency designated
by the political subdivision to collect and administer the tax herein imposed.
DCED — The Department of Community and Economic Development of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
EARNED INCOME — Compensation, as this term is defined in the Local Tax
Enabling Act,117 the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.118
EMPLOYER — An individual, partnership, association, limited-liability
company, limited-liability partnership, corporation, governmental body,
agency or other entity employing one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other compensation basis, including a self-employed person.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as
male, female and neuter genders.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the political subdivision.
NET PROFITS — The net income from the operation of a business,
profession or other activity, as this term is defined in the Local Tax Enabling
Act,119 the Act of December 31, 1965, P.L. 1257, as amended.120
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, earned on or
performed within the corporate limits of the political subdivision for which
116. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
117. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
118. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
119. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.101 et seq.
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-32
1:341
compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary, wages,
commission or fees for services rendered.
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Girard.
TAX — The local services tax at the rate fixed in this article pursuant to 53
P.S. § 6924.311 as to rates of specific taxes.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 until December 31 in any year; a
calendar year.
§ 377-33. Levy of tax; rate; use of funds.
For specific revenue purposes, an annual tax is hereby levied and assessed,
commencing January 1, 2010, upon the privilege of engaging in an
occupation with a primary place of employment within the Borough during
the tax year. Each natural person who exercises such privilege for any
length of time during any tax year shall pay the tax for that year in the
amount of $52, assessed on a pro-rata basis, in accordance with the
provisions of this article. This tax may be used solely for the following
purposes, as the same may be allocated by the Borough of Girard from
time to time: emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services; road construction and/or
maintenance; reduction of property taxes; or property tax relief through
implementation of a homestead and farmstead exclusion in accordance with
53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85, Subchapter F (relating to homestead property
exclusion).121 The political subdivision shall use no less than 25% of the
funds derived from the tax for emergency services. This tax is in addition
to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the political
subdivision. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each
calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within
which a person may be employed.
§ 377-34. Exemptions; refunds.
A. Exemptions. Any person whose total earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision is less than $12,000 for
any calendar year in which the tax is levied is exempt from the payment
of the tax for that calendar year. In addition, the following persons are
exempt from payment of the tax:
(1) Any person who has served in any war or armed conflict in which
the United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans' Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent disability.
121. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8581 et seq.
§ 377-32 GIRARD CODE § 377-34
1:342
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year. For the purposes of this subsection, "reserve
component of the armed forces" shall mean the United States Army
Reserve, United States Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps
Reserve, United States Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air
Force Reserve, the Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the
Pennsylvania Air National Guard.
B. Procedure to claim exemption.
(1) A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax
may annually file an exemption certificate with the political
subdivision and with the person's employer affirming that the
person reasonably expects to receive earned income and net profits
from all sources within the political subdivision of less than
$12,000 in the calendar year for which the exemption certificate is
filed. In the event the political subdivision utilizes a tax collection
officer, it shall provide a copy of the exemption certificate to that
officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached to it a copy of
all the employee's last pay stubs or W-2 forms from employment
within the political subdivision for the year prior to the fiscal year
for which the employee is requesting to be exempted from the tax.
Upon receipt of the exemption certificate and until otherwise
instructed by the political subdivision or except as required by
Subsection B(2) of this section, the employer shall not withhold the
tax from the person during the calendar year or the remainder of
the calendar year for which the exemption certificate applies.
Employers shall ensure that the exemption certificate forms are
readily available to employees at all times and shall furnish each
new employee with a form at the time of hiring. The exemption
certificate form shall be the uniform form provided by the political
subdivision.
(2) With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given
calendar year from the tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within the political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or
that the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of
earned income within the municipality in an amount equal to or in
excess of $12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold
the local services tax from the person under Subsection B(3).
(3) If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year
from the tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year under
Subsection B(2), the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from
the person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the
notification under Subsection B(2), a lump sum equal to the amount
§ 377-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-34
1:343
§ 377-35. Duty of employers to collect.
of tax that was not withheld from the person due to the exemption
claimed by the person under this subsection, plus the per-payroll
amount due for that first payroll period. The amount of tax withheld
per payroll period for the remaining payroll periods in that
calendar year shall be the same amount withheld for other
employees. In the event the employment of a person subject to
withholding of the tax under this subsection is subsequently
severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable for any
outstanding balance of tax due, and the political subdivision may
pursue collection under this article.
(4) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), it is the intent of this
subsection that employers shall not be responsible for investigating
exemption certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or
exempting any employee from the local services tax.
C. Refunds. The Borough of Girard, in consultation with the Collector and
DCED, shall establish procedures for the processing of refund claims
for any tax paid by any person who is eligible for exemption, which
procedures shall be in accord with provisions of the general municipal
law relating to refunds of overpayments and interest on overpayments.
Refunds made within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the
last day the employer is required to remit the tax for the last quarter of
the calendar year, whichever is later, shall not be subject to interest. No
refunds shall be made for amounts overpaid in a calendar year that do
not exceed $1. The Borough of Girard or the Collector shall determine
eligibility for exemption and provide refunds to exempt persons.
A. Each employer within the political subdivision, as well as those
employers situated outside the political subdivision but who engage in
business within the political subdivision, is hereby charged with the
duty of collecting the tax from each of his employees engaged by him or
performing for him within the political subdivision and making a return
and payment thereof to the Collector. Further, each employer is hereby
authorized to deduct this tax for each employee in his or her employ,
whether said employee is paid by salary, wage or commission and
whether or not all such services are performed within the political
subdivision.
B. A person subject to the tax shall be assessed by the employer a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the rate of the tax
levied for the calendar year by the number of payroll periods
established by the employer for the calendar year. For purposes of
determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round down the
amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest onehundredth
of a dollar. Collection of the tax shall be made on a payrollperiod
basis for each payroll period in which the person is engaging in
§ 377-34 GIRARD CODE § 377-35
1:344
§ 377-36. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of the
tax on forms to be supplied to the employer by the Collector. If an employer
fails to file the return and pay the tax, whether or not the employer makes
collection thereof from the salary, wages or commissions paid by him or her
to an employee, except as provided hereafter in this article, the employer
shall be responsible for the payment of the tax in full as though the tax had
been originally levied against the employer.
§ 377-37. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
In each tax year, each employer shall use his or her employment records to
determine the number of employees from whom such tax shall be deducted
an occupation, except as provided in Subsection D of this section. For
purposes of this subsection, "combined rate" shall mean the aggregate
annual rate of the tax levied by the school district and the municipality.
C. No person shall be subject to the payment of the local services tax by
more than one political subdivision during each payroll period.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the tax if the employee provides a recent pay statement
from a principal employer that includes the name of the employer, the
length of the payroll period and the amount of the tax withheld and a
statement from the employee that the pay statement is from the
employee's principal employer and the employee will notify other
employers of a change in principal place of employment within two
weeks of its occurrence. The employee's statement shall be provided on
the form approved by DCED.
E. The tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for each calendar
year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions within which a
person may be employed. The political subdivision shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the tax or for the
payment of the withheld tax money to the political subdivision if the
failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect information submitted by
the employee as to the employee's place or places of employment, the
employee's principal office or where the employee is principally
employed. Further, an employer shall not be liable for payment of the
local services tax in an amount exceeding the amount withheld by the
employer if the employer complies with the provisions of § 377-34B of
this article and this section and remits the amount so withheld in
accordance with this article.
G. Employers shall be required to remit the local services taxes 30 days
after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
§ 377-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-37
1:345
and paid over to the Collector on or before the 30th day following the end
of each calendar quarter of each such tax year.
§ 377-38. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type or kind
or engages in any occupation or profession within a primary place of
employment within the political subdivision shall be required to comply with
this article and pay the pro rata portion of the tax due to the Collector on or
before the 30th day following the end of each quarter.
§ 377-39. Multiple occupations; employment in multiple political
subdivisions.
§ 377-40. Nonresidents subject to tax.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their places
of business outside of the political subdivision but who perform services
of any type or kind or engage in any occupation or profession within the
political subdivision do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by and subject
themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations promulgated under
this article with the same force and effect as though they were residents of
the political subdivision. Further, any individual engaged in an occupation
within the political subdivision and an employee of a nonresidential
employer may, for the purpose of this article, be considered a self-employed
person, and in the event his or her tax is not paid, the political subdivision
shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer or employee
for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 377-41. Administration and enforcement.
A. The situs of the tax shall be the place of employment on the first day the
person becomes subject to the tax during each payroll period. In the
event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, that is,
concurrent employment, or an occupation which requires the person
working in more than one political subdivision during a payroll period,
the priority of claim to collect the local services tax shall be in the
following order:
(1) First, the political subdivision in which a person maintains his or
her principal office or is principally employed;
(2) Second, the political subdivision in which the person resides and
works if the tax is levied by that political subdivision;
(3) Third, the political subdivision in which a person is employed and
which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's home.
B. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing authority for that calendar
year declaring that the taxpayer has made prior payment constitutes
prima facie certification of payment to all other political subdivisions.
§ 377-37 GIRARD CODE § 377-41
1:346
§ 377-42. Suits for collection.
§ 377-43. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article or whoever refuses inspection of the books, records or accounts
in his or her custody and control setting forth the number of employees
subject to this tax who are in his or her employment or whoever fails or
refuses to file any return required by this article shall be guilty of a violation
and, upon conviction thereof, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $600, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment for not more than 30 days. The action to
enforce the penalty herein prescribed may be instituted against any person
A. The Collector shall be appointed by resolution of the political
subdivision. It shall be the duty of the Collector to accept and receive
payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof showing the amount
received by him from each employer or self-employed person, together
with the date the tax was received.
B. The Collector is hereby charged with the administration and
enforcement of this article and is hereby charged and empowered,
subject to municipal approval, to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules
and regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration
and enforcement of this article, including provisions for the
examination of payroll records of any employer subject to this article,
the examination and correction of any return made in compliance with
this article and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to
which overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred. Any person
aggrieved by any decision of the Collector shall have the right to appeal
to the Court of Common Pleas of Erie County as in other cases provided.
C. The Collector is hereby authorized to examine the books and payroll
records of any employer in order to verify the accuracy of any return
made by an employer or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax
due. Each employer is hereby directed and required to give the
Collector the means, facilities and opportunity for such examination.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Collector may sue for the
recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together with
interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
on the amount of such tax shall be calculated beginning with the due
date of the tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat rate of
such tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the recovery
of this tax or other appropriate remedy undertaken, the individual liable
therefor shall, in addition, be responsible and liable for the costs of
collection.
§ 377-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 377-43
1:347
in charge of the business of any employer who shall have failed or who
refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 377-44. Interpretation.
§ 377-45. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as set forth hereafter, all ordinances or parts of ordinances
inconsistent herewith are hereby repealed. Nothing herein shall be
construed to repeal the imposition and collection of an occupation privilege
tax or an emergency and municipal services tax, plus applicable penalties
and interest, for all prior calendar years, as the same existed prior to
adoption of this article.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to empower the
political subdivision to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on any
occupation not within the taxing power of the political subdivision
under the Constitution of the United States and the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 377-43 GIRARD CODE § 377-45
1:348
Chapter 388
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES
§ 388-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 388-2. License required; fees.122
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Borough
of Girard without first having obtained from the Borough Secretary a
license, for which a fee as set from time to time by resolution of the Borough
Council, which shall be for the use of the Borough, shall be charged,
provided that no license fee shall be charged under this section to farmers
selling their own produce; for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise
donated by the owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied
to any charitable or philanthropic purpose; or to any manufacturer or
producer in the sale of bread and bakery products, meat and meat products
or milk or milk products, but all persons exempted hereby from the payment
of the license fee shall be required to register with the Borough Secretary
and obtain a license without fee; provided further that any person dealing
in one or more of the above-mentioned exempted categories, and dealing
with other goods, wares or merchandise not so exempted, shall be subject
to the payment of the license fee fixed by this section for his activities
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LEGAL HOLIDAY — Includes New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS — Includes the following:
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample
or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house, within the
Borough of Girard; and
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise from a fixed location within the Borough on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but shall not be limited to,
such activities conducted at the time of special occasions or
celebrations, for seasonal purposes, or for or in advance of specific
yearly holidays.
(2)
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
122. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 377-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-2
1:349
in connection with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such
exempted categories; provided further that the Secretary may similarly
exempt from payment of the license fee, but not from registering with
him, persons working without compensation and selling goods, wares or
merchandise for the sole benefit of any nonprofit corporation; and provided
further that every license issued under the provisions of this chapter shall
be issued on an individual basis to persons engaging in such business, every
individual shall obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name, and
the license fee hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such individual
license.
§ 388-3. Application for license.
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Secretary for such license. If such person shall also be
required to obtain a license from any state or county officer, he shall, when
making such application, exhibit a valid license from such state or county
officer. The applicant shall give his name and address; his criminal record, if
any; the name and address of the person by whom he is employed; the type
of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such transient
retail business; the length of time for which such license is to be issued; and
the type and license number of the vehicle to be used, if any.
§ 388-4. Issuance of license; display.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Secretary, if he
shall find such application in order, shall issue the license required under
this chapter. Such license shall contain the information required to be given
on the application therefor. Every license holder shall carry such license
upon his person, if engaged in a transient retail business from house to
house or upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, or
shall display such license at the location where he shall engage in such
business if doing so at a fixed location. He shall exhibit such license, upon
request, to all police officers, Borough officials, and citizens or residents of
the Borough.
§ 388-5. Prohibited acts.
No person engaged in any transient retail business shall:
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license;
B. Hawk his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or public
grounds in the Borough;
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing in the immediate vicinity;
D. Park any vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Borough for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
§ 388-2 GIRARD CODE § 388-5
1:350
§ 388-6. Supervision; records and reports.
The Secretary shall supervise the activities of all persons holding licenses
under this chapter. He shall keep a record of all licenses issued hereunder
and shall make a report thereof to the Borough Council upon request.
§ 388-7. Suspension and revocation of license; appeals.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to suspend or revoke any license issued
under this chapter when he deems such suspension to be beneficial to the
public health, safety or morals, or for violation of any of the provisions
of this chapter, or for giving false information upon any application for a
license hereunder. Appeals from any suspension or revocation may be made
to the Borough Council at any time within 10 days after such suspension or
revocation. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person whose
license shall have been suspended or revoked.
§ 388-8. Violations and penalties.123
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or of
any stock or wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through
handling, age or otherwise;
E. Engage in any business activity prohibited in the Borough of Girard by
general or special law applicable thereto;
F. Engage in any house-to-house activity, except by prior appointment, at
any time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time except between
9:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. any day of the week, other than a Sunday or
legal holiday.
123. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 388-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 388-8
1:351
Chapter 392
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
217.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Zoning — See Ch. 425.
§ 392-1. Jurisdiction; custody.
From and after the passage of this chapter, all trees of whatsoever
description situate within the lines of the highways, streets and public
squares of the Borough shall be under the jurisdiction and in the sole
custody of the Borough Council, which shall enforce the provisions hereof
and may make such reasonable regulations for the removal, care and
protection of said trees as shall seem to it necessary and proper and for the
planting of additional trees.
§ 392-2. Authority to plant, remove or trim.
The Borough Council is hereby authorized in its discretion to cause to be
planted, removed or trimmed such trees in the highways, streets or public
squares of the Borough in such manner and at such times as it may deem
best for the public interest.
§ 392-3. Permit requirements; exception.
It shall be unlawful to cut, trim or climb with spurs, break, injure, kill,
destroy or remove or to cause, authorize or procure any reason to cut, trim,
climb with spurs, break, kill, destroy, or remove any shade tree or trees
now growing or which shall hereafter grow in any highway, street or public
square of the Borough without a written permit from the Borough Council
first had and procured; provided, however, that in case of emergency
involving the probable loss of life or property, such permit shall not be
required, but any work made necessary by said emergency shall be done in
a manner least likely to endanger the tree or trees involved.
§ 392-4. Injury to roots prohibited.
It shall be unlawful to allow gas, hot water, steam, oil or any other substance
deleterious to tree life to come into contact with the soil surrounding the
roots of any shade tree in any highway, street or public square of the
Borough or to place any material or substance in such manner as to obstruct
the free passage of air and water to the roots of any such tree or to make
excavations or to lay in the ground any pipe for the conducting of steam,
gas, water, or other substance in such manner as to injure the roots of any
such shade tree.
§ 388-8 GIRARD CODE § 392-5
1:352
§ 392-5. Contact with electric wires.
It shall be unlawful to cause, authorize or procure any wire or conductor
charged with electricity to come in contact with any shade tree in any
highway, street or public square of the Borough in such a manner as may
injure, destroy or kill such tree.
§ 392-6. Attachment of certain items restricted.
It shall be unlawful to permanently attach or cause to be permanently
attached to any shade tree in any highway, street or public square of the
Borough any rope, wire, sign or other device whatsoever without a written
permit from the Borough Council.
§ 392-7. Interference with sewer lines.
It shall be unlawful to plant in any highway, street or public square in which
a sewer is laid trees of such a type as naturally tend or cause roots to
interfere with or injure said sewer lines.
§ 392-8. Trimming of trees; removal of dead trees.
It shall be unlawful to maintain in any highway, street or public square
trees wholly dead or partly dead without removing the dead portion or to
maintain therein any growing trees which are not properly trimmed so as
not to interfere with pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
§ 392-9. Additional rules and regulations.
It shall be unlawful to violate any additional reasonable regulations which
the Borough Council may by resolution cause to be entered upon its minutes
relative to the planting, removal, care and preservation of shade trees upon
any of its highways, streets or public squares.
§ 392-10. Violations and penalties.124
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
124. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 392-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 392-10
1:353
Chapter 400
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366. Storage of vehicles — See Ch. 409.
§ 392-10 GIRARD CODE § 392-10
1:354
ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 400-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 400-2. Manner of adopting permanent regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances or as parts of ordinances or as amendments to ordinances of
the Borough of Girard.
§ 400-3. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code of Pennsylvania, as now in force or
as hereafter amended, enacted or reenacted, except where the context
clearly indicates a different meaning. As used in this chapter, the
following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
LEGAL HOLIDAYS — Includes New Year's Day, Memorial Day,
Independence Day, Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
B. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine.125
A. The Mayor shall have the following powers to regulate traffic and
parking temporarily and in times of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations;
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works, or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Mayor and the Police Department in the same manner as permanent
regulations. Any person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, or who shall move, remove, destroy,
injure or deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give
notice of any such regulation, shall, upon conviction thereof, be liable to
the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a
violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific
penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of
not more than $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five
days.
125. Editor's Note: Section 3 of Article V of Ord. No. 463 repealed Ord. Nos. 37, 38, an
ordinance of July 12, 1928, Ord. Nos. 211, 258, 266, 292, 370, 386, 414, and 442.
§ 400-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-4
1:355
§ 400-4. Experimental regulations.
§ 400-5. Authority of peace officers.
The peace officers of the Borough are hereby given authority to direct traffic
on the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof.
A. The Borough Council may, from time to time, designate places upon and
along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more than
90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect and shall designate such
locations by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions
and restrictions shall be effective just as if they had been specified in
this chapter. No person shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in
violation of any such regulation, prohibition or restriction, and no
person shall move, remove, destroy or deface any sign or marking
erected, posted or made by authority of this section. Any person who
shall violate any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof,
be liable to the penalty set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter
for a violation of such nature and, in case of a violation for which no
specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a
fine of not more than $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more
than five days.
B. The purpose of this section is to allow for the test and experimental
determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent changes
in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 400-4 GIRARD CODE § 400-5
1:356
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 400-6. Driving on sidewalks prohibited.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in
the Borough, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across
any sidewalk, except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway
or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall
have been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person who shall violate
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $50, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
10 days.
§ 400-7. Speed limits. [Amended 5-16-1986 by Ord. No. 560;
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 604; 5-18-1992 by Ord. No. 608; 1-25-1993
by Ord. No. 619; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 641]
A. The following speed limits are hereby established:
Highway Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Aurora Avenue Hathaway Street and Barker
Street
25
Chestnut Street U.S. Route 20 and dead end 25
Church Street U.S. Route 20 and B. & L.E.
Railroad
25
Greenfield Drive Pine Tree Drive and Pine Tree
Drive
25
Haggerty Street Hathaway Street East and N. & W.
Railroad
25
Hathaway Street Church Street and Lake Street 25
Hemlock Drive Spruce Tree Drive and Aurora
Avenue
25
Heron Court Woodcock Drive and Woodcock
Drive
25
Hillcrest Drive Lake Street and Kibler Drive 25
Juniper Drive Hemlock Drive and Oak Tree
Drive
25
Kibler Drive Lake Street and Lake Street 25
Lake Street Rice Avenue and north Borough
line
25
Lawrence Court Randall Avenue and Dewey Drive 25
Liberty Street Church Street and Penn Avenue 25
§ 400-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-7
1:357
Highway Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Locust Street Myrtle Street and Walnut Street 25
Lourdes Drive
[Added
12-17-2001 by
Ord. No. 676]
Goretti Drive and U.S. Route 20 25
Main Street Chestnut Street and Walnut Street 25
Main Street East Walnut Street and Lourdes Drive 35
Main Street West West Borough line and Chestnut
Street
35
Mechanic Street Main Street and N. & W. Railroad 25
Mellon Avenue Rice Avenue and Lake Street 25
Miles Avenue Rice Avenue and Lake Street 25
Myrtle Street U.S. Route 20 and dead end 25
Oak Tree Drive Spruce Tree Drive and Aurora
Avenue
25
Old Ridge Road West Borough line and U.S. Route
20
25
Olin Avenue Main Street and Hathaway Street 25
Park Drive
[Amended
6-16-1997 by
Ord. No. 660]
Lake Street and dead end 15
Penn Avenue Main Street and Shenango Street 25
Penn Avenue
Extension
Hathaway Street and Olin Avenue 15
Pheasant Drive Tilden Avenue and Woodcock
Drive
25
Prospect Street Church Street and Mechanic
Street
25
Randall Avenue Rice Avenue and Mechanic Street 25
Rice Avenue Main Street West and north
Borough line
35
Spruce Tree
Drive
Oak Tree Drive and Barker Street 25
Templeton
Avenue
Rice Avenue and Lake Street 25
Walnut Street Main Street and 300 feet south of
Locust Street
35
§ 400-7 GIRARD CODE § 400-7
1:358
§ 400-8. Traffic signals at certain intersections. [Amended
1-16-1989 by Ord. No. 579]
§ 400-9. One-way highways. [Amended 11-18-1974 by Ord. No. 470]
Highway Between
Speed Limit
(mph)
Walnut Street U.S. Route 20 and south Borough
line
35
Woodcock Drive Tilden Avenue and Pheasant Drive 25
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor at a speed in excess of
that established therefor upon any highway or portion thereof specified
in this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
A. At the following intersections, official traffic signals shall be erected (or
if heretofore erected are hereby ratified), and traffic at such
intersections shall be directed by such signals:
Intersection
Chestnut Street and Rice Avenue
Church Street and Main Street East
Right turn on red is prohibited from Walnut Street onto Main Street
East and from Olin Avenue onto Main Street East
Walnut Street and Olin Avenue
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall disobey the directions of
any traffic signal shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $5, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days.
A. The following are hereby established as one-way highways:
Highway From To
Direction of
Travel
Commercial Street Main Street
West
Writz Alley North
Penn Avenue
Extension
Hathaway Street
East
Olin Avenue West and South
South Park Row Main Street
West
Main Street
East
East
Wall Street Main Street
West
Vine Street North
§ 400-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-9
1:359
§ 400-10. Through highways.
§ 400-11. Stop intersections. [Amended 3-17-1986 by Ord. No. 558;
10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 563; 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 575; 10-21-1991
by Ord. No. 597; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 604; 1-25-1993 by Ord. No.
619; 10-18-1993 by Ord. No. 624; 9-19-1994 by Ord. No. 630;
12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 641]
B. Any person who shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any
highway or portion thereof hereby established as a one-way highway
other than in the direction hereby established for traffic thereon shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than
$10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
A. The following highways are hereby established as through highways,
and the operator of every vehicle or tractor upon approaching any such
highway at any intersection thereof (except for such intersections
where there are now or shall hereafter be located official traffic signals)
shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before entering
any such through highway:
Highway Between
Lake Street Rice Avenue and Lake City Borough line (north
Borough line)
Main Street Entire length
Rice Avenue Main Street West and Lake City Borough line
(north Borough line)
Walnut Street Main Street East and Borough line
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any such through
highway as hereinabove required shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of $5, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more
than three days.
A. The following intersections (in addition to highways intersecting with
the through highways established by § 400-10 of this article) are hereby
established as stop intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected
(or are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to
face traffic approaching the second-named highway upon the firstnamed
highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated. All
vehicles and tractors approaching any such intersection upon the firstnamed
highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each
case, shall come to a full stop, within a reasonable distance, before
entering any such intersection.
§ 400-9 GIRARD CODE § 400-11
1:360
Stop Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Aurora Avenue Barker Street North
Aurora Drive Hathaway Street South
Barker Street Haggerty Street East
Barker Street Mechanic Street West
Boothby Drive Aurora Avenue West
Boothby Drive Haggerty Street East
Commercial Street Vine Street North
Dewey Drive Mechanic Street East
Dewey Drive Rice Avenue West
Elk Creek Avenue Mechanic Street East
Elk Creek Avenue Rice Avenue East
Erie Street Kibler Drive (north) North
Erie Street Kibler Drive (south) South
Fireside Court Haggerty Street East
Frick Avenue Hathaway Street North
Frick Avenue Templeton Avenue South
Goss Avenue Mechanic Street East
Goss Avenue Rice Avenue West
Greenfield Drive Pine Tree Drive East and West
Haggerty Street Barker Street North and South
Haggerty Street Hathaway Street South
Hathaway Street Lake Street West
Hathaway Street Rice Avenue East and West
Hemlock Drive Aurora Avenue East
Hemlock Drive Spruce Tree Drive West
Hillcrest Drive Kibler Drive North
Hillcrest Drive Lake Street East
Juniper Drive Hemlock Drive North
Juniper Drive Oak Tree Drive South
Kibler Drive (north) Lake Street East
Kibler Drive (south) Lake Street East
Lake Street Hathaway Street North and South
Lake Street Rice Avenue South
Lawrence Court Dewey Drive South
Lawrence Court Randall Avenue North
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-11
1:361
Stop Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Liberty Street Church Street East
Liberty Street Penn Avenue West
Locust Street Myrtle Street West
Locust Street Walnut Street East
Lourdes Drive Goretti Drive North
Lourdes Drive Main Street East South
Mechanic Street Hathaway Street North and South
Mechanic Street Main Street South
Mechanic Street Wilcox Street North and South
Mellon Avenue Lake Street West
Mellon Avenue Rice Avenue East
Miles Avenue Lake Street West
Miles Avenue Mechanic Street East
Miles Avenue Rice Avenue East and West
Myrtle Street Main Street West North
Nickel Plate Avenue Rice Avenue West
Oak Tree Drive Aurora Avenue East
Oak Tree Drive Spruce Tree Drive West
Olin Avenue Hathaway Street
East
North
Park Drive Lake Street East
Penn Avenue Main Street East South
Penn Avenue Prospect Street North and South
Penn Avenue Extension Olin Avenue West and South
Pheasant Drive Tilden Avenue South
Pine Tree Drive Lake Street East
Prospect Street Church Street East
Prospect Street Mechanic Street East
Prospect Street Olin Avenue East and West
Randall Avenue Rice Avenue West
Riley Drive (east) Miles Avenue North
Riley Drive (west) Miles Avenue North
School Drive Lake Street (located
371 feet east of Lake
Street intersection)
West
School Street Main Street East North
§ 400-11 GIRARD CODE § 400-11
1:362
§ 400-12. Yield intersections. [Added 3-17-1986 by Ord. No. 558;
amended 10-20-1986 by Ord. No. 563; 3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 575;
12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 604; 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 641]
Stop Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Shenango Street Church Street East
South Park Row Main Street East East and North
Spruce Tree Drive Barker Street North
Sunset Drive Main Street East South
Templeton Avenue Lake Street West
Templeton Avenue Rice Avenue East
Tilden Avenue Lourdes Drive East and West
Tilden Avenue Sunset Drive East and West
Trinity Drive Main Street East South
Vine Street Mechanic Street East
Vine Street Rice Avenue West
Wall Street Vine Street North
Wilcox Street East Mechanic Street West
Wilcox Street East Olin Avenue East
Wilcox Street West Lake Street West
Wilcox Street West Mechanic Street East
Wilcox Street West Rice Avenue East and West
Woodcock Drive Tilden Avenue South
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before entering any stop intersection, as
hereinabove required, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of $25, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three
days.
A. The following intersections are hereby established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected in such a position
as to face traffic approaching the second-named highway upon the firstnamed
highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated. All
vehicles and tractors approaching any such intersection upon the firstnamed
highway, in the direction or directions hereby indicated in each
case, shall yield the right-of-way to traffic on the second-named street
before entering the intersection.
§ 400-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-12
1:363
§ 400-13. Stop intersections with railroad crossing. [Added
10-15-1990 by Ord. No. 591]
Yield Street Through Street Direction of Travel
Beaver Road Noble Road North
Circle Drive Goretti Avenue North
Circle Drive Tilden Avenue North and South
Edison Place Nickel Plate Avenue South
Heron Court Woodcock Drive West
Macrina Drive Tilden Avenue South
Nobel Road Old Ridge Road West
Park Drive (Sec. A) Park Drive North
Park Drive (Sec. C) Park Drive (Sec. B) North
Park Drive (Sec. E) Park Drive (Sec. C) East
Randall Avenue Mechanic Street East
Spruce Tree Drive Oak Tree Drive South
Woodcock Drive Pheasant Drive West
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to yield the right-ofway
before entering any yield intersection, as hereinabove required,
shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $5, and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days.
A. The following highways crossing a railroad intersection are hereby
established as stop highways, and official stop signs shall be erected (or
are hereby confirmed if heretofore erected) in such a position as to face
traffic approaching the named railroad crossing, in the direction or
directions hereby indicated. All vehicles and tractors approaching such
railroad crossing in the directions indicated shall come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before crossing any such railroad
crossing.
Stop Street Railroad Direction of Travel
Haggerty Street Norfolk and
Southern
North and South
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall fail to come to a full stop,
within a reasonable distance, before crossing any railroad crossing, as
hereinbefore required, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of $25, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three
days.
§ 400-12 GIRARD CODE § 400-14
1:364
§ 400-14. Play highways.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to designate as play highways, whenever he
shall deem such action advisable, and for whatever period of time directed
by him, any portion of any highway in the Borough, whereon sledding and
coasting shall be permitted. Such highway shall be set apart for the purpose
under the direction of the Mayor. No person shall operate any motor vehicle
or tractor upon any play highway at any time when such highway shall be
so designated, except in case of emergency, with special permission of the
Mayor or of the police officer in charge, who shall first clear such play
highway of all persons using such highway for the purpose for which it was
set aside. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $10,
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 400-15. Turn and through lanes. [Added 1-21-1975 by Ord. No.
474]
§ 400-16. Bridge closed. [Added 8-18-1986 by Ord. No. 562]
A. At the following intersections, turn and through lanes are established,
official signs directing the flow of traffic shall be erected (or if
heretofore erected are hereby ratified), and traffic at such intersections
shall be directed by such signs:
Intersection
Direction of
Travel Movement
Main Street and
Church Street
West on Main
Street
The curb lane is restricted
to traffic turning right
onto Church Street, which
traffic must turn right
Main Street and Rice
Avenue
East on Main
Street
The center lane is
restricted to traffic
turning left onto Rice
Avenue, which traffic must
turn left
Main Street and Rice
Avenue
West on Main
Street
The curb lane is restricted
to traffic turning right
onto Rice Avenue, which
traffic must turn right
B. Any operator of a vehicle or tractor who shall disobey the directions of
any lane sign shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
of $5, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than three days.
A. The bridge on Old Ridge Road passing over Elk Creek is hereby closed
to all vehicular and pedestrian traffic. The posting of approved signs
and any appropriate barricade is hereby authorized.
§ 400-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-16
1:365
§ 400-17. Vehicle weight limits. [Added 7-19-1993 by Ord. No. 622]
The following highways are hereby established as prohibiting all vehicles
over 10 tons in gross weight, except commercial vehicles making local
deliveries. The following streets are to be posted "No Trucks," "10 Ton
Limit" and "Local Delivery Only":
Highway Between
Lawrence Court [Added
4-16-2001 by Ord. No. 674]
Randall Avenue and Dewey Drive
Lourdes Drive Main Street (East) and Goretti Avenue
Sunset Drive 300 feet north of Tilden Avenue
Tilden Avenue Pheasant Drive and Trinity Drive
Trinity Drive Main Street (East) and Tilden Avenue
§ 400-18. Violations and penalties. [Added 7-19-1993 by Ord. No.
622]
Any person who shall violate any provision of § 400-17 of this article shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $100,
and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
B. Any operator of a vehicle or bicycle or any pedestrian who shall enter
upon the bridge shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a
fine of $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 400-16 GIRARD CODE § 400-18
1:366
ARTICLE III
Parking Regulations
§ 400-19. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Girard are hereby established as a
zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 400-20. Parking within marked spaces.
Wherever a space shall be marked off on any highway for the parking of
an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the
lines bounding such space.
§ 400-21. Angle parking. [Amended 4-20-1987 by Ord. No. 569;
12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 641]
§ 400-22. Parking prohibited at all times. [Amended 11-18-1974 by
Ord. No. 470; 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 567; 2-17-1992 by Ord. No.
606; 3-21-1994 by Ord. No. 627; 6-19-1995 by Ord. No. 644]
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of the
highway:
Highway Side Between
Main Street East South Exit from South Park Row and
Walnut Street
Main Street East South No trucks or vans shall be
permitted to park in the first
two designated spaces west of
Walnut Street.
Main Street West North and
South
Entrance to South Park Row and
B. & L.E. Railroad
Main Street West South No trucks or vans shall be
permitted to park in the first
two designated spaces west of
Myrtle Street
B. On all highways or portions thereof where angle parking is now or shall
hereafter be authorized, all vehicles parked thereon shall be parked
with the front thereof nearest the curb.
§ 400-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-22
1:367
Highway Side Between
Church Street East Prospect Street and Shenango
Street
Goss Avenue North Rice Avenue and Mechanic Street
Hathaway Street North Olin Avenue and Haggerty Street
Lake Street South Rice Avenue and 532 feet west
Locust Street [Added
11-15-1999 by Ord.
No. 669]
South No parking between signs
Main Street Both Chestnut Street and west Borough
line
Main Street East North In front of St. John's Rectory
Mechanic Street East Between the first sign located 90
feet north of Main Street West and
the second sign located 170 feet
north of Main Street West
Nickel Plate Avenue North Rice Avenue and dead end
Olin Avenue East Main Street East and Prospect
Avenue
Olin Avenue West Entrance to Methodist Church,
except there shall be one handicap
space being the first location north
of the entrance to the Methodist
Church, to be designated by
appropriate signs
Rice Avenue East Hathaway Street and a point 135
feet southwardly
Rice Avenue East Main Street West and Vine Street
Rice Avenue West Hathaway Street and a point 145
feet southwardly
Rice Avenue West Hathaway Street and a point 200
feet northwardly
Sunset Drive West Main Street and Tilden Avenue
Vine Street [Added
2-18-2013 by Ord. No.
726]
North From 106 Vine Street west to Rice
Avenue
Wilcox Extension East Olin Avenue and end of street
§ 400-23. Parking prohibited certain days and times. [Amended
2-21-1977 by Ord. No. 490]
Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days, months, and between the hours hereby indicated:
§ 400-22 GIRARD CODE § 400-23
1:368
Highway Side Between Days Hours
All streets
and tree
lawns
[Amened
2-18-2013
by Ord.
No. 726]
Both All days,
November 1 to
April 1 of the
next year
3:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
Main Street Both Church Street and
west Borough line
Friday 3:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
Main Street North Wall Street and
Mechanic Street
All days 3:00 a.m. and
6:00 a.m.
§ 400-24. Time-limit parking. [Amended 2-21-1977 by Ord. No. 490;
10-19-1987 by Ord. No. 572; 8-17-1992 by Ord. No. 611]
No person shall park a vehicle, or allow the same to remain parked, for
longer than the time herein indicated, in any of the following locations, at
any time on the days and between the hours herein indicated:
Highway Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Main Street North Wall Street
and
Mechanic
Street
Every day 6:00 a.m.
to 3:00
a.m.
1 hour
Main Street
East
Both Penn Avenue
and Church
Street
Every day 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Main Street
East
North Penn Avenue
and Walnut
Street
Mon. to
Sat.
24 hours 15 minutes
Main Street
East
South Penn Avenue
and Walnut
Street
Mon. to
Sat.
24 hours 15 minutes
Main Street
West
[Added
3-17-2003
by Ord. No.
678
North Bessemer
R.R. and
Walnut
Street
Every day 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
2 hours
§ 400-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-24
1:369
Highway Side Between Days Hours
Parking
Time Limit
Main Street
West
[Added
3-17-2003
by Ord. No.
678]
South Bessemer
R.R. and Olin
Avenue
Every day 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
2 hours
Mechanic
Street
East First two
spaces north
of Main
Street
fronting
Every day 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
Myrtle
Street
[Added
3-17-2003
by Ord. No.
678]
Both Main Street
and Locust
Street
Every day 7:00 a.m.
to 7:00
p.m.
2 hours
Olin Avenue West Main Street
and Prospect
Mon. to
Sat.
8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Randall
Avenue126
Both Rice Avenue
and
Mechanic
Street
Every day 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Rice Avenue Both Miles Avenue
and Nickel
Plate Avenue
Every day 8:00 a.m.
to 6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Wilcox
Library
30 minutes
§ 400-25. Continuous parking prohibited. [Added 9-19-1977 by Ord.
No. 493]
Parking for a continuous period in excess of 48 hours is hereby prohibited
on all streets and municipal parking lots within the Borough of Girard.
§ 400-26. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-19-1977 by Ord. No.
493; 8-17-1992 by Ord. No. 611; 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 678;
11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 693]
A. Any person who shall violate any provisions of § 400-20, 400-21, 400-22,
400-24 or 400-27 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $10 nor more than $25, except
126. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-24 GIRARD CODE § 400-26
1:370
§ 400-27. Parking by authorized vehicles only. [Added 7-15-1975 by
Ord. No. 479]
Parking shall be prohibited by all, other than authorized vehicles, in the
parking lot north of the Borough Municipal Building, said lot being bounded
on the south by the Borough Municipal Building, on the west by the
municipal parking lot, and on the east by Mechanic Street. Travel through
the parking lot shall be limited to one-way traffic flowing west from
Mechanic Street to the municipal parking lot.
trucks, passenger vans or commercial vehicles parking in a posted
"No Trucks or Vans Permitted" parking zone for which the fine will be
$25, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine
and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five days. Any
person who shall violate the provisions of § 400-23 or 400-25 of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $15, except trucks, passenger vans or commercial vehicles
parking in a posted "No Trucks or Vans Permitted" metered parking
zone for which the fine will be not less than $20 nor more than $25, and
costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of such fine and costs,
to undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
B. It shall be the duty of the police officers of the Borough to report to the
Mayor all violations of any provisions of this article, indicating in each
case:
(1) The section thereof violated;
(2) The license number of the vehicle involved in such violation;
(3) The location where such violation took place;
(4) The time of such violation; and
(5) Any other facts that might be necessary in order to secure a clear
understanding of the circumstances attending such violation.
C. The police officer making such report shall also attach to every such
vehicle a notice that such vehicle was parked in violation of this article,
which notice shall contain instructions to the owner or operator of such
vehicle that if he shall report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay,
for the use of the Borough, the sum of $10 within 48 hours after the
time of such notice, or if he shall place such sum of $10, enclosed with
the envelope provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed
at various locations within the Borough within such time limit, the same
shall save such violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine
and costs hereinabove prescribed, provided that if the violation shall be
of § 400-23 or 400-25 of this article, the notice hereby required shall
provide for the payment of $10 within 48 hours after the time of such
notice.
§ 400-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-28
1:371
§ 400-28. Fire lanes; Fire Department access points. [Added
3-21-1988 by Ord. No. 575]
To promote and secure the safety of persons and property and to facilitate
the fighting of fires and the evacuation of sick or injured persons in areas of
public buildings or places of assembly, it is hereby established that certain
areas may be designated as fire lanes and/or Fire Department access points
wherein the parking or standing of motor vehicles is prohibited.
§ 400-29. Handicapped parking. [Added 4-19-1993 by Ord. No. 621]
A. Definitions. The following are established and shall apply to this
section:
FIRE DEPARTMENT ACCESS POINT — An area indicated by official
signs in front of or adjacent to any required exit of a building or to a fire
hydrant or to a hose connection point serving a building's fire-fighting
system.
FIRE LANE — An area indicated by official signs leading to or adjacent
to a public building or place of business or assembly which must be
kept open at all times in order for fire or other emergency equipment
to operate effectively in case of fire or other emergency. Said area is to
be 35 feet in width, extending outward from the sidewalk or designated
line for its entire length. Each fire lane shall be designated by road
markings and posted at convenient intervals.
B. Borough Council may from time to time determine and designate areas
as a fire lane and/or Fire Department access point. Each area so
designated shall be indicated by road markings, and official signs shall
be placed adjacent to said fire lane or Fire Department access point so
as to clearly designate the area affected.
C. No person at any time shall park or leave standing any vehicle in any
fire lane or Fire Department access point as herein established.
D. The penalty for violation of this article as set forth in § 400-26 shall not
apply to violations of this section. Any person who shall violate the
provisions of this section shall, upon summary conviction thereof,
before a Magisterial District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $10 nor more than $15, and costs of prosecution, and, in
default of payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for a term not
to exceed five days.
A. Except for persons parking vehicles lawfully bearing a handicapped or
severely disabled veteran registration plate or displaying a
handicapped or severely disabled veteran parking placard when such
vehicles are being operated by or for the transportation of a
handicapped person or a severely disabled veteran, no person shall
park a vehicle on public or private property reserved for a handicapped
person or severely disabled veteran, which property has been so posted
§ 400-28 GIRARD CODE § 400-29
1:372
in accordance with Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
regulations. [Amended 12-19-1994 by Ord. No. 641]
Highway Side Location
Main Street West North A metered parking space will be
designated for handicapped parking only
in front of 222 Main Street West
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section is guilty of a
summary offense and shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $200.
§ 400-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-29
1:373

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impounding of Certain Vehicles
[Added 3-17-2003 by Ord. No. 678]
§ 400-30. Statutory authority; scope.
This article is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle Code
and gives authority to the Borough to remove and impound vehicles that are
parked overtime on any street in the Borough or in metered and unmetered
parking lots in the Borough, in violation of any provisions of this chapter.
§ 400-31. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 400-30 of this article, and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this article.
§ 400-32. Approved storage garages; towing and storage charges.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this article shall be done by only
approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by the
Borough Council. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Borough
Council that it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount
satisfactory to the Borough Council as sufficient to indemnify owners of
impounded vehicles against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the
custody of the garagekeeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The
approve storage garage shall submit to the Borough Council its schedule
of charges for towing and storage of vehicles under this article, and when
the schedule is approved by the Borough Council, those charges shall be
adhered to by the approved storage area. No different charges shall be
demanded of or collected from any person whose vehicle is removed or
impounded under this article by any approved storage garage. The Borough
Council shall delete from its list of any approved storage garages any
garage that makes any unapproved charge in connection with any vehicle
removed or impounded under this article.
§ 400-33. Notification of removal and impounding.
Within 12 hours from the time of removal of any vehicle under authority
granted by this article, the Borough shall send notice of the fact that the
vehicle was removed to the owner of record of the vehicle. The notice shall
designate the place from which the vehicle was removed, the reason for its
removal and impounding and the garage in which it is impounded.
§ 400-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-34
1:375
§ 400-34. Effect of payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of any towing and storage charges authorized by this article
shall, unless payment is made under protest, be final and conclusive and
shall constitute a waiver of any right to recover the money so paid. If
payment of any towing or storage charges is made under protest, the
offender shall be entitled to a hearing before a Magisterial District Judge.
Payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or driver
of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation of the
provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or impounded.
§ 400-35. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this article and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners or
the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the place
of storage of the vehicle.
§ 400-36. Restrictions upon removal.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this article if, at the
time of the intended removal, the owner or the person for the time being in
charge of the vehicle is present and expresses a willingness and intention
to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 400-34 GIRARD CODE § 400-36
1:376
ARTICLE V
On-Street Metered Parking
§ 400-37. Parking meter zones. [Amended 9-16-1996 by Ord. No.
653]
Parking meter zones are hereby established upon and along certain
highways in the Borough of Girard as follows:
Highway Side Between
(Reserved)
§ 400-38. Parking time limits.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same to
remain parked for longer than three hours at any time between the hours
of 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Thursday and Saturday, and at
any time between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m., Friday, upon any of
the portions of streets herein established as parking meter zones, provided
the requirements of this article as to parking time limit and as to deposit of
coins in parking meters shall not apply on legal holidays or other periods of
time as may be established by Council.
§ 400-39. Placement and characteristics of parking meters.
Parking meters installed in the parking meter zones established as provided
in § 400-37 of this article shall be placed upon the sidewalk and immediately
adjacent to the individual parking spaces hereinafter described. Each
parking meter shall be placed or set in such manner as to show that the
parking space adjacent to such meter is or is not legally occupied. Each
parking meter installed shall indicate by a proper legend the legal parking
time established by the Borough and, when occupied, shall indicate on and
by its dial and pointer the duration of the period of legal parking and, on the
expiration of such period, shall indicate illegal or overtime parking.
§ 400-40. Parking within marked spaces.
Lines and/or markings shall be painted or placed upon the curb, sidewalk
and/or highway adjacent to each parking meter for the purpose of
designating the parking space for which such meter is to be used. Each
vehicle parked adjacent to any parking meter shall be parked wholly within
the lines or markings so placed and applicable to such meter. It shall be
unlawful and a violation of this article to park any vehicle across any such
line or marking or to park any vehicle in such a position that such vehicle
shall not be wholly within the area so designated by such lines or markings.
§ 400-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-41
1:377
§ 400-41. Manner of parking at meters. [Amended 8-17-1992 by
Ord. No. 611]
When a parking space in any parking meter zone is parallel with the
adjacent curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall
be parked so that the foremost part of such vehicle shall be nearest to the
parking meter; when a parking space in any parking meter zone is diagonal
to the curb or sidewalk, any vehicle parked in such parking space shall be
parked with the foremost part of such vehicle nearest to such meter. No
trucks, passenger vans or commercial vehicles are permitted to park in any
designated parking meter zone.
§ 400-42. Deposit of coins; overtime parking.
Whenever any vehicle is to be parked in any space adjacent to which a
parking meter shall have been placed at any time during the period of
limited parking as herein prescribed, the operator of such vehicle shall,
upon entering such parking space, immediately deposit coins of the United
States as shall be specified in the legend upon such parking meter. Upon
the deposit of such coin or coins, and placing the meter in operation, such
parking space may be lawfully occupied by such vehicle. If any vehicle shall
remain in any such parking space for such length of time that the meter
shall indicate by a proper signal that the lawful parking time shall have
expired, such vehicle shall be considered as having been parked overtime,
and the parking of a vehicle overtime shall be a violation of this article.
§ 400-43. Deposit of coins to extend parking time beyond legal
limit.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deposit
or to cause to be deposited, in any parking meter, any coin for the purpose
of increasing or extending the parking time of any vehicle beyond the total
legal parking time.
§ 400-44. Parking at meter showing violation.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to permit
a vehicle to remain in any parking space adjacent to a parking meter when
such meter shall display a signal indicating that such vehicle shall already
have been parked beyond the period of time prescribed for such parking
space.
§ 400-45. Tampering with meters.
It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any person to deface,
tamper with, open or willfully break, destroy or impair the usefulness of any
parking meter installed under the provisions of this article, provided that
nothing herein shall apply to the servicing or opening of parking meters by
officers, employees and/or peace officers of the Borough under the direction
of the Mayor and/or the Borough Council.
§ 400-41 GIRARD CODE § 400-46
1:378
§ 400-46. Reporting of violations; effect of payment within 48
hours. [Amended 8-17-1992 by Ord. No. 611]
§ 400-47. Violations and penalties. [Amended 8-17-1992 by Ord. No.
611]
A. It shall be the duty of the peace officers of the Borough, acting in
accordance with instructions of the Chief of Police, to report:
(1) The number of each parking meter that indicates that the vehicle
occupying the parking space adjacent thereto is, or has been,
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this article;
(2) The date and hour of such violation;
(3) The state license number of such vehicle;
(4) Any other facts, the knowledge of which shall be necessary for a
thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such
violation.
B. Every such peace officer shall also place upon such vehicle a notice to
the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle was parked in violation
of the provisions of this article and instructing such owner or operator
that if he shall report to the office of the Chief of Police and pay, for the
use of the Borough, the sum of $3 within 48 hours after the time of such
notice, or if he shall place such sum of $3, enclosed within the envelope
provided, in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at various
locations within the Borough within such time limit, the same shall save
such violator from prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs
hereinafter provided in this article.
A. Any person who shall violate any provision of this article, except for
§ 400-45 hereof, shall, for each and every such violation, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $5 nor
more than $10, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment of
such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than five
days.
B. Any person who shall violate any provision of § 400-45 of this article
shall, for each and every such violation, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50, and costs of prosecution,
and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, to undergo
imprisonment for not more than 10 days.
§ 400-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-47
1:379

ARTICLE VI
Interpretation
§ 400-48. Continuation of prior regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately prior to the enactment
of this chapter, are intended as a continuation of such ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. The provisions of this chapter shall
not affect any act done or liability incurred, nor shall they affect any suit
or prosecution pending or to be instituted to enforce any of these repealed
ordinances or regulations.
§ 400-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-48
1:381

ARTICLE VII
Snowmobiles
[Added 11-22-1976 by Ord. No. 488]
§ 400-49. Definitions.127
As used in this article, words and phrases shall have the designated
meanings set forth in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7701 et seq., the Snowmobile and All-
Terrain Vehicle Law.
§ 400-50. Snowmobile streets designated.128
The following streets within the Borough of Girard are hereby designated as
snowmobile streets pursuant to 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7704 for the purpose of going
to or returning from snowmobile trails:
Street or Road
Church Street, from East Main Street to Hathaway Street
Haggerty Street, from Hathaway Street to the Borough limits
Hathaway Street, from Lake Street to Church Street
Lake Street, from Rice Avenue to Hathaway Street
Mechanic Street, from Hathaway Street to the Borough limits.
§ 400-51. Use of snowmobile streets.
The above-designated snowmobile streets may be used as often as
reasonably necessary to traverse the distance from a snowmobile owner's
home to private areas of snowmobile use and return.
§ 400-52. Continuous riding or racing prohibited.
No street is to be used for continuous riding or racing, except as hereinafter
specifically provided.
§ 400-53. Limitations on operation.
Privileges extended by this article to allow snowmobile operation shall apply
only from November 1 of each year until April 1 of the following year.
§ 400-54. Applicability.129
The privileges extended hereunder shall not apply:
A. To snowmobiles which do not meet all of the requirements of the
Snowmobile and All-Terrain Vehicle Law as to registration, lights,
127. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-54
1:383
§ 400-55. Manner of operation.
In addition to the restrictions contained in Section 15 of the Snowmobile
Act,130 it shall be a violation of this article to operate a snowmobile in the
following manner:
§ 400-56. Special events.
The Chief of Police, with the approval of the Council President, may, in
his discretion, grant permission for organized rides, races, training classes
or similar events deemed reasonable and in the best interests of the
community at such designated places and at such designated times as he
may specify and under such supervision as he may specify.
§ 400-57. Access to snowmobile streets.
Persons living on other than a snowmobile street, when there is no rear
or other means or way of ingress or egress to a snowmobile street, may
slowly and carefully, at a speed not to exceed 10 mph, travel on the edge of
any road to the nearest permitted snowmobile road, provided that the rightof-
way shall be given to all pedestrians and other traffic; no snowmobile
operator shall make more than four one-way trips per day.
brakes, safety features and all other matters, provided that, until decals
to be displayed under 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7711.1 are issued by the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, no snowmobile shall be operated
under the provisions of this article without having displayed on both
sides of the cowling of the snowmobile the name of the owner of the
said snowmobile, in letters not less than three inches high.
B. To snowmobile operators who do not meet the requirements of the
Snowmobile and All-Terrain Vehicle Law as to age and certification of
training.
C. To racing-type or modified unmuffled or special machines.
A. No snowmobile shall be operated at a speed in excess of 10 miles per
hour.
B. No snowmobile shall be operated on any sidewalk or curb lawn.
C. When stopping two or more snowmobiles for any purpose other than
yielding right-of-way to motor vehicles or pedestrians, all machines
shall have their engines stopped.
D. A minimum distance of 50 feet shall be maintained between
snowmobiles when traveling in groups of two or more.
130. Editor's Note: So in original.
§ 400-54 GIRARD CODE § 400-58
1:384
§ 400-58. Violations and penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon
summary conviction for a first offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $10 nor more than $50, and costs of prosecution, and, in default of the
payment thereof, shall undergo imprisonment for not more than 10 days;
and, for a second offense, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $25 and
not more than $100 and, in default of the payment thereof, shall undergo
imprisonment for not more than 30 days.
§ 400-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 400-58
1:385
Chapter 409
VEHICLES, STORAGE OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 266.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 400.
§ 409-1. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Borough Manager or other official
designated by Council.131
MOTOR VEHICLE — Includes one or more motor vehicles, including trailers
or semitrailers, or parts thereof.
NUISANCE — Any condition, structure, or improvements which shall
constitute a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the citizens of Girard
Borough.
OWNER — Includes the actual owner, agent, or custodian of the property
on which motor vehicles are stored, whether an individual, partnership,
association or corporation, and the lessee shall be construed as the owner
for the purpose of this chapter when the lessor holds the lessee responsible
for maintenance and repairs.
PERSON — Includes every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
§ 409-2. Compliance required.
Except for licensed motor vehicles of the owners or occupiers of private
grounds within the Borough of Girard, no used motor vehicle, junked or
otherwise, shall be stored on said premises except in compliance with the
provisions of this chapter.
§ 409-3. Conditions for storing motor vehicles.
Any person desiring to store motor vehicles on private grounds, except
those mentioned in § 409-2, shall comply with the following:
A. All gas and oil shall be drained from the vehicle.
B. All glass shall be removed from any broken windshield, window or
mirror.
C. All upholstery shall be removed.
131. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 400-58 GIRARD CODE § 409-3
1:386
§ 409-4. Inspections; notice of violation; time to correct.
§ 409-5. Failure to correct; work performed by Borough; costs.
If the owner of grounds on which motor vehicles are stored does not comply
with the notice to abate the conditions within the time limit prescribed, the
Borough shall have the authority to take measures to correct the conditions
and collect the cost of such correction, plus a penalty of 10% of the cost
thereof. The Borough, in such event and pursuant to its statutory or
otherwise authorized police powers, shall have the right and power to enter
upon the offending premises to accomplish the foregoing.
§ 409-6. Hearings.
D. All wheels shall be removed so that the said vehicle is rendered
incapable of movement.
E. All trunk lids shall have their locks removed or shall themselves be
removed.
F. All such stored motor vehicles shall be at least 25 feet from any building
so as not to obstruct any fire-fighting equipment or emergency vehicles.
G. All such stored motor vehicles shall be at least 25 feet from any river or
stream or any other natural watercourse.
H. All such stored motor vehicles shall at all times be kept free of
infestation by vermin.
A. The enforcement officer is hereby empowered to inspect grounds on
which motor vehicles are stored to determine if there is compliance
with the provisions of this chapter. If noncompliance with the provisions
of § 409-3 of this chapter is found, or if any condition, structure, or
improvement poses a threat to the health, safety, or welfare of the
public, he shall issue written notice, to be served by registered or
certified mail, upon the owner of said premises or, if his whereabouts or
identity be unknown, by posting the notice conspicuously upon the
offending premises.
B. Said notice shall specify the condition or structure or improvement
complained of and shall require the owner to remove or otherwise
rectify the condition or structure or improvement as set forth therein
within 10 days of mailing or posting of said notice.
A. Any person aggrieved by the decision of the enforcement officer may
request and shall be granted a hearing before the Borough Council,
provided he shall file with said Council a written petition requesting
such hearing and setting forth a brief statement of the grounds therefor
within 10 days after notice of the enforcement officer's decision. The
hearing shall commence not later than 30 days after the date on which
the petition was filed, unless postponed for sufficient cause.
§ 409-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 409-6
1:387
§ 409-7. Violations and penalties.132
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this chapter. No judgment shall
be imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
§ 409-8. Remedies not exclusive.
The remedies provided herein for the enforcement of this chapter, or any
remedy provided by law, shall not be deemed mutually exclusive; rather,
they may be employed simultaneously or consecutively, at the option of the
Borough of Girard.
Chapter 414
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
Sewers and sewage disposal — See Ch. 320.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360.
B. After such hearing, the Borough Council shall sustain, modify or
overrule the action of the enforcement officer, and the decision of the
Council shall be final.
132. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 409-6 GIRARD CODE § 409-8
1:388
ARTICLE I
Water Connections
[Adopted 12-4-1978 by Ord. No. 503 (Ch. XXVII, Part 2, of the 1974
Code of Ordinances)]
§ 414-1. Permit to connect; fees.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to connect into any
portion of the water system of the Borough of Girard without first securing
a written permit therefor from the Borough Secretary, which permit shall be
issued upon the payment of a tap-in fee in such amount as may from time to
time be established by resolution of the Borough Council. Current fees shall
be on file with the Borough Secretary and shall be furnished upon request.
§ 414-2. Permitted materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any material
other than that furnished by the Borough of Girard to connect into any
portion of the water system of the Borough of Girard. Such material shall
be furnished by the Borough of Girard at the expense of the person, firm or
corporation desiring to make the connection into the water system.
§ 414-3. Violations and penalties.133
Any person who violates or permits a violation of this article shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by
the Borough before a Magisterial District Judge, pay a fine of not more than
$600, plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred
by the Borough in the enforcement of this article. No judgment shall be
imposed until the date of the determination of the violation by the
Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals
the judgment, the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the
applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day a violation exists shall
constitute a separate offense. Further, the appropriate officers or agents
of the Borough are hereby authorized to seek equitable relief, including
injunction, to enforce compliance herewith.
133. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 414-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-3
1:389

ARTICLE II
Rates and Charges
[Adopted 11-16-1981 by Ord. No. 526 (Ch. XXVII, Part 1, of the
1974 Code of Ordinances)]
§ 414-4. Imposition of charges; payment.
There is imposed upon the owners of, or the users of water in or on, all
properties connected to the Girard Borough water system charges for the
use of said system and purchase of water therefrom, payable in the amounts
and as provided in the Water Rate Resolution of the Council of the Borough
of Girard and as it is hereafter from time to time adopted, amended, and
modified by Council. Said owners and users are jointly and severally liable
for the payment of said water charges and the penalties therein prescribed
for delinquent payment thereof.
§ 414-5. Billing.
All bills for water sold through the Borough water system shall be due when
rendered and be subject to the penalty provisions set forth in the Borough's
Water Rate Resolution. Owners and, where adequate arrangements have
been made with Council, users will be billed periodically for the water
distributed and sold through the Borough water system in accordance with
the billing practices of the Borough.
§ 414-6. Liens.
The amount charged for water and any penalty added thereto as herein
provided shall be a lien upon the real estate charged with the payment
thereof, whether or not the original billing has been to the owner of the
property or to a tenant thereof.
§ 414-7. Water Rate Resolution on file.
The Water Rate Resolution and as it is hereafter from time to time adopted,
amended, or modified by Council shall be on file in the Borough Manager's
office, with a copy thereof available to any owner, user, or potential owner
or user of water purchased from the Borough of Girard.
§ 414-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 414-7
1:391
Chapter 425
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 50.
Airport district overlay — See Ch. 105.
Construction — See Ch. 145.
Fire prevention and fire protection — See Ch.
199.
Floodplain management — See Ch. 205.
Grass, weeds and other vegetation — See Ch.
217.
Housing standards — See Ch. 228.
Massage establishments — See Ch. 250.
Mobile homes and mobile home parks — See
Ch. 259.
Nuisances; dangerous buildings — See Ch.
266.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 283.
Sexually oriented businesses — See Ch. 325.
Signs — See Ch. 331.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 360.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 366.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
370.
Trees — See Ch. 392.
§ 414-7 GIRARD CODE § 414-7
1:392
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 425-1. Title.
This chapter shall be cited as the "Borough of Girard Zoning Ordinance."
§ 425-2. Definitions.
Unless the context requires otherwise, words used in this chapter shall have
the meanings set forth in Article VI of this chapter.
§ 425-3. Community development objectives.
The community development objectives, which are the basis for the
provisions of this chapter, are set forth in the Comprehensive Plan, as
adopted and amended by the Borough Council.
§ 425-4. Zoning Map.
A map entitled "Official Borough of Girard Zoning Map" is hereby adopted
as a part of this chapter. The Zoning Map shall be kept on file for
examination in the office of the Borough Manager in the Girard Borough
Building.
§ 425-5. Compliance required.
No structure shall be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved,
razed, altered, converted, or enlarged, nor shall any structure or land be
used, except in full compliance with all the provisions of this chapter and
after the lawful issuance of all permits and certificates required by this
chapter.
§ 425-6. Statutory authority; purpose.
This chapter is adopted by virtue of the authority vested in the Borough and
set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, Act 247 of 1968,
53 P.S. § 10101 et seq., as amended, for the purpose of protecting the public
health, safety, morals and general welfare.
§ 425-7. Conformity with Comprehensive Plan.
The established zoning districts within this chapter are designed to achieve
the intent of the Girard Borough portion of the Girard-Lake City Area
Background Analysis and Comprehensive Plan, and more specifically the
Girard Borough Land Use Plan Map of this Comprehensive Plan, which was
adopted by Borough Council July 16, 1979.
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-7
1:393

ARTICLE II
District Regulations
§ 425-8. Zoning districts. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 530;
9-18-1989 by Ord. No. 583; 1-15-1991 by Ord. No. 592; 12-16-1991
by Ord. No. 599]
A. The minimum lot and yard requirements and other development
standards for each zoning district are set forth within Subsection B of
this section. These standards must be met at the minimum, as well as
any other requirement(s) listed within this chapter that apply to the
respective use. The permitted uses are set forth within the table located
in Subsection C of this section. Any use not expressly listed for a
district, or uses which the Zoning Officer cannot interpret as being of
the same classification as a listed use, are prohibited within the district.
Permitted uses require normal application procedures through the
Zoning Officer. The established zoning districts within this chapter are
designed to achieve the intent of the Girard Borough Comprehensive
Plan Update, more specifically the Borough Land Use Plan Map of this
plan.
(1) R-1 Residential District. The purpose of this district is for land uses
that are compatible with lower-density single-family dwellings.
(2) R-1A Residential District (Single-Family). The purpose of this
district is to preserve the primary area of single-family residential
dwellings.
(3) R-2 Residential District (Medium-Density). The purpose of this
district is to provide transitional residential areas between the
preservation-oriented R-1 District and the redevelopment-oriented
R-3 District.
(4) R-3 Residential District (High-Density). The purpose of this district
is to provide for diverse residential composition through allowing a
wide variety of housing types to serve the future housing needs of
the Borough. Secondary uses that comprise of public services or
housing that are compatible with higher-density residential uses
are provided for within this district.
(5) C-1 Commercial District (Central Business). The purpose of this
district is to provide sufficient land area for the commercial
(Central Business District) potential of the Borough. While the
district is primarily designed for the shopping convenience of
persons residing within the Borough, the uses provided for also
serve regional interests and needs, and it is designed and intended
to permit a wide range of commercial and institutional uses.
Standards are developed to provide an attractive, functional and
efficient shopping and business atmosphere; to protect existing
investments; and to encourage redevelopment and revitalization
with adequate off-street parking facilities.
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-8
1:395
(6) C-2 Commercial District (Highway/Plaza). The purpose of this
district is to provide sufficient land area for the commercial
(Highway/Plaza) potential of the Borough.
(7) M-1 Manufacturing District. The purpose of this district is to
provide for industrial needs and potential of the Borough. This
district will contain only those industrial establishments,
nonresidential commercial activities and facilities for
manufacturing, processing, packaging, storage and warehousing
which can conform to the performance standards of this article.
(8) FP Floodplain District. The purpose of this district is to provide for
the protection of life and property in the recognized one-hundredyear
floodplain of the Borough, which is identified in the Flood
Insurance Rate Maps (FIRM) and related study prepared by the
Federal Insurance Administration. The Floodplain District, as
mapped specifically (officially) within the aforementioned FIRM
study, shall be considered an area whereby all uses and structures
are subject to special development standards. All uses and
structures shall be regulated by Chapter 205, Floodplain
Management, to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Borough's residents and businesses.
B. Girard Borough is divided into seven districts as shown by the district
boundaries on the Zoning Map. Those districts are:
(1) R-1 Residential (Low-Density):
(a) Minimum lot area: 15,000 square feet.
(b) Lot area/family: 15,000 square feet.
(c) Front yard: 30 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: 10 feet.
(e) Total side yard: 24 feet.
(f) Rear yard: 40 feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 100 feet.
(h) Minimum lot and area requirements for planned residential
developments shall comply with Article VII, Planned
Residential Development, of this chapter.
(2) R-1A Residential (Single-Family). Minimum lot and area
requirements for the R-1A Residential District shall comply with
the minimum lot and area requirements for the R-1 Residential
District.
(3) R-2 Residential (Medium-Density):
(a) Minimum lot area: 7,500 square feet.
§ 425-8 GIRARD CODE § 425-8
1:396
(b) Lot area/family: 5,000 square feet.
(c) Front yard: 25 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: eight feet.
(e) Total side yard: 20 feet.
(f) Rear yard: 35 feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 60 feet.
(4) R-3 Residential (High-Density):
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Lot area/family: 2,500 square feet.
(c) Front yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: six feet.
(e) Total side yard: 16 feet.
(f) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 50 feet.
(5) C-1 Commercial (Central Business District):
(a) Minimum lot area: 3,600 square feet.
(b) Lot area/family: 2,500 square feet.
(c) Front yard: —
(d) Minimum side yard: —
(e) Total side yard: —
(f) Rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 50 feet.
(6) M-1 Manufacturing:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Lot area/family: —
(c) Front yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard: eight feet.
(e) Total side yard: 18 feet.
(f) Rear yard: 30 feet.
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-8
1:397
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 50 feet.
(7) FP Floodplain.
C. Permitted Use Table. The permitted uses for each district, as shown in
the following table, shall be according to the common meaning of the
term or according to the definitions given in Article III through Article
VI. The letter "P" designates a permitted use for that district. The letter
"D" in brackets means the term is defined in this chapter. A section
reference in brackets means that the use must comply with the
requirements within that section in this chapter.
Permitted Use Table
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 M-1 FP
Public grounds [D]
[§ 425-45]
P P P P P P P P
Essential services
[D] [§ 425-45]
P P P P P P P P
Wall/fence
[§ 425-15D]
P P P P P P P P
Off-street loading/
parking [D]
[§§ 425-18, 425-19]
P P P P P P P P
Signs [D] [§ 425-17] P P P P P P P P
Accessory uses [D]
[§ 425-15]
P P P P P P P —
Single-family
dwelling [D]
P P P P — — — —
Agriculture [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — — — — — P P
Two-family dwelling
[D]
— — P P — — — —
Conversion
apartment [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — P P — — — —
Resident treatment
facility [D]
[§ 425-10]
— — P P P P — —
Placement
treatment facility
[D] [§ 425-10]
— — P P P P — —
Churches [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — P P P P — —
Multifamily
dwellings [D]
— — — P P — — —
§ 425-8 GIRARD CODE § 425-8
1:398
§ 425-9. District boundaries.
District boundaries shown on the lines of roads, streams, and transportation
rights-of-way shall be deemed to follow the center lines. The vacation
of roads shall not affect the location of such district boundaries. When
Permitted Use Table
R-1 R-1A R-2 R-3 C-1 C-2 M-1 FP
Public buildings [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — — P P P — —
Public utility
building [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — — — P P — —
Retail trade sales
[D]
— — — — P P — —
Service business [D]
[§ 425-45]
— — — — P P — —
Home occupation
[D] [§ 425-45]
— — — — P P — —
Commercial/
residential structure
[D] [§ 425-45]
— — — — P P — —
Cemeteries — — — — P — — —
Light manufacturing
[D]
— — — — — — P —
Human body
massage
establishments [D]
[Added 2-19-2001
by Ord. No. 673]
— — — — — P — —
Sexually oriented
business operations
[D] [Added
2-19-2001 by Ord.
No. 673]
— — — — — P — —
Manufactured/
mobile homes
[§ 425-21] [Added
10-19-2009 by
Ord. No. 704]
P — — — — — — —
Manufactured/
mobile home parks
[§ 425-21] [Added
10-19-2009 by
Ord. No. 704]
P — — — — — — —
§ 425-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-9
1:399
the Zoning Officer cannot definitely determine the location of a district
boundary of such center lines by the scale of dimensions stated on the
Zoning Map or by the fact that it clearly coincides with a property line,
he shall refuse action, and the Zoning Hearing Board, upon appeal, shall
interpret the location of the district boundary with reference to the scale of
the Zoning Map and the purposes set forth in all relevant provisions of this
chapter.
§ 425-10. Permitted uses. [Amended 1-15-1991 by Ord. No. 592;
2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 673]
The permitted uses for each district are stated in § 425-8. Where a human
body massage establishment or sexually oriented business operation is a
permitted use, such uses shall meet the conditions outlined in Chapter 325,
Sexually Oriented Businesses, and Chapter 250, Massage Establishments,
and such uses shall meet the following requirements:
§ 425-11. Conditional uses.
Borough Council may authorize conditional uses as specified in § 425-8, if
all conditions and provisions of Article IV are met.
§ 425-12. Height regulations.
No structure shall exceed 35 feet in height above average ground level,
unless approved by the Zoning Hearing Board. The Board may authorize a
variance to the height regulations in any district. All front, side, and rear
yard depths may be increased not to exceed one foot for each additional foot
of height, at the discretion of the Board.
§ 425-13. Lot and yard requirements. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 614]
The minimum lot area, minimum depths of front yard, and minimum width
of each side yard for each district shall be as designated in § 425-8.
A. Evidence that all applicable federal, state, county and local laws, rules,
regulations, and ordinances have been met and will be complied with
concerning the use of an existing structure or construction of a new
facility, in the operation of the facility once occupied.
B. Evidence that all necessary permits, licenses, certifications and other
approvals for the facility and for its operator and/or personnel or
employees have been obtained from federal, state, county and local
government agencies and/or courts, as applicable and will be kept in
effect.
C. Uses not specifically listed shall not be permitted, except upon appeal
to the Board.
A. Lots which abut on more than one street shall provide the required
front yards along every street.
§ 425-9 GIRARD CODE § 425-13
1:400
B. All structures, whether attached to the principal structure or not, and
whether open or enclosed, including porches, carports, balconies, or
platforms above normal grade level, shall not project into any minimum
front, side, or rear yard.
C. Any lot of record existing at the effective date of this chapter then held
in separate ownership different from the ownership of adjoining lots
may be used for the erection of a structure conforming to the use
regulations of the district in which it is located, so that such lot may be
used as a building site; provided, however, that the yard and other
requirements of the district are complied with as closely as is possible
in the opinion of the Planning Commission.
D. Where an on-lot septic tank is to be used, the minimum lot size shall not
be less than required by percolation tests, and in no case shall it be less
than 20,000 square feet. A septic tank permit from the Pennsylvania
Department of Environmental Protection shall be a prerequisite to an
application for a building permit.
E. Nonresidential structures or uses shall not be located or conducted
closer to any lot line of any other lot in any residential district than the
distance specified in the following schedule:
Minimum Side or Rear
Yard Abutting any Lot in
any Residential District
(feet) Use
10 Off-street parking spaces and access
drives for nonresidential uses
30 Churches, schools, and public or
semipublic structures
50 Entertainment facilities, motels, all
business uses and industrial uses
F. Any portion of a lot once used as a yard or as lot area per family in
compliance with the area requirements of the district regulations of this
chapter shall not be counted again as required yard or lot area per
family for another building.
§ 425-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-13
1:401

ARTICLE III
General Regulations
§ 425-14. Nonconforming uses. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No.
614]
The following provisions shall apply to all nonconforming uses or structures:
§ 425-15. Accessory uses.
The following provisions shall apply to accessory uses:
A. A nonconforming use or a nonconforming structure may be continued
but may not be extended, expanded, or changed, unless to a conforming
use, except as permitted by the Zoning Hearing Board in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.
B. The Zoning Officer shall identify and register all nonconforming uses
and structures as required by Act 247, as amended.134 A zoning
certificate shall then be issued to the owner of said use or structure.
C. Any nonconforming structure damaged by fire, flood, explosion, or
other casualty may be reconstructed and used as before if such
reconstruction is performed within 12 months of such casualty, and if
the restored structure has no greater coverage and contains no greater
cubic content than before such casualty.
D. In the event that any nonconforming use, conducted in a structure or
otherwise, ceases, for whatever reason, for a period of one year, or is
abandoned for any period, such nonconforming use shall not be
resumed.
A. Accessory farm buildings shall not be erected within 100 feet of a
neighboring property.
(1) Feed lots, runs, pens, kennels, and similar facilities used for
commercial animal raising and care shall not be permitted within
the Borough. General agriculture activities are permitted to every
lot line.
(2) Roadside stands for sale of homegrown fruits and vegetables shall
be permitted if they do not entail a structure having a floor area
greater than 100 square feet, are erected at least 30 feet off the
road, parking space is provided off the road, and are conducted on
the property from which the crops were grown.
B. Every swimming pool shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than
six feet high to prevent uncontrolled access by small children. The
requirement shall supersede all other fencing requirements of this
chapter, providing said fence is offset the minimum distance required
134. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-15
1:403
§ 425-16. Special exceptions.
The following uses may be authorized with such conditions as are deemed
appropriate by the Zoning Hearing Board:
for a side yard from the edge of the property. Swimming pools 24 inches
and less are exempt. [Amended 1-21-2013 by Ord. No. 725]
C. The exterior storage of not more than one motor vehicle which does not
have a current inspection sticker shall be considered an accessory use,
but two or more shall constitute an auto salvage business and shall not
be permitted as an accessory use.
D. An open screening wall or fence no more than four feet in height may be
erected in the front and side yards of any structure. An open or solid
screening wall or fence no more than six feet in height may be
constructed in the rear yard of any structure. For purposes of this
subsection, the line of demarcation between rear and side yards shall
be determined to be the rear wall of the building. A fence not exceeding
10 feet in height may be built in any yard used for public schools, public
playgrounds, public parks, public recreation or public institution areas.
On corner lots, no fence or enclosure hedge exceeding three feet in
height may be erected within 50 feet of the intersection of the
curblines.
E. No fence shall be constructed within 18 inches of the sidewalk in the
front, side or rear yards. [Added 8-16-2004 by Ord. No. 687]
A. Living quarters in an accessory structure as an accessory use to a
single-family house to accommodate domestic employees of the
residents of the principal building.
B. The accommodation of not more than two nontransient roomers as an
accessory use to a single-family house, provided that no sign is
displayed.
C. Directional signs of a reasonable size in connection with any legal
business or industry, provided they contain no information other than
instructions for convenience of vehicular traffic in reaching such
business or industry.
D. Temporary structures and trailers used in conjunction with
construction work may be permitted only during the period that the
construction work is in progress. Permits for temporary structures shall
be issued for a six-month period.
E. Sheds: one-story detached accessory buildings used as tool or storage
sheds, playhouses or similar uses. The structure must be on a lot where
there is an existing single-family dwelling. The structure cannot be
designed for human habitation. The gross floor area must not exceed
200 square feet, and the total height must not exceed 10 feet. The
structure must be subordinate to the main dwelling. The structure,
§ 425-15 GIRARD CODE § 425-16
1:404
§ 425-17. Signs. [Amended 4-21-2003 by Ord. No. 679; 7-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 727]
including soffit, fascia and appurtenances, must be at least 10 feet from
each property line and cannot be placed in the front yard. No plumbing
or gas installation in the accessory building is allowed. Electrical
installation in the accessory building shall be subject to permitting.
When an inspection is performed for electrical, the inspector is
obligated to address any apparent violation of the Pennsylvania
Building Code, when found. To apply for the residential accessory use
exemption, a zoning certificate must be filled out and approved by the
Zoning Administrator and the applicable fee must be paid. [Amended
7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 728]
F. A swimming pool to be located within the minimum rear or side yard
depth, provided the same is approved as to size, construction, material,
safety features, location and shielding.
G. Wheelchair ramp. A wheelchair ramp may be added to a residence to
allow accessibility to a home, provided it meets the Federal ADA
standards and the most current Pennsylvania Building Code standards
and is built at least 24 inches from any property line. To apply for the
residential accessory use exemption, a zoning certificate must be filled
out and approved by the Zoning Administrator and the applicable fee
must be paid. A building permit must also be obtained, if needed, and
all conditions of same met. [Added 7-15-2013 by Ord. No. 728]
A. General sign provisions applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) No person shall erect, alter, place or permit to be placed, or replace
any sign without first obtaining a zoning certificate and building
permit, unless otherwise exempted. All signs shall conform to the
requirements of this section and the most current Pennsylvania
Uniform Construction Code. All signs, as defined, shall require a
permit for the erection and maintenance of the same, unless
otherwise exempted.
(2) Each application for a sign permit shall be accompanied by a
drawing, to scale, showing the design which is being proposed, the
size, character and color of letter, lines and symbols, the method of
illumination, the exact location of the sign in relation to the
building and property and construction details. The application
shall be accompanied by the permit fee, as designated in the
appropriate municipal resolution.
(3) Any permit issued by the Zoning Officer for erection, alteration,
replacement or relocation of any sign shall expire automatically 12
months after the date of issuance if work authorized by the permit
has not been initiated and diligently pursued.
§ 425-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:405
(4) Sign supports, braces, guys and anchors shall be maintained in
such a manner as not to cause a hazard.
(5) Signs shall be maintained free of peeling paint or paper, fading,
staining, rust, or other condition which impairs legibility or
intelligibility. All signs shall be constructed of a durable material
and maintained in good condition. All signs, other than those
constructed of decay-resistant wood, shall bear a protective
treatment to guard against rust or decay. Signs using removable
paper or other materials and general signs bearing protective
coatings such as paint shall be maintained in such condition as to
eliminate loose or frayed material protruding or hanging or falling
from the structure. Any sign found to be in an unsafe or poorly
maintained condition upon inspection shall be declared to be a
public nuisance, and the Zoning Officer shall give notice to the
owner, in writing, to repair or remove the sign within 10 days. Upon
failure of the owner to comply, the municipality shall remove the
sign at the owner's expense in accordance with state and local law.
(6) Signs may be internally illuminated, or, if externally illuminated,
the source of the light shall be enclosed and directed to prevent the
source of light from shining directly onto traffic or residential
property.
(7) Illumination.
(a) Illumination, when authorized by this section, shall be directed
upon the sign face and not towards adjoining properties or
streets.
(b) Flashing or oscillating signs shall not be permitted.
(c) Lighting shall be stationary and constant in intensity and color
at all times.
(d) The intensity of any source of illumination of any sign, whether
indirect or internal, shall be controlled so as to not exceed a
maximum of 1.0 footcandle at the property line.
(e) External light bulb fixtures shall project no colors.
(f) Lighting emitted by signage shall be subject to lighting
standards otherwise applicable to the property.
(8) No sign shall be placed in, upon or over any public right-of-way,
alley, or other public place, except as may be otherwise permitted
by this section.
(9) No light pole, utility pole, or other supporting member shall be
used for the placement of any sign unless specifically designed and
approved for such use.
§ 425-17 GIRARD CODE § 425-17
1:406
(10)No sign shall be erected in any place where it may, by reason of its
position, shape, color, or other characteristic, interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic
sign, signal, or device.
(11)No sign shall be located in such a position that it will cause a
hazard by obstructing visibility. No sign shall interfere with
minimum site distance required by PENNDOT standards from
access drives to a street. No sign, other than official traffic signs
and off-premises directional signs, shall hang over or be erected
within the right-of-way of any street.
(12)No commercial vehicle which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Administrator, has the intended function of acting as a sign shall be
parked in any area abutting the street, unless no other parking
area is available.
(13)No sign shall contain any moving or animated parts or have the
appearance of having any moving or animated parts, provided that
variable time/temperature signs, digital signs and electronic
message boards may be permitted in accordance with
§ 425-17F(10).
(14) No wall sign shall extend above the roofline of a building.
(15)No sign shall be permitted within street lines (curb lawns), except
those of a duly constituted governmental body, including traffic
signs, and similar regulatory notices. [Ordinance 679; Section
4(F)(1)135]
(16)No signs shall contain information or advertising for any product or
service not sold on the premises.
(17) Existing nonconforming signs. Every sign or other advertising
structure lawfully in existence on the effective date of this section
may not be replaced, altered or relocated, unless it is made to
comply with this section, except in the case of a sign accidentally
damaged or destroyed. A change in wording of the sign message
does not constitute replacement, alteration or relocation and, as
such, shall be permitted.
(18) All setbacks specified within this section shall apply to the entirety
of the sign, including elements that overhang or extend from the
supporting structure.
(19) No part of any sign shall emit noise.
(20) A sign shall bear no more than two faces.
135. Editor's Note: For the provisions of this section, originally adopted by Ord. No. 679, see
§ 425-17D(2)(a).
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:407
(21) Obscene signs are prohibited. No sign shall utilize sexually explicit
or suggestive language or graphics or any illustration of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" as defined in this
Code136 and/or which bears language deemed obscene by
Ordinance 15 of the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Public Indecency.
(22) Automatic changeable-copy signs shall not bear advertising or
mention of an establishment, an activity, a product, a service or
entertainment which is sold, produced, manufactured, available or
furnished at a site other than on the premises on which the sign is
located.
(23)Within 90 days of a business's closing, the sign copy of the
associated obsolete sign or signs shall be removed or obscured in a
manner commensurate with general construction standards
outlined herein.
B. Prohibited signs applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) A sign that is not permitted by this section is prohibited.
(2) The following additional sign types are expressly prohibited.
(a) Billboards.
(b) Roof signs.
(c) Portable signs and temporary signs, except as may be
otherwise permitted.
C. Nonconforming signs, illegal signs and signs accessory to
nonconforming uses applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) Every permanent sign which does not conform to the height, size,
area, or location requirements of this section as of the date of the
adoption of this section is hereby deemed to be nonconforming.
(2) Nonconforming signs may not be altered, expanded, enlarged, or
extended; however, nonconforming signs may be maintained and
repaired so as to continue the useful life of the sign. An existing
nonconforming sign, including a billboard, shall not be changed to
a digital sign.
(3) For purposes of this section, a nonconforming sign may be
diminished in size or dimension or the copy of the sign amended or
changed without jeopardizing the privilege of nonconforming use.
If a sign is nonconforming in its setback, this section shall not
apply, and the sign shall not be replaced.
136. Editor's Note: See Ch. 325, Sexually Oriented Businesses.
§ 425-17 GIRARD CODE § 425-17
1:408
(4) Any nonconforming sign destroyed by fire or other casualty loss
shall not be restored or rebuilt if reconstruction will constitute
more than 50% of the surface of the sign on the date of loss.
(5) Any sign which, for a period of six months or more, no longer
advertises a bona fide business conducted or product sold shall be
removed by the owner of the building, structure, or property upon
which such sign is located, within 30 days of receipt of written
notice by the Zoning Administrator.
(6) A sign accessory to a nonconforming use may be erected in the
Borough in accordance with the sign regulations for the subject
zoning district.
D. Exempted signs applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) The following signs shall be permitted in all districts, and no permit
shall be required to erect such signs:
(a) Temporary signs announcing a drive or event of a civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious organization, providing
such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet in area and shall be
removed immediately upon completion of the drive or event.
(b) Signs offering the sale or rental of the premises upon which the
sign is erected. Not more than one sign shall be placed on the
property, unless such property fronts on more than one street,
in which case one sign may be erected on each street frontage.
(c) Temporary signs of contractors, developers, architects,
engineers, builders and artisans, erected and maintained on
the premises where the work is being performed, provided that
the area of such sign shall not exceed 32 square feet, and
provided that such sign shall be removed upon completion of
the work.
(d) Trespassing signs, signs indicating the private nature of a
road, driveway or premises and signs controlling fishing or
hunting on the premises, provided that the area of such sign
shall not exceed four square feet.
(2) The following signs shall be permitted:
(a) No sign shall be permitted within street lines (curb lawns),
except those of a duly constituted governmental body,
including traffic signs, and similar regulatory notices.
(b) Political signs are permitted on private property only after
obtaining the consent of the owner.137
137. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 331, Art. I, Political Signs.
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:409
(c) In commercial districts, special temporary promotional
devices, signs or displays, such as banners or pennants, are
permitted. Where such signs are outside of a building, they
shall remain on display for a period not to exceed 30
consecutive days.
E. Units of measurement applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) The area of a sign shall be measured as the area within a single,
continuous perimeter composed of any straight-line geometric
figure which encloses the extreme limits of writing, representation,
emblem, logo, or any other figure of similar character, together
with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part
of the display or used to differentiate the sign from the background
against which it is placed, excluding only the structure necessary to
support the sign.
(2) The area of a freestanding, ground, or projecting sign that has two
faces shall be measured by including the area of all sign faces,
except that if two such faces are placed back-to-back and are of
equal size, the area of the two back-to-back faces shall be counted
as one face. If the two back-to-back faces are of unequal size, the
larger of the two sign faces shall be counted as the one face.
(3) The height of a sign shall be measured as the vertical distance from
the highest point of the sign to the grade of the adjacent street or
the average grade of the ground immediately beneath the sign,
whichever is less.
(4) For buildings with multiple tenants, the sign areas for wall signs,
marquee signs, projecting signs, and awning signs shall be
determined by taking that portion of the front wall of the building,
applicable to each tenant space, and computing sign requirements
for that portion of the total wall. In the case of a corner lot, the wall
area adjacent to the tenant space on the second street frontage
shall be used to calculate the sign area for a second wall sign,
awning sign, or projecting sign. Each sign shall be attached to the
same wall which is used to determine its size.
F. Sign regulations applicable to all zoning districts.
(1) Temporary signs are subject to Ordinance 679.138
(2) All ground, wall and freestanding signs may include message
boards and digital signs.
(3) Electronic message boards and digital signs shall be subject to
§ 425.17F(10).
138. Editor's Note: The provisions originally adopted by Ord. No. 679 are codified as
§ 425-17D(1) and (2).
§ 425-17 GIRARD CODE § 425-17
1:410
(4) No sign or other structure shall be erected, constructed or
maintained over or across any sidewalk of the Borough, the lowest
part of which or the supports of which are less than 10 feet above
the highest point of the underlying sidewalk. Signs which project
from any building over a sidewalk shall not project more than 2/3 of
the distance from the building to the curb.
(5) Real estate signs shall be removed within seven days after
completion of the sale or lease of the property.
(6) Construction signs are permitted within any zoned district, subject
to Ordinance 679.139
(7) Special event signs are permitted within any zoned district, subject
to Ordinance 679.140
(8) Directional signs are permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) A directional sign may contain a logo of an on-premises
establishment, but no advertising copy.
(b) No such sign shall exceed six square feet in area or four feet in
height.
(c) Directional signs shall be limited to traffic control functions.
(9) Garage and estate sale signs are permitted subject to the following
restrictions:
(a) One sign per lot or parcel is permitted, located on the lot or
parcel on which such sale is being conducted, or on any other
lot or parcel with the permission of the property owner, and
erected outside of any public street right-of-way.
(b) Such sign shall not exceed six square feet in area.
(c) Such sign shall be erected no more than seven days prior to the
day(s) of the sale and shall be removed within one day after the
completion of the sale.
(10) Message boards, digital signs and electronic message boards are
permitted subject to the following restrictions, as applicable:
(a) Only one digital sign shall be permitted on a lot or parcel; the
size of which may not exceed 30 inches by 84 inches (2.5 feet
by seven feet).
139. Editor's Note: The provisions originally adopted by Ord. No. 679 are codified as
§ 425-17D(1) and (2).
140. Editor's Note: The provisions originally adopted by Ord. No. 679 are codified as
§ 425-17D(1) and (2).
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:411
(b) Messages displayed on digital signs located within any zoning
district shall have a minimum duration of 10 seconds.
(c) All electronic messages shall be static, and the transition
between messages shall be instantaneous, with no more than
0.3 second between messages.
(d) No digital sign shall create glare or have characteristics that
impair the vision of motorists or create a nuisance for
surrounding properties.
(e) The digital sign shall not be illuminated beyond the default
settings of the manufacturer's brightness or dimming controls.
(f) The digital sign shall have automatic dimming capabilities that
adjust the brightness of the sign to changes in the ambient
light levels at all times of the day and night.
(g) The owner of the sign shall allow the Borough to use the
electronic message board to communicate emergency public
service information relating to disasters or emergencies.
(h) Audio speakers or any form of pyrotechnics are prohibited in
conjunction with a manual or electronic message board.
(i) Any property on which is located a manual or an electronic
message board shall not be permitted to have a temporary sign
or a sign displayed on a vehicle.
(j) Any digital sign that is not in working order shall be shut off
until repairs are made.
G. Schedule of sign regulations. Signs in each zoning district shall be
subject to the following regulations:
(1) R-1A, R-1, R-2, and R-3 Zoning District: permitted signs.
(a) In any residential district, a sign is permitted which announces
the name, address, or professional activity of the occupant of
the premises on which said sign is located and is reflective of
the character of the neighborhood.
[1] No sign shall be permitted to exceed the following
dimensions: 68 inches horizontal plane; 34 inches vertical
plane; and 18 inches of space between the sign and the
ground, for a total of 52 inches.
[2] Signs must be located 14 feet from the sidewalk.
[3] Sign posts shall not be more than four inches in diameter
and 55 inches high. (See Attachment A.141)
141. Editor's Note: See the Girard Borough Sign Requirement diagram included as an
attachment to this chapter.
§ 425-17 GIRARD CODE § 425-17
1:412
(2) Church, school or similar public structure.
(a) A bulletin board not exceeding 24 square feet is permitted in
connection with any church, school or similar public structure.
(3) C-1, C-2, M-1 Zoning Districts: permitted signs.
(a) Business signs shall be permitted in commercial and
manufacturing districts in connection with any legal business
or industry when located on the same premises and if they
meet the following requirements:
[1] Signs shall not contain information or advertising for any
product or service not sold on the premises.
[2] Signs shall not have a combined aggregate surface size
greater than five square feet for each foot of width of the
principal structure on the premises.
[3] No sign or other structure shall be erected, constructed or
maintained over or across any sidewalk of the Borough,
the lowest part of which or the supports of which are less
than 10 feet above the highest point of the underlying
sidewalk. Signs which project from any building over a
sidewalk shall not project more than 2/3 of the distance
from the building to the curb.
[4] Signs, open areas, and structures shall not be illuminated
in any manner which causes undue distraction, confusion
or hazard to vehicular traffic.
[5] One freestanding sign is permitted for each property to a
maximum size of 25 feet in height and 20 feet in width and
must also comply with § 425-7G(3)(a)[2].
H. Special land uses.
(1) Billboards.
(a) Billboards shall not be permitted.
(b) No portion of the face or structure of any existing billboard
shall include any moving parts or changing illumination.
(c) No existing billboard shall permit the advertising or other
display of tobacco products, alcohol products, or sexually
oriented business.
I. Violations and penalties. Upon a determination by the Girard Borough
Manager that a violation of this section has occurred, the following
action shall be taken:
(1) The Borough Manager shall direct a registered or certified letter
notice to the owner of such property. The owner shall be
§ 425-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-17
1:413
§ 425-18. Off-street parking. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No. 530]
determined by reviewing the county tax assessment records of the
most current year. Said letter shall be mailed to the address as
determined by such records.
(2) The said letter notice shall inform the said owner as to the violation
of this section, citing the reason for violation and giving the owner
15 days to remove the reason for the violation. If the owner,
occupant, mortgagee, or lessee fails to comply with the order of the
Borough within the time specified in the notice and no petition for a
hearing before Borough Council is filed by the owner within 10
days thereafter, or following a hearing by the Girard Council where
the order is sustained thereby, the Borough shall cause such
building or structure to be repaired, vacated, or demolished, as
determined by the Girard Borough Manager in accordance with the
standards hereinbefore provided. The Girard Borough may collect
the cost of such repair, vacation or demolition, together with a
penalty of 10% of such cost, in the manner provided by law, or the
Girard Borough may seek injunctive relief in a court of competent
jurisdiction pursuant to the Rules of Civil Procedure, or a
combination of the above, and charge the cost thereof to such
owner.
A. Off-street parking spaces shall be provided in accordance with the
specifications in this section in any district whenever any new use is
established or existing use or structure is enlarged.
Use Parking Space Required
Dwelling 2 for each dwelling unit
Dwelling (single- and twofamily)
2 for each dwelling unit
Church, theatre, school 1 for every 4 seats in largest meeting
room
Stores, shops, restaurants,
clubs, funeral homes
1 for every 100 square feet of public
floor space
Business services,
warehouses, professional
offices
1 for every 300 square feet of gross
floor area
Manufacturing plants 1 for every 2 employees
Hospitals 1 for every 2 beds
Motels 1 for every rental unit
Multifamily dwellings The number of parking spaces shall
comply with the provisions of Article
VII
§ 425-17 GIRARD CODE § 425-18
1:414
§ 425-19. Off-street loading.
One off-street berth of not less than 35 feet by 10 feet shall be provided
by every business and industrial use with a floor area of more than 5,000
square feet, with one additional berth required for each additional 25,000
square feet of floor area.
§ 425-20. Environmental protection requirements.
The following provisions shall apply to all uses of land in all districts unless
otherwise noted:
B. No off-street parking space shall have an area less than 200 square feet,
exclusive of access drives, and shall not be less than 10 feet by 20 feet
in size.
C. Any off-street parking lot for more than five vehicles shall be graded for
proper drainage and surfaced so as to provide a durable and dustless
surface. A design plan must be submitted for approval by the Planning
Commission.
D. Any lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking lot shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light away from adjoining premises in any
residential district.
A. No cut or fill grade shall exceed a slope of three to one or 33%. This
provision shall apply to all cuts and fill exceeding 100 square feet in
exposed surface area, including cuts and fills on land naturally
exceeding three to one in slope.
B. All lands, regardless of their slope, from which structures or natural
cover has been removed or otherwise destroyed shall be appropriately
graded and seeded within a reasonable time of such clearance activity.
The phrase "a reasonable time" shall be interpreted to be within two
weeks during the growing season and shall be rigidly applied to
construction activities in order to accomplish the intent of keeping
erosion to an absolute minimum.
C. No cutting, fill, or other disturbing of land and natural vegetation is
permissible within 50 feet of the edge of natural drainagecourses,
except as permitted by action of the Zoning Hearing Board. In such
cases, the Board may grant permission, provided special precautions
are taken to insure against continuing erosion or other circumstances
which may be harmful to the immediate watercourse or in any way
pollute the stream.
D. The entrance grade of all structures shall be at least 1/4 inch in height
above the established curve or grade elevation for each foot in distance
therefrom.
§ 425-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-21
1:415
§ 425-21. Manufactured or mobile homes; manufactured or mobile
home parks. [Added 10-19-2009 by Ord. No. 704]
The following provisions shall apply to all manufactured or mobile homes
and manufactured or mobile home parks:
A. A manufactured or mobile home may be located in an R-1 Zoning
District.
B. A manufactured or mobile home park may be located in an R-1 Zoning
District.
C. Manufactured or mobile homes shall be subject to conditions
prescribed in an R-1 Residential District herein, plus those conditions
prescribed in Chapter 259, Article I, Mobile Homes.
D. Manufactured or mobile home parks shall be subject to conditions
prescribed in an R-1 Residential District herein, plus those conditions
prescribed in Chapter 259, Article II, Manufactured and Mobile Home
Parks.
§ 425-21 GIRARD CODE § 425-21
1:416
ARTICLE IV
Conditional Uses
§ 425-22. General provisions.
Conditional uses as specified in Article II may be allowed or denied by the
Borough Council after recommendations by the Planning Commission in
accordance with the following criteria and provisions.
§ 425-23. Application requirements.
Applications for conditional uses will be filed with the Zoning Officer and
shall be accompanied by:
§ 425-24. Application review. [Amended 3-18-1985 by Ord. No. 547]
If the application is for a conditional use in District C-1 Commercial, District
C-2 Commercial or District M-1 Manufacturing and is a permitted use in
a more restrictive district, the Zoning Officer may review and approve the
application and may attach such conditions as he may deem necessary to
the approval, or he may forward copies of the application to the Borough
Council and to the Planning Commission for review and approval. The
Zoning Officer shall forward copies of any other application to the Borough
Council and to the Planning Commission for review and approval.
§ 425-25. Criteria for approval.
A conditional use shall be approved if, and only if, it is found to meet the
following criteria:
A. An application fee in an amount equal to that set from time to time by
resolution of the Borough Council.
B. Five copies of a site plan and supporting data which show the size,
location, and topography of the site; the use of adjacent land; the
proposed size, bulk, use and location of buildings; the location and
proposed function of all yards, open spaces, parking areas, driveways,
storage areas and accessory structures; the location of all utilities; the
provisions for parking, moving or loading of vehicles; and the time of
construction proposed.
A. The proposed use conforms to the district and conditional use
provisions and all general regulations of this chapter.
B. The proposed use meets all special standards which may apply to its
class of conditional uses as set forth in this article.
C. The proposed use shall not involve any element or cause any condition
that may be dangerous, injurious, or noxious to any other property or
persons and shall comply with the performance standards of § 425-26.
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-25
1:417
§ 425-26. Performance standards. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No.
530]
All conditional uses shall comply with the requirements of this section.
In order to determine whether a proposed use will conform to the
requirements of this chapter, the Borough Council may obtain a qualified
consultant to testify, whose cost for services shall be borne by the applicant.
D. The proposed use shall be sited, oriented and landscaped to produce a
harmonious relationship of buildings and grounds to adjacent buildings
and properties.
E. The proposed use shall produce a total visual impression and
environment which is consistent with the environment of the
neighborhood.
F. The proposed use shall organize vehicular access and parking to
minimize traffic congestion in the neighborhood.
G. The proposed use shall preserve the objectives of this chapter and shall
be consistent with the intent of the Comprehensive Plan.
A. Fire protection. Fire prevention and fighting equipment acceptable to
the Board of Fire Underwriters shall be readily available when any
activity involving the handling or storage of flammable or explosive
materials is carried on.
B. Electrical disturbances. No activity shall cause electrical disturbance
adversely affecting radio or other equipment in the vicinity.
C. Noise. Noise which is determined to be objectionable on any
neighboring property because of volume, frequency, or beat shall be
muffled or otherwise controlled, except fire sirens and related
apparatus used solely for public purposes shall be exempt from this
requirement.
D. Vibrations. Vibrations detectable without instruments on neighboring
property in any district shall be prohibited.
E. Odors. No malodorous gas or matter shall be permitted which is
discernible on any adjoining lot or property.
F. Air pollution. No pollution of air by fly ash, dust, smoke, vapors, or other
substance shall be permitted which is harmful to health, animals,
vegetation or other property.
G. Glare. Lighting devices which produce objectionable, direct or reflected
glare on adjoining properties or thoroughfares shall not be permitted.
H. Erosion. No erosion by wind or water shall be permitted which will
carry objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
§ 425-25 GIRARD CODE § 425-26
1:418
§ 425-27. Prohibited activities; dangerous materials or substances.
[Added 5-20-1985 by Ord. No. 549]
I. Water pollution. Water pollution shall be subject to the standards
established by the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
Protection.
J. Permit conversion apartments as conditional uses in the R-1, R-2 and
R-3 Zoning Districts.
(1) In the R-1 and R-2 Districts, single-family dwellings can only be
converted to a two-family dwelling. Such two-family conversion
must comply with the lot, yard, area, height and other applicable
regulations that pertain to the district in which the conversion unit
is located.
(2) In the R-3 District, single-family dwellings can be converted to a
multifamily structure of three or more dwelling units. Such
multifamily conversions must comply with the following lot and
area requirements:
(a) Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet.
(b) Minimum lot area/dwelling unit: 2;500 square feet.
(c) Minimum front yard: 20 feet.
(d) Minimum side yard (one side): six feet.
(e) Total minimum side yard (both sides): 16 feet.
(f) Minimum rear yard: 30 feet.
(g) Minimum lot width at building line: 50 feet.
(3) Conditions for permitting conversion apartments. Conversion
apartments are permitted as conditional uses, provided:
(a) Each unit provides a minimum of 500 square feet of habitable
living area.
(b) Each unit shall contain three habitable rooms, at least one of
which shall be a bedroom, and a separate bathroom.
(c) Separate and private sanitary facilities, cooking and dining
facilities shall be provided for each living unit.
(d) Fire and safety provisions are certified to be adequate with
respect to the Borough Fire Code, as adopted.
(e) There are two off-street parking spaces provided for each
living unit.
A. The following obstructions and activities are prohibited if located
partially or entirely within any floodplain area:
§ 425-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-27
1:419
(1) The commencement of any of the following activities, or the
construction, enlargement or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(a) Hospitals.
(b) Nursing homes.
(c) Jails or prisons.
(2) The commencement of, or any construction of, a new mobile home
park or mobile home subdivision, or substantial improvement to an
existing mobile home park or mobile home subdivision.
(3) Any new or substantially improved structure which:
(a) Will be used for the production or storage of any of the
dangerous materials or substances listed in Subsection B; or
(b) Will be used for any activity requiring the maintenance of a
supply of more than 550 gallons, or other comparable volume,
of any of the dangerous materials or substances listed in
Subsection B on the premises; or
(c) Will involve the production, storage or use of any amount of
radioactive substances.
B. The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(1) Acetone.
(2) Ammonia.
(3) Benzene.
(4) Calcium carbide.
(5) Carbon disulfide.
(6) Celluloid.
(7) Chlorine.
(8) Hydrochloric acid.
(9) Hydrocyanic acid.
(10) Magnesium.
(11) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(12) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(13) Phosphorus.
§ 425-27 GIRARD CODE § 425-27
1:420
(14) Potassium.
(15) Sodium.
(16) Sulphur and sulphur products.
(17) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides and rodenticides).
(18)Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
C. No variance shall be granted for any of the other requirements of this
section.
§ 425-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-27
1:421

ARTICLE V
Administration and Enforcement
§ 425-28. Zoning Officer. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
§ 425-29. Zoning certificates.
A. The Zoning Officer, who may not hold an elective office within the
Borough, shall be appointed by Borough Council and shall:
(1) Administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms and shall not have the power to permit any
construction or use or change of use or structure which does not
conform to this chapter.
(2) Issue zoning certificates and occupancy permits.
(3) Maintain a permanent file of all zoning certificates and applications
as public records.
(4) Have two weeks to investigate any application for a zoning
certificate.
B. The Zoning Officer is hereby authorized to institute civil enforcement
proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting within the scope of
his employment.
A. A zoning certificate shall be obtained before any person may:
(1) Occupy or use any vacant land.
(2) Occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
moved, altered or enlarged.
(3) Change the use of a structure or land to a different use.
(4) Change a nonconforming use or structure.
B. Applications for a zoning certificate shall be accompanied by a plot plan
showing clearly and completely the location, dimensions and nature of
any structure involved and such other information as the Zoning Officer
may require for administration of this chapter, including an engineering
survey by a registered professional surveyor. The application shall also
include a filing fee in accordance with a schedule fixed from time to
time by resolution of Borough Council.
C. Zoning certificates shall become null and void one year from date of
issue.
D. An occupancy permit shall be obtained before any person may initially
occupy or use any structure hereafter constructed, reconstructed,
moved, altered or enlarged.
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-30
1:423
§ 425-30. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 614]
§ 425-31. Causes of action. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
In case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval
of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner
or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent,
in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting
a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant,
notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior
to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council. No such action may be maintained until such notice has
been given.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by
the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the applicable Rules of Civil Procedure. Each day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation, unless
the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating this chapter to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 425-30 GIRARD CODE § 425-32
1:424
§ 425-32. Enforcement notice. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
§ 425-33. Enactment of chapter amendments. [Amended
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
A. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of this chapter has
occurred, the Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by
sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a period of 10 days.
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
A. The Borough Council may from time to time amend, supplement, or
repeal any of the regulations and provisions of this chapter. The
procedure for the preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance as set
forth in Section 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,
53 P.S. § 10607, is hereby declared optional.
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a Zoning Map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the
perimeter of the tract to notify potentially interested citizens. The
affected tract or area shall be posted at least one week prior to the date
of the hearing.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
§ 425-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-33
1:425
§ 425-34. Procedure for landowner curative amendments. [Added
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
to the Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on
such proposed amendment to provide the Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations.
D. If, after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially, or is revised, to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
E. At least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by the
Borough Council, the Borough shall submit the proposed amendment to
the County Planning Agency for recommendations.
F. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Agency.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge, on substantive grounds, the
validity of this chapter or the Zoning Map or any provision thereof
which prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he
has an interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough
Council, with a written request that his challenge and proposed
amendment be heard and decided as provided in Section 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10916.1. The curative amendment and challenge shall be referred to
the Planning Commission and the County Planning Agency as provided
in Section 609, and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as
provided in Sections 610 and 916.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609,
10610, and 10916.1.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with Section 908 of the
MPC, 53 P.S. § 10908, and all references therein to the Zoning Hearing
Board shall, for purposes of this section, be references to the Borough
Council. If the Borough does not accept a landowner's curative
amendment brought in accordance with this subsection, and a court
subsequently rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision
shall not result in a declaration of invalidity for this entire chapter and
Zoning Map, but only for those provisions which specifically relate to
the landowner's curative amendment and challenge.
C. The Borough Council, if it determines that a validity challenge has
merit, may accept a landowner's curative amendment, with or without
revision, or may adopt an alternative amendment which will cure the
challenged defects. The Borough Council shall consider the curative
amendments, plans and explanatory material submitted by the
landowner and shall also consider:
§ 425-33 GIRARD CODE § 425-34
1:426
§ 425-35. Procedure for Borough curative amendments. [Added
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities;
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of persons otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of this chapter or Zoning Map;
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features;
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features, the degree to which these are protected or destroyed, the
tolerance of the resources to development and any adverse
environmental impacts; and
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
A. If the Borough determines that this chapter, or any portion hereof, is
substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
(1) The Borough shall declare, by formal action, this chapter or
portions hereof substantially invalid and propose to prepare a
curative amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days of
such declaration and proposal, the Borough Council shall:
(a) By resolution, make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of this chapter, which may include:
[1] References to specific uses which are either not permitted
or not permitted in sufficient quantity;
[2] Reference to a class of use or uses which requires revision;
or
[3] Reference to this entire chapter which requires revisions.
(b) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to this
chapter to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate, or reaffirm the
validity of, this chapter pursuant to the provisions of Section 609 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S.
§ 10609, in order to cure the declared invalidity of this chapter.
§ 425-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-35
1:427
§ 425-36. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No.
614]
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures as set forth in Subsection A of this
section, the Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or
consider any landowner's curative amendment filed under Section
609.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.1, nor shall the Zoning Hearing Board
be required to give a report requested under Sections 909.1 or 916.1 of
the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10909.1, 10916.1, subsequent to the declaration
and proposal based upon the grounds identical or substantially similar
to those specified by the resolution required by Subsection A(1). Upon
completion of the procedures set forth in Subsections A and B, no rights
to a cure pursuant to the provisions of Sections 609.1 and 916.1 of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10916.1, shall, from the date of the declaration
and proposal, accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive
invalidity of this chapter for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Borough, having utilized the procedures set forth in this section,
may not again utilize said procedure for a period of 36 months following
the date of enactment of a curative amendment, or reaffirmation of the
validity of this chapter; provided, however, if, after the date of
declaration and proposal, there is a substantially new duty imposed
upon the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania Appellate Court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provisions of this section to propose a curative amendment to this
chapter to fulfill said duty or obligation.
A. There is hereby created for the Borough a Zoning Hearing Board in
accordance with the provisions of Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10901 et seq.
B. The membership of the Board shall consist of five residents of the
Borough appointed by resolution by the Borough Council. The terms of
office shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member shall expire each year. The Board shall promptly notify the
Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments to fill
vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion. Members of the Board
shall hold no other office in the Borough.
C. Any Board member may be removed for malfeasance, misfeasance or
nonfeasance in office or for other just cause by a majority vote of the
Borough Council which appointed the member, taken after the member
has received 15 days' advance notice of the intent to take such a vote. A
hearing shall be held in connection with the vote if the member shall
request it in writing.
D. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
§ 425-35 GIRARD CODE § 425-36
1:428
§ 425-37. Hearings. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
The Zoning Hearing Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in
accordance with the following requirements:
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in this chapter.
E. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Borough, and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the
Borough Council.
F. Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the
Board may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel,
consultants and other technical and clerical services. Members of the
Board may receive compensation for the performance of their duties, as
may be fixed by the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the
rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the members of the
Borough Council.
A. Public notice shall be given, and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the Board. In addition to
the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The hearing shall be held within 60 days from the date of the applicant's
request, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension of
time.
C. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board, or the Board may
appoint any member as a hearing officer. The decision, or, where no
decision is called for, the findings, shall be made by the Board; however,
the appellant or the applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the
Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or
findings by the Board and accept the decision or findings of the hearing
officer as final.
D. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board, and any other person, including civic or community
organizations permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
§ 425-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-37
1:429
E. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
F. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
G. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial, or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
H. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and, in either event, the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases, the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
I. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved, except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda, or other materials, except advice from the Solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative, unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
J. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon, together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of this chapter or of any law,
ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a reference to the provision
relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed appropriate in
the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by a hearing
officer, and there has been no stipulation that his decision or findings
are final, the Board shall make his report and recommendations
available to the parties within 45 days, and the parties shall be entitled
to make written representations thereon to the Board prior to final
decision or entry of findings, and the Board's decision shall be entered
no later than 30 days after the report of the hearing officer. Where the
Board fails to render the decision within the period required by this
subsection, or fails to hold the required hearing within 60 days from the
§ 425-37 GIRARD CODE § 425-37
1:430
§ 425-38. Jurisdiction. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
date of the applicant's request for a hearing, the decision shall be
deemed to have been rendered in favor of the applicant, unless the
applicant has agreed in writing or on the record to an extension of time.
When a decision has been rendered in favor of the applicant because
of the failure of the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove
provided, the Board shall give public notice of the said decision within
10 days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in
the same manner as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the
Board shall fail to provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing
in this subsection shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the
application to appeal the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
K. A copy of the final decision, or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings, shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which
the full decision or findings may be examined.
L. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to
Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1, 10916.1.142
(2) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer, including,
but not limited to, the granting or denial of any permit, or failure to
act on the application therefor, the issuance of any cease and desist
order or the registration or refusal to register any nonconforming
use, structure or lot.
(3) Appeals from a determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer with reference to the administration of any
floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a
land use ordinance.
(4) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to Section 910.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10910.2.
142. Editor's Note: Original § 511(1)(B), pertaining to challenges to the validity of a land use
ordinance, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed at time of adoption
of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-38
1:431
(5) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to Section 912.1 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10912.1.
(6) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfers of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(7) Appeals from the Zoning Officer's determination under Section
916.2 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
(8) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough
Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance or
provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
development not involving applications under Article V or VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq., 10701 et seq.
B. The Borough Council shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII of the MPC pursuant to the provisions of Section
702 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10702.
(2) All applications pursuant to Section 508 of the MPC, 53 P.S.
§ 10508, for approval of subdivisions or land developments under
Article V of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
(3) Applications for conditional uses under the express provisions of
this chapter.
(4) Applications for curative amendments to this chapter or pursuant
to Sections 609.1 and 916.1(a) of the MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1,
10916.1(a).
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in Section 609 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10609.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or the
Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use ordinance
or provisions thereof with reference to sedimentation and erosion
control and stormwater management insofar as the same relate to
applications for land development under Articles V and VII of the
MPC, 53 P.S. §§ 10501 et seq., 10701 et seq. Where such
determination relates only to development not involving an Article
V or VII application, the appeal from such determination of the
Zoning Officer or the Borough Engineer shall be to the Zoning
Hearing Board pursuant to this section. Where the applicable land
use ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of
subdivision and land development applications in the Planning
Commission, all appeals from determinations under this subsection
§ 425-38 GIRARD CODE § 425-38
1:432
§ 425-39. Variances. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
§ 425-40. Special exceptions. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated special exceptions
to be granted or denied by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the Board shall hear and decide requests for such
special exceptions in accordance with such standards and criteria. In
granting a special exception, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as
shall be to the Planning Commission, and all appeals from the
decision of the Planning Commission shall be to court.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall hear requests for variances where it is
alleged that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship
upon the applicant. The Board may, by rule, prescribe the form of
application and may require preliminary application to the Zoning
Officer. The Board may grant a variance, provided that all of the
following findings are made where relevant in a given case:
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness, or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, and that the
authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-40
1:433
it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter and the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-41. Conditional uses. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated conditional uses to
be granted or denied by the Borough Council pursuant to express standards
and criteria, the Borough Council shall hold hearings on and decide
requests for such conditional uses in accordance with such standards and
criteria. In granting a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in
this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter and the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10101
et seq.
§ 425-42. Appeals. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
Appeals raising the substantive validity of any land use ordinance (except
those to be brought before the Borough Council pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Code), procedural questions or alleged defects
in the process of enactment or adoption of a land use ordinance; or from
the determination of the Zoning Officer, including, but not limited to, the
granting or denial of any permit, or failure to act on the application therefor,
the issuance of any cease and desist order or the registration or refusal
to register any nonconforming use, structure or lot; from a determination
by the Borough Engineer or the Zoning Officer with reference to the
administration of any floodplain or flood hazard ordinance or such
provisions within a land use ordinance; from the determination of any
officer or agency charged with the administration of any transfers of
development rights or performance density provisions of this chapter; or
from the determination of the Zoning Officer or Borough Engineer in the
administration of any land use ordinance or provision thereof with reference
to sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management insofar
as the same relate to development not involving subdivision and land
development or planned residential development may be filed with the
Zoning Hearing Board in writing by the landowner affected, any officer or
agency of the Borough, or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance
and for special exception may be filed with the Board by any landowner or
any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 425-43. Time limitations. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Zoning
Hearing Board later than 30 days after an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been approved by the Borough if such
proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval in any
manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no notice,
knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been given. If
such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval, he shall
be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The failure of
§ 425-40 GIRARD CODE § 425-43
1:434
§ 425-44. Stay of proceedings. [Added 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse decision
on a tentative plan or from an adverse decision by the Zoning Officer
on a challenge to the validity of this chapter or an amendment hereto
or map or an amendment thereto shall preclude an appeal from a final
approval, except in the case where the final submission substantially
deviates from the approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowner shall be filed
by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination is
issued.
A. Upon filing of any appeal proceeding before the Zoning Hearing Board
and during its pendency before the Board, all land development
pursuant to any challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning
Officer or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder, shall
be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or any other appropriate agency or
body certifies to the Board facts indicating that such stay would cause
imminent peril to life or property, in which case the development or
official action shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order,
which may be granted by the Board or by the court having jurisdiction
of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice to the Zoning Officer or other
appropriate agency or body. When an application for development,
preliminary or final, has been duly approved and proceedings designed
to reverse or limit the approval are filed with the Board by persons
other than the applicant, the applicant may petition the court having
jurisdiction of zoning appeals to order such persons to post bond as a
condition to continuing the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellants to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond,
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
§ 425-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-44
1:435
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorneys'
fees incurred by the petitioner.
§ 425-44 GIRARD CODE § 425-44
1:436
ARTICLE VI
Terminology
§ 425-45. Word usage; definitions. [Amended 3-15-1982 by Ord. No.
530; 1-15-1991 by Ord. No. 592; 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 599;
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular includes
the plural, and the plural includes the singular; and the word "shall" is
mandatory and not permissive. The word "used" shall be deemed also
to include "designed, intended or arranged to be used." As used in this
chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings indicated:
ACCESSORY USE — A use customarily incidental and subordinate to the
principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use
or building.
AGRICULTURE — Any agriculture use, as herein defined, including farming,
pasturage, agriculture, horticulture, floriculture, viticulture, and forestry,
including the harvesting of timber. It shall exclude all animal and poultry
raising/husbandry.
ALLEY — A passage or way open to public travel which affords generally a
secondary means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not intended for
general traffic circulation.
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
AREA — Area of a lot or site calculated from dimensions derived by
horizontal projections of the site.
BASEMENT — A story having more than 50% of its clear height above the
average level of the surrounding ground but with a floor elevation below
grade. A basement shall be counted as 1/2 story for the purpose of height
measurement if the vertical distance between the ceiling and the average
level of the adjoining ground is more than five feet or is used for a dwelling
unit.
BILLBOARD — A sign other than one indicating a business conducted on
the premises; a sign upon which advertising matter of any character is
printed, posted or lettered; and it may be either freestanding or attached to
a surface of a building or other structure.
BOARD — Any body granted jurisdiction under a land use ordinance or
under this chapter to render final adjudications.
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:437
BOARDINGHOUSE; ROOMING, TOURIST OR LODGING HOUSE — A
building where lodging is provided, for compensation, for three or more
persons.
BUILDING — A roofed structure enclosed by walls, columns, or piers for the
shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, goods, materials or animals.
BUILDING HEIGHT — The vertical distance from the average elevation at
grade level to the highest point of the deck of a flat roof or mansard roof
or to the mean height between the eaves and the ridge for gable, hip and
gambrel roofs.
BUILDING OR SETBACK LINE — Imaginary line parallel to or concentric
with the nearest right-of-way line and which is located at the setback
distance from the street right-of-way line, said line being a boundary or limit
beyond which no permanent part of a building shall project.
BUILDING PERMIT — The written authorization issued by the Borough of
Girard to permit the construction of a building or structure in accordance
with this chapter and/or other ordinances and regulations.
BUSINESS SERVICE — Any mobile sales business activity which renders
service to any portion of the Borough of Girard.
CARTWAY — That portion of a road which is paved, graded, or improved for
travel by vehicles within a dedicated right-of-way.
CELLAR — A story having more than 50% of its clear height below the
average level of the surrounding ground. A cellar shall be counted as 1/
2 story for the purpose of height measurement if the vertical distance
between the ceiling and the average level of the adjoining ground is more
than five feet or if used for dwelling purposes.
CHURCH — An establishment designed and intended for religious
instruction or public worship.
CLINIC — Any establishment where human patients are examined and
treated by doctors and other licensed professionals, but not hospitalized
overnight.
CLUB — An establishment operated for social, recreational, or educational
purposes but open only to members and invited guests and not the general
public.
COMMERCIAL — Retail and wholesale establishments, professional offices,
lending institutions and food services engaging in an activity for profit.
COMMERCIAL/RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURE — Any mixed use of a structure
for both commercial and residential use purposes.143
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
143. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GIRARD CODE § 425-45
1:438
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district by the
Borough Council pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Article VI of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.
CONVERSION APARTMENT — The remodeling or conversion of a singlefamily
dwelling unit into two or more separate living units, exclusive of
basement and/or cellar dwellings. To be considered as a conversion, any
proposed alterations must be confined to the interior of an already existing
structure.
COUNCIL — The Girard Borough Council, Girard Borough, Erie County,
Pennsylvania.
COVERAGE — That percentage of the lot area covered by principal and
accessory use structures.
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so, either by
reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of appeals from
determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the Borough lies.
DENSITY — The number of families that may be housed on a lot or group
of lots divided by the area in acres of the lot or group of lots computed,
exclusive of any portion of a road right-of-way.
DETERMINATION — Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with
the administration of any land use ordinance or applications thereunder,
except the following:
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.
A. The Borough Council;
B. The Zoning Hearing Board; or
The Planning Commission, only if and to the extent the Planning
Commission is charged with final decision on preliminary or final plans
under Chapter 370, Subdivision and Land Development, or Article VII,
Planned Residential Development, of this chapter. Determinations shall
be appealable only to the boards designated as having jurisdiction for
such appeal.
C.
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:439
DRIVE-IN FACILITY — A commercial business that provides service to the
occupants of a vehicle from a window, booth, or other structure designed
to provide such service without the occupants leaving the vehicle. This
shall include, but not be limited to, such establishments as drive-in banks,
restaurants, laundries, and service stations. Also included in this category
are automobile washing facilities that are designed to allow the vehicle to
be driven or propelled through or into a wash bay.
DWELLING — Any building designed or used as a permanent or temporary
living quarters for human habitation.
DWELLING, MULTIFAMILY — A building or portion thereof designed for
or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other
with separate living, cooking, sanitary and entrance facilities for each.
Multifamily structures are only permitted as planned residential
developments and must be developed in accordance with Article VII of this
chapter.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY — A detached building arranged or used for
occupancy by one family. Only one dwelling is permitted on each lot of
record.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY — A building or portion thereof designed for or
occupied by two families living independently of each other with separate
living, cooking, sanitary and entrance facilities for each.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the Engineer for the
Borough of Girard.
ESSENTIAL SERVICES — The erection, construction, alteration or
maintenance by public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies
of underground or overhead gas, electrical, steam or water transmission or
distribution systems, including poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes,
hydrants, and other similar equipment and accessories in connection
therewith, reasonably necessary for the furnishing of adequate services by
such public utilities or municipal or other governmental agencies for the
public health or safety or general welfare.
FAMILY — One or more persons living together in a single dwelling unit as a
traditional family or the functional equivalent of a traditional family. It shall
be a rebuttable presumption that four or more persons living together in a
single dwelling unit, who are not related by blood, adoption or marriage,
do not constitute the functional equivalent of a traditional family. In
determining the functional equivalent of a traditional family, the following
criteria shall be present:144
A. The group shares the entire dwelling unit.
B. The group lives and cooks together as a single housekeeping unit.
144. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GIRARD CODE § 425-45
1:440
GARAGE, PARKING — A building or part thereof, other than a private
garage, used for the storage of motor vehicles for rental purposes or where
any such vehicles are kept for hire.
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory building or part of a main building used
primarily for the storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use by members
of the family or families housed in the building to which such garage is
accessory.
GARAGE, REPAIR — Premises where motor vehicles are serviced and
repaired, including engine overhaul and body work.145
HOME OCCUPATION — Any use customarily carried on entirely within
a dwelling by occupants thereof, which use is clearly incidental and
subordinate to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and which does
not change the residential character thereof.
HOTEL/MOTEL — A building containing rooms which are used, rented or
hired out to guests for sleeping purposes, and where only a central kitchen
and dining room are provided with the building for guests and the general
public, and provides separate sanitary facilities.
HUMAN BODY MASSAGE ESTABLISHMENT — A service facility with any
type of treatment center, whether institutional, nonprofit or otherwise,
designed to provide any method of pressure on, or friction against, or
stroking, kneading, rubbing, tapping, pounding, vibrating or stimulating
of external soft parts of the body with the hands or with the aid of any
mechanical or electrical apparatus or appliance, with or without such
supplementary aids as rubbing alcohol, lineaments, antiseptics, oils,
powder, creams, lotions, ointments, or other similar preparations commonly
used in this practice.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 673]
JUNKYARD — Land or structures used for the collecting, storage,
processing and sale of scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor
vehicles, machinery, equipment, wastepaper, glass, rags, containers and
other discarded materials. It shall not include, however, refuse or garbage
kept in a proper container for the purpose of prompt disposal. The
dismantling of two or more used vehicles or trailers or the storage, sale,
or dumping of two or more partially dismantled or obsolete or wrecked
vehicles or trailers shall be considered a junkyard.
KENNEL — The boarding, breeding, housing, keeping or medical treatment
of three or more dogs six months old or older.
The group shares expenses for food, rent, utilities or other household
expenses.
C.
The group is permanent and stable, and not transient or temporary in
nature.
D.
Any other factor reasonably related to whether the group is the
functional equivalent of a family.
E.
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:441
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee, if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner or other person having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purpose of this chapter.
LAND USE INTENSITY SYSTEM — The method for determining/calculating
the residential density in a planned residential development. The system
correlates the land area, floor area, open space, livability space, recreation
space and car storage space for a planned residential development to
prevent overdevelopment or overcrowding of a building site. Under this
system, a land use intensity rating is assigned to each zoning district where
planned residential developments are permitted. The rating controls the
overall density of development.
LIGHT MANUFACTURING — The processing or fabrication of certain
materials and products which does not produce objectionable noise,
vibration, air pollution, fire hazard or other disturbances or dangers to
neighboring properties.
LOADING SPACE — A portion of a lot usable for the loading or unloading of
motor vehicles.
LOT — A designated parcel, tract or area of land established by a plat or
otherwise as permitted by law and to be used, developed or built upon as a
unit.
LOT, AREA OF — The total horizontal ground area of a lot computed,
exclusive of any portion of the right-of-way of any public or private
thoroughfare, street, road, alley, or easement of access of use, but including
any easement for essential services.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting street rights-of-way.
LOT, DEPTH OF — A mean horizontal distance between the front and rear
lot lines.
LOT OF RECORD — Any lot which, individually or as a part of a subdivision,
has been recorded in the office of the Recorder of Deeds of Erie County
prior to the effective date of this chapter.
LOT, WIDTH OF — A mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines
measured along the front setback line.
MANUFACTURING INDUSTRY — Encompasses all of the major groups in
the manufacturing division (20-39) of the Standard Industrial Classification
of the Federal OMB.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable, single-family dwelling intended for
permanent occupancy, contained in one unit or in two or more units
designed to be joined into one integral unit capable of again being
separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete and ready
for occupancy, except for minor and incidental unpacking and assembly
§ 425-45 GIRARD CODE § 425-45
1:442
operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a permanent
foundation.
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.
MOTEL — See "hotel."
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of June 19, 2001, P.L. 287, No. 22 (53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.),
known as the "Municipality Authorities Act."146
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial activity
administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly secondary
to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no customer, client or
patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian, pickup, delivery or removal
functions to or from the premises in excess of those normally associated
with residential use. The business or commercial activity must satisfy the
following requirements:147
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of the
property and surrounding residential uses.
A.
The business shall employ no employees other than family members
residing in the dwelling.
B.
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling or
inventory of a substantial nature.
C.
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including, but
not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
D.
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or electronic
interference, including interference with radio or television reception,
which is detectable in the neighborhood.
E.
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge in volume or type which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
F.
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling and
may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
G.
H. The business may not involve any illegal activity.
146. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
147. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:443
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot, the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of this chapter, but which fails to
conform to the requirements of the zoning district in which it is located by
reason of such adoption or amendment.
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the use or extent of use provisions
of this chapter or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
structure lawfully existed prior to the enactment of this chapter or
amendment or prior to the application of this chapter or amendment to its
location by reason of annexation. Such nonconforming structures include,
but are not limited to, nonconforming signs.
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure, which
does not comply with the applicable use provisions in this chapter or
amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such use was lawfully
in existence prior to the enactment of this chapter or amendment, or prior
to the application of this chapter or amendment to its location by reason of
annexation.
OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE — A private parking space, whether or not
enclosed, located off the sidewalk and right-of-way of any public or private
road.
OPEN SPACE — Any area of land which is predominantly free of structures.
PLACEMENT TREATMENT FACILITY — A service facility with any type
of treatment center or residence program, whether institutional, nonprofit
or otherwise, designed to provide services to treat or accommodate, in
a group care setting, two or more persons required to have supervision
authorized by a court of law for protection, detention, confinement or
incarceration. This facility is for reasons such as adult or child abuse care,
delinquency, drug or substance dependency, and civil or criminal violation.
This facility includes orphanages, boarding schools for troubled children,
halfway and probation centers, jails and prisons, etc., where supervision
is court ordered for attendance or for overnight, extended stay, and/or
permanent placement.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of the Borough of
Girard, Erie County, Pennsylvania.
PUBLIC BUILDING — A building generally open to the public and used
for public use and functions. The term includes, but is not limited to,
schools, day-care centers, museums, airport terminals, hospitals, stores,
restaurants, office buildings, convention centers and government buildings.
148
§ 425-45 GIRARD CODE § 425-45
1:444
PUBLIC GROUNDS — Includes parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other
recreational areas and other public areas; sites for schools, sewage
treatment, refuse disposal and other publicly owned or operated facilities;
and public owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by the
Borough Council or Planning Commission, intended to inform and obtain
public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with this chapter.
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under the Act of
October 15, 1998, P.L. 729, No. 93 (65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.), known as the
"Sunshine Act."149
PUBLIC NOTICES — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
PUBLIC UTILITY BUILDING — A building used exclusively for utilities,
such as water, sewer, electric or heat, provided to the general public for
compensation. 150
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar writing
made by any body, board, officer or consultant, other than a solicitor, to
any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose of assisting the
recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision or determination.
All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and advisory only and shall
not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer, body or agency, nor shall
any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used, received or considered by the
body, board, officer or agency rendering a determination or decision shall
be made available for inspection to the applicant and all other parties to
any proceeding upon request, and copies thereof shall be provided at cost
of reproduction.
RESIDENT TREATMENT FACILITY — A service facility with any type of
treatment center or residence program, whether institutional, nonprofit or
otherwise, designed to provide health services to treat or accommodate,
in a group care setting, two or more persons in need of assistance for
reasons such as age, mental or physical handicap or disease, emotional
or psychological disturbance, injury or disability. These facilities include
hospitals and clinics, geriatric and rehabilitation centers, nursing and
convalescent homes, group care and personal care homes, etc., where
assistance is given for outpatient, overnight, extended stay, and/or
permanent residency.
RETAIL TRADE BUSINESS — Encompasses all of the major groups in the
retail trade division (52-59) of the Standard Industrial Classification of the
148. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
150. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:445
Federal OMB and includes building materials and garden supplies, general
merchandise stores, food stores, automotive dealers and service stations,
apparel and accessory stores, furniture and home furnishing stores, eating
and drinking places, and miscellaneous retail.
RETAIL TRADE SALES — Sale of goods or articles directly to the consumer
in individual or small quantities as a line of work or occupation in the
ordinary course of business. 151
SERVICES BUSINESS — Encompasses all the major groups in the services
division (70-89) of the Standard Industrial Classification of the Federal
OMB and includes business services, auto repair and service and garages,
miscellaneous repair services, motion pictures, amusement and recreation
services, health services, legal services, educational services, social
services, museums and botanical and zoological gardens, membership
organizations, private households, miscellaneous services, and agricultural
services.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS OPERATIONS — An adult arcade, adult
bookstore or adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motel, adult motionpicture
theater, escort agency, nude model studio, or sexual encounter
center.[Added 2-19-2001 by Ord. No. 673]
SIGN — Any structure or device to attract attention by words or graphic
display.
SPECIAL EXCEPTION — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and Articles VI and IX of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S. §§ 10601 et seq., 10901
et seq.
STORY — The portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there be no floor above
it, the space between such floor and the ceiling above it.
STREET — Includes street, avenue, boulevard, road, highway, freeway,
parkway, lane, alley, viaduct and other ways used or intended to be used by
vehicular traffic or pedestrians, whether public or private.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.
TRAVEL TRAILER — A recreational vehicle, with wheels, designed for
overnight occupancy or camping purposes, capable of being towed by a
passenger vehicle.
TRUCK TERMINAL — A facility to accommodate the service, repair and
storage of trucks and other motorized equipment, which provides
warehousing activities.
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and
Articles VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, 53 P.S.
§ 10101 et seq.
151. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-45 GIRARD CODE § 425-45
1:446
YARD, FRONT — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the building and the road right-of-way line.
YARD, REAR — An open space extending the full width of the lot between
the building and the rear lot line.
YARD, SIDE — An open space extending from the front yard to the rear yard
between the building and the nearest side lot line.
ZONING CERTIFICATE — The written authorization issued by the Zoning
Officer for the use of land or buildings or other structures.
ZONING MAP — The map containing the zoning districts of the Borough
of Girard, Erie County, Pennsylvania, together with all amendments
subsequently adopted.
ZONING OFFICER — The Zoning Officer or authorized representative
appointed by the Girard Borough Council, Borough of Girard, Erie County,
Pennsylvania.
§ 425-45 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:447

ARTICLE VII
Planned Residential Development
[Added 2-8-1982 by Ord. No. 529]
§ 425-46. Purpose; scope. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
§ 425-47. Objectives.
The objective of this article is to develop properties for single-family and
multifamily housing which provide:
A. In an era of increasing urbanization and with a growing demand for
housing of all types and design, the purpose of this article is to
encourage innovations in residential development and renewal so that
the growing demand for housing may be met by a greater variety in
type, design and layout of dwellings and by the conservation and more
efficient use of open space ancillary to said dwellings so that greater
opportunities for better housing and recreation may extend to all
citizens and residents of this Borough, and, in order to encourage a
more efficient use of land and of public services and to reflect changes
in the technology of land development so that economies secured may
inure to the benefit of those who need homes and, in aid of these
purposes, to provide a procedure which can relate the type, design and
layout of residential development to the particular site and the
particular demand for housing existing at the time of development in a
manner consistent with preservation of the property values within
existing residential areas and to insure that the increased flexibility of
regulations over land development authorized herein is carried out
under such administration standards and procedures as shall
encourage the disposition of proposals for land development without
undue delay, the following powers are granted.
B. This article insures that the provisions of this chapter which are
concerned in part with the uniform treatment of dwelling type, bulk,
density and open space within each zoning district shall not be applied
to the improvement of land by other than lot-by-lot development in a
manner that would destroy the objectives of this chapter.
A. A suitable residential environment by utilizing the potential advantages
of the site, including suitable placement of the buildings and facilities in
relation to the site and surrounding influences.
B. A land use intensity appropriate to the character of the site and its
location in the anticipated community pattern.
C. Adequate open space related to buildings and other land improvements.
D. Sufficient livability space (nonvehicular open space) for use of the
occupants and for visual appeal.
§ 425-46 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-47
1:449
§ 425-48. Definitions. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
APPLICANT — A landowner or developer, as hereinafter defined, who has
filed an application for development, including his heirs, successors and
assigns.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including but not limited to an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan or for the approval of a development plan.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas, and areas set aside for public
facilities.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.
DEVELOPMENT — The provisions for development of a planned residential
development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants relating to use, location
and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity of use or density of
development, streets, ways and parking facilities, common open space and
public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the development plan," when
used in this article, shall mean the written and graphic materials referred
to in this definition.
ENGINEER — A professional engineer licensed as such in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, duly appointed as the engineer for a
municipality, planning agency, or joint planning commission.
E. Areas for outdoor recreation of a size and location to properly serve the
needs of occupants.
F. Adequate and conveniently located car storage space.
G. Elevations and gradients appropriate for buildings, land improvements,
drainage, and for safe, easy circulation for occupant use.
H. Night lighting for safe and convenient use of streets, driveways,
parking areas, walks, steps and other facilities.
I. The preservation of desirable existing trees and other natural site
features.
J. Plantings to enhance the appearance of buildings and grounds, to
screen objectionable features and to control erosion.
§ 425-47 GIRARD CODE § 425-48
1:450
GOVERNING BODY — The Council in cities, boroughs and incorporated
towns; the Board of Commissioners in townships of the first class; the Board
of Supervisors in townships of the second class; the Board of Commissioners
in counties of the second class through eighth class; or as may be
designated in the law providing for the form of government.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
LANDOWNER — The legal or beneficial owner or owners of land, including
the holder of an option or contract to purchase (whether or not such option
or contract is subject to any condition); a lessee if he is authorized under
the lease to exercise the rights of the landowner, or other persons having
a proprietary interest in land, shall be deemed to be a landowner for the
purpose of this article.
PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT — An area of land, controlled by
a landowner, to be developed as a single entity for a number of dwelling
units, or combination of residential and nonresidential uses, the
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenure; or
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of, or for the purpose of, streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
"Land development" does not include development which involves:
The conversion of an existing single-family detached dwelling or
single-family semidetached dwelling into not more than three
residential units, unless such units are intended to be a
condominium;
(1)
The addition of an accessory building, including farm building, on
a lot or lots subordinate to an existing principal building; or
(2)
The addition or conversion of buildings or rides within the confines
of an enterprise which would be considered an amusement park.
For the purposes of this subsection, an "amusement park" is
defined as a tract or area used principally as a location for
permanent amusement structures or rides. This exclusion shall not
apply to newly acquired acreage by an amusement park until initial
plans for the expanded area have been approved by the proper
authorities.
(3)
C.
§ 425-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-48
1:451
development plan for which does not correspond in lot size, bulk, type of
dwelling, or use, density or intensity, lot coverage and required open space
to the regulations established in any one district created, from time to time,
under the provisions of this chapter.
PLANNING AGENCY — A planning commission, planning department, or a
planning committee of the governing body.
PLAT — The map or plan of a subdivision or land development, whether
preliminary or final.
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.
§ 425-49. General standards.
The planned development must meet all of the following general standards:
§ 425-50. Applicable districts; permitted uses.
A. The planned development is consistent with the Comprehensive Plan.
B. The planned development is an effective and unified treatment of the
development possibilities on the project site; and the development plan
makes appropriate provision for the preservation of streams and stream
banks, wooded cover, rough terrain and similar areas.
C. The planned development shall be planned and developed to harmonize
with any existing or proposed development in the area surrounding the
project site.
D. A performance bond for all improvements in the development must be
posted as required.
E. Provision for sewerage treatment must be made and proof of such
submitted with the application.
A. Planned residential developments may be approved in the following
zoning districts:
(1) R-1 Low-Density Residential with a land use intensity rating of 35.
(2) R-2 Medium-Density Residential with a land use intensity rating of
40.
(3) R-3 High-Density Residential with a land use intensity rating of 50.
B. Permitted uses include:
(1) Dwelling units in detached, semidetached, attached or multistoried
structures or any combination thereof; and
§ 425-48 GIRARD CODE § 425-50
1:452
§ 425-51. Calculation of project densities.
The type and number of dwelling units which may be constructed within a
planned development will be determined by using the Land Use Intensity
Rating System, which is described as follows, and within the required land
use intensity rating set forth in this chapter for each zoning district where
planned residential developments are permitted, i.e., R-1, R-2, and R-3.
(2) Those nonresidential uses deemed to be appropriate (by the
Borough) for incorporation in the design of the planned residential
development.
A. Land Use Intensity System.
(1) The Land Use Intensity System correlates the land area, floor area,
open space, livability space, recreation space, and car storage
capacity of a planned residential development to prevent
overdevelopment or overcrowding of a building site.
(2) The system lets the developer choose the type of residential
construction he wishes to build, i.e., single-family homes, two-story
townhouses, multifamily apartments, etc. The system also indicates
the type of construction which can be developed at any given
intensity.
(3) For example, a land use intensity (LUI) of 40 permits one- or twostory
townhouses, two-story detached units, or two-story
apartments and then prescribes the land use intensity standards
such as maximum floor area and minimum open space for the type
of residential construction selected.
B. The Land Use Intensity Ratio Table. The Land Use Intensity Ratio Table
shows the ratios for floor area, open space, livability space, and car
storage which apply at various levels of land use intensity. Also shown,
for each of the several common residential building types, is the
optimum range of land use intensity characteristics for such building
type when used alone on a site.
C. Land use intensity rating. The land use intensity for a planned
residential development shall conform to the land use intensity rating
for the zoning district in which the development is located.
(1) Rating scale. In order to measure the land use intensity of proposed
sites and project plans, the Borough shall use the Land Use
Intensity Table. These ratings correlate the land area, floor area,
open space, livability space, recreation space, and car storage
capacity of a project.
(2) Rating for the site. After analyzing the characteristics of various
sites and their relation to the Borough's Comprehensive Plan, the
Borough determined a land use intensity rating for various zoning
districts. The determination of the land use intensity rating is
§ 425-50 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-51
1:453
important, as it represents the maximum land use intensity
acceptable to the Borough for the current use of the site for a
housing development. If a portion(s) of a site is located in more
than one zoning district, the land use intensity rating for each
zoning district shall apply to each portion(s) alone in substantially
the same manner as it would if the portion were a separate site.
(3) Number of living units. The total number of living units will depend
upon the size (square footage) of various individual dwelling units.
However, the total floor area for all dwelling units shall not exceed
the permitted floor area for the site as calculated by multiplying the
area of the site by the permitted floor area ratio.
D. Building types. For each of several common building types, the Land
Use Intensity Ratio Table shows the optimum range of land use
intensity which is characteristic of the building type where used alone
on all or a part of a site. To determine the building type or types usually
suitable to a site, compare the land use intensity rating with the
possible building combinations shown in the left-hand margin of the
table. For example, an intensity rating of 45 suggests two-story
townhouses and two-story apartments. Any single building type
(common or special) or any group of varied building types are
acceptable on a site, provided the requirements stated below are met:
(1) The sizes and types of living meet long-term needs.
(2) The property has adequate visual appeal.
(3) The property can be operated and maintained at costs reasonably
related to income.
(4) The land use and other site planning standards of this chapter are
met.
(5) Zoning and other local regulations are complied with.
E. Residential uses and nonresidential uses. For these land use standards,
the measurements for FAR, OSR, LSR, RSR, OCR, TCR, etc., include
only such land area, floor area, open space and car storage as are
allocated for residential use and for uses incidental to, and compatible
with, the residential use, such as recreation facilities serving the
occupants or a coffee shop in a recreation building.
F. Land use standards for the site. The land use intensity rating ascribes
to the site the land use standards shown for that intensity number as
shown on the Land Use Intensity Table and in this chapter. The
standards or ratios are defined as follows:
(1) The maximum floor area ratio (FAR): the maximum square footage
of total floor area (all stories) permitted for each square foot of land
area.
§ 425-51 GIRARD CODE § 425-51
1:454
(2) The minimum open space ratio (OSR): the minimum square footage
of open space which shall be provided for each square foot of land
area.
(3) The minimum livability space ratio (LSR): the minimum square
footage of livability (nonvehicular) outdoor space which shall be
provided for each square foot of land area.
(4) The minimum recreation space ratio (RSR): the minimum square
footage of recreation space required for each square foot of land
area.
(5) The minimum occupant car ratio (OCR): the number of parking and
garage spaces without time limits required for each living unit.
(6) The minimum total car ratio (TCR): the total number of parking and
garage spaces required for each living unit, including spaces
without time limits (primarily for occupants) and spaces available
for limited time periods (primarily for guests).
G. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
BUILDING AREA (BA) — The total land area covered by residential
buildings, measured horizontally from the faces of the exterior walls
(or the exterior lines of omitted walls) at main grade level. Entrance
platforms, steps and terraces are not countable as building area.
FLOOR AREA (F) and FLOOR AREA RATIO (FAR) — The total floor area
for residential use on all floors of a building or buildings, measured
from the outside faces of the exterior walls, including halls, lobbies,
stairways, elevator shafts, enclosed porches, balconies and belowgrade
floor areas used for habitation and residential access.
LAND AREA (LA) — The land area used for LUI computations is the
total site area within the property lines of the proposed site.
Noncountable:
(a) Open terrace, patio, atrium or balcony;
(b) Carport, garage, breezeway or toolshed;
Special purpose areas for the common use of all the occupants,
such as a recreation room or social hall;
(c)
(d) Staff space for therapy or examination in care housing;
(e) Basement spaces not used for living accommodations; or
(f) Any commercial or other nonresidential space.
(1)
The floor area ratio (FAR) times the land area (LA) equals the
maximum amount of floor area (FA) acceptable for the development
of a property. (FAR x LA = FA; or FA divided by LA = FAR.)
(2)
§ 425-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-51
1:455
LIVABILITY SPACE (LS) and LIVABILITY SPACE RATIO (LSR) — The
open space used for people, including lawns, planting space, walks,
paved terraces and sitting areas and the unpaved portions of streets
rights-of-way. No paved areas for car traffic or parking can be included
as livability space. The livability space shall be so related to the land
area that it is consistent with the character of the site and its location in
the community; adequate for the exterior property attractiveness that is
needed for long-term marketability; adequate for outdoor living space
for the occupants; and not less than the minimum livability space ratio
(LSR) shown in the Land Use Intensity Ratio Table for the selected land
use intensity rating. The livability space ratio (LSR) times the land area
(LA) equals the minimum amount of livability space acceptable for the
development of a property. (LSR x LA = LS; LS divided by LA = LSR.)
OCCUPANT CAR SPACE (OCS) and OCCUPANT CAR RATIO (OCR) —
A garage, carport or other parking space available to the residents
without time limits. Occupant car space shall be so related to the living
units that the relationship shall be consistent with the site and its
location in the community; adequate to meet the needs of the occupants
and their guests without interfering with normal traffic movements;
adequate for the storage of the occupants' boats, trailers, recreational
vehicles, and other permitted vehicles, as well as cars, as appropriate
to the anticipated need; and not less than the minimum occupant car
ratio (OCR) and minimum total car ratio (TCR) shown in the Land Use
Intensity Ratio Table for the selected land use intensity rating. The
occupant car ratio (OCR) times the number of living units (LU) equals
the minimum number of car parking spaces (CPS) for residents in the
development of a property. (OCR x LU = CPS; or CPS divided by LU =
OCR.)
OPEN SPACE (OS) and OPEN SPACE RATIO (OSR) — The relation of
open space to the land area shall be consistent with the character of the
site and its location in the anticipated community pattern; adequate for
the needs of the occupants for livability open space and for traffic and
parking space; and not less than the minimum open space ratio (OSR)
shown in the Land Use Intensity Ratio Table for the selected land use
intensity rating. Open space is the sum of the uncovered open space
and 1/2 of the covered open space.
UNCOVERED OPEN SPACE — — The horizontal area of the site
not covered by building area (BA), plus open exterior balconies and
roof area improved as recreation space (RS).
(1)
COVERED OPEN SPACE (COS) — — The usable open space that is
closed to the sky, having two clear, unobstructed open or partially
opened sides (minimum 50% open). The square foot amount
countable as covered open space may not exceed the square foot
amount of the open sides. Examples: covered balconies, covered
portions of improved roof area or spaces under buildings supported
by posts, columns or cantilevers.
(2)
§ 425-51 GIRARD CODE § 425-51
1:456
RECREATION SPACE (RS) and RECREATION SPACE RATIO (RSR) —
The open space ratio (OSR) times the land area (LA) equals the
minimum amount of open space acceptable for the development of
a property. (OSR x LA = OS; or OS divided by LA = OSR.)
(3)
General. Adequate recreation facilities for the residents shall be
provided in locations easily accessible to the living units and where
they do not impair the view and privacy of living units.
(1)
Passive recreation. Attractive sitting areas shall be appropriate in
size, type and number to the needs of the residents. The design
and location of sitting areas may vary according to the type of
projects, from a sun deck, balcony, or roof garden to a paved area
overlooking a pleasant view, or a shaded area along a walk.
(2)
Active recreation. Active recreation areas shall be appropriate for
the needs of the residents. Activities may vary from horseshoe
pitching, shuffleboard, swimming or tennis to golf, horseback
riding, or boating in large projects. Well-equipped playgrounds of
adequate size and number shall be provided where it is anticipated
that children will occupy the premises.
(3)
Required recreation space.
The recreation space required by the Land Use Intensity
Standards is that part of the livability space which provides
one or more major open spaces in a planned residential
development.
(a)
The recreation space ratio (RSR) times the land area (LA)
equals the minimum amount of recreation space acceptable for
the development of a property. (RSR x LA = RS; or RS divided
by LA = RSR.)
(b)
The relation of total countable recreation space to the total
floor area shall not be less than shown in the Land Use
Intensity Table for the selected land use intensity rating
determined. As part of the required recreation space (RS),
permanent recreation space abutting the property and
available for use by the residents may be considered.
(c)
(4)
Countable as required recreation space.
Where the required recreation is greater than 10,000 square
feet, the smallest countable recreation area shall be 10,000
square feet. Small playgrounds or sitting areas less than
10,000 square feet in size count as livability space but do
not count as required recreation space. Where several areas
are to be counted as part of the required recreation space,
each must be at least 10,000 square feet. The least dimension
of a countable recreation area shall average not less than
100 feet and not be less than 50 feet at any point. Areas
(a)
(5)
§ 425-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-51
1:457
TOTAL CAR SPACE and TOTAL CAR RATIO (TCR) — The number
of spaces (or space) available to the occupants without time limits
(counted in OCR), plus the number of spaces available for limited
time periods (primarily for guests). The total car ratio (TCR) times the
number of living units (LU) equals the minimum number of car parking
spaces acceptable for a development, including space for guest cars.
(TCR x LU = TCS; or TCS divided by LU = TCR.)
designated for recreation space shall be suitably developed for
the intended purpose shown on the development plan. Areas
such as steep slopes (hillsides), narrow ravines and/or stream
valleys or other remnant-type parcels of land shall not be used
or counted as required recreation space unless such parcels
are specifically improved for the particular recreation activity
proposed on the plan.
Where the required recreation space is less than 625 square
feet, a specific recreation area need not be designated on
the development (site) plan, as it will be considered part of
the required livability space. The dimensions for recreation
areas under 10,000 square feet may be smaller than those for
a countable recreation area. All areas counted as recreation
space shall be at least 30 feet away from any point on the
perimeter boundary line, and at least 20 feet away from any
structure proposed as part of the development.
(b)
§ 425-51 GIRARD CODE § 425-51
1:458
§ 425-52. Standards for required improvements.
Site planning, design and construction of all required improvements
(streets; sidewalks; curbs; sewer, water and storm drainage systems; etc.)
shall conform to the requirements specified in Chapter 370, Subdivision and
§ 425-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-52
1:459
Land Development, of the Code of the Borough of Girard, and the Borough
developer standards referenced therein.
§ 425-53. Lot size and spacing of buildings; vehicle access.
§ 425-54. Perimeter requirements.
§ 425-55. Common open space requirements.
A. The location of all structures shall be as shown on the final plans.
B. The proposed location and arrangement shall not be detrimental to
existing or prospective adjacent dwellings or to the existing or
prospective development of the neighborhood. There shall be no
minimum or maximum percentage of lot coverage and no minimum lot
width in the planned development. However, every dwelling shall have
access to a public street, court, walkway, or other area dedicated to
public use. No dwellings and no addition to any dwellings shall be
erected within a distance of less than the height of the highest adjacent
building or height of proposed structure, whichever is greater.
C. Vehicular access to dwellings by means of adequate service drive and/
or emergency entrances shall be provided in all cases where dwellings
do not front on a public street or where the Borough deems necessary
for public safety. Furthermore, all plans must be reviewed by the
Borough Fire Chief to insure that fire vehicles have adequate access to
all structures.
A. The requirements of this section apply only to structures located within
200 feet of the perimeter of a planned development.
B. If topographical or other barriers do not provide adequate privacy for
existing uses adjacent to the planned development, the Borough may
require either or both of the following:
(1) Structures located on the perimeter of the planned development
must be set back by a distance sufficient to protect the privacy and
amenity of adjacent existing uses, but in no case less than the
height of the aforementioned buildings.
(2) Structures located on the perimeter of the planned development
must be screened in such a manner which is sufficient to protect
the privacy and amenity of adjacent existing uses.
A. The development plan will contain areas to be allocated for common
open space which satisfy the standards governing the usability and
quality of common open space that is contained in the minimum open
space ratio.
B. No open area may be accepted as common open space under the
provisions of this article unless it meets the following standards:
§ 425-52 GIRARD CODE § 425-55
1:460
§ 425-56. Conveyance and maintenance of common open space.
(1) The location, shape, size and character of the common open space
must be suitable for the planned development.
(2) Common open space must be suitably improved for its intended
use, but common open space containing natural features worthy of
preservation may be left unimproved. The buildings, structures and
improvements which are permitted in the common open space
must be appropriate to the uses which are authorized for the
common space and must conserve and enhance the amenities of
the common open space having regard to its topography and
unimproved condition. Lakes, swamps and other water bodies may
not be used in computing common open space.
(3) The development schedule which is part of the development plan
must coordinate the improvement of the common open space, the
construction of buildings, structures and improvements in the
common open space and the construction of residential dwellings
in the planned development.
(4) If the final development plan provides for buildings, structures and
improvements in the common open space which exceed $1,000, the
developer must provide a bond in the estimated amount of the
improvements assuring that the buildings, structures and
improvements will be completed. The Council shall release the
bond or other assurance when the buildings, structures or
improvements have been completed according to the development
plan.
A. All land shown on the final development plan as common open space
must be conveyed and/or maintained under one of the following
options:
(1) It may be conveyed to a public agency which will agree to maintain
the common open space and any buildings, structures or
improvements which have been and will be placed in it, in which
case the general public must have use of the open space.
(2) It may be conveyed to the trustees provided for in an indenture
establishing an association or similar organization for the
maintenance of the planned development. The common open space
must be conveyed to the trustees subject to covenants which are
approved by the Borough Council, restrict the common space to the
uses specified on the final development plan, and provide for the
maintenance of the common open space in a manner which assures
its continued use for its intended purpose.
(3) The developer/landowner may elect to assume the maintenance of
all open space and/or the maintenance of all roads, parking areas,
drainage facilities and recreation facilities. Should a developer
§ 425-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-56
1:461
choose this option, his intention to maintain such open space and
facilities must be so stated in the development plan and application
for tentative approval.
B. No common open space may be put to any use not specified in the final
development plan unless the final development plan has been amended
to permit that use. However, no change of use authorized under
§ 425-57 may be considered as a waiver of any of the covenants limiting
the use of common open space areas, and all rights to enforce these
covenants against any use permitted under § 425-57 are expressly
reserved.
C. If the common open space is not conveyed to a public agency, one of the
following methods of enforcement must be provided:
(1) The legal right to develop the common open space for the uses not
specified in the final development plan must be approved by the
Council.
(2) Restrictions governing the use, improvement and maintenance of
the common open space must be stated as conditions to the
conveyance of the common open space, the fee title to the common
open space to vest in a public agency in the event of a substantial
default in the stated conditions.
(3) If the common open space is not maintained in reasonable order
and condition and in accordance with the development plan, the
Council may serve written notice to the organization responsible
for maintenance or to the residents of the planned residential
development, setting forth:
(a) The manner in which the organization has failed to maintain
the common open space in reasonable condition.
(b) A demand that such deficiencies of maintenance be corrected
within 30 days thereof.
(c) The date and place of a hearing thereon which shall be held
within 14 days from the date of the notice.
(d) If the deficiencies set forth in the original notice or in the
modifications thereof shall not be corrected within said 30 days
or any extension thereof, the Council may enter upon said
common space and maintain the same for a period of one year
in order to preserve the taxable values of the properties within
the planned residential development and to prevent the
common open space from becoming a public nuisance.
Maintenance by the Borough shall not constitute a taking of
said common space, nor vest in the public any rights to use the
same. Before the expiration of said year, the Borough shall,
upon its own initiative or upon the request of the organization
theretofore responsible for the maintenance of the common
§ 425-56 GIRARD CODE § 425-56
1:462
space, call a public hearing, after giving notice to said
organization and/or to the residents of the planned residential
development. The hearing will be held by the Borough or its
designated agency and shall provide said organization or the
residents of the planned residential development opportunity
to show cause why the Borough shall not, at its option,
continue said maintenance for a succeeding year. If the
Borough or its designated agency determines that said
organization is ready and able to maintain said common open
space in a reasonable condition, the Borough shall cease to
maintain said common open space at the end of a said year.
If the Borough determines that such organization is not ready
and able to maintain said common open space in a reasonable
condition, the Borough may, in its discretion, continue to
maintain said common open space during the next succeeding
year and, subject to similar hearing and determination, in each
year thereafter. The decision of the Borough shall be subject to
appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same time
limitation, as is provided for zoning appeals by Act 247 of 1968,
as amended.152
(e) The cost of such maintenance by the Borough shall be assessed
ratably against the properties within the planned residential
development that have the right of enjoyment of the common
open space and shall become a lien on said properties. The
Borough, at the time of entering upon said common space for
the purpose of maintenance, shall file a notice of lien in the
office of the Prothonotary of Erie County, Pennsylvania, upon
the properties affected by the lien within the planned
residential development.
D. This article further establishes the special requirements and
procedures which are applicable for any building or land development
intended to be maintained under the condominium form of ownership.
Furthermore, this article provides for the revocation of an approved
condominium and subsequent recording of same by appropriate means.
The procedure set forth in this section shall be followed by all
applicants proposing to develop land or buildings to be maintained
under the condominium form of ownership, or to convert existing land
or buildings from their present ownership to the condominium form of
ownership.
(1) Requirements. In addition to all other requirements set forth in this
article and not in conflict with the requirements of this section, a
declaration, a declaration plan and a code of regulations shall be
required for any proposed condominium and shall be approved by
the Borough Council, as appropriate, in accordance with the
requirements set forth in this section and the Uniform
152. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-56
1:463
§ 425-57. Application for tentative approval. [Amended 10-19-1992
by Ord. No. 614]
Condominium Act, July 2, 1980,153 prior to submission of said
documents for proper recording to the Recorder of Deeds of Erie
County.
A. The application for a planned residential development shall be filed
with the Borough Council or its designated representative by the
landowner or his designated representative. The applicant shall provide
a minimum of four copies of the complete application and related
documents.
B. The application shall be accompanied by an application fee, plus such
other fees as Council may from time to time establish by resolution.154
C. The application shall include, but not necessarily be limited to, the
following:
(1) Site development master plan.
(2) Topographical map:
(a) Existing topographical map.
(b) Proposed topographical map (grading plan).
(c) Unique features, i.e., wooded areas, streams, valleys, etc.
(3) Utilities plan, including:
(a) Existing and proposed sanitary sewers, including profiles.
(b) Existing and proposed water system, including fire prevention
facilities.
(c) Stormwater management plan.
(d) Soil erosion and sedimentation plan.
(e) Lighting plan.
(f) Refuse collection plan.
(4) Street/thoroughfare plan, including:
(a) Proposed public streets/thoroughfares.
(b) Profiles for proposed public roadways.
(c) Typical cross section of proposed improvements, including
road surface, shoulders, ditches and drainage areas.
153. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq.
154. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-56 GIRARD CODE § 425-57
1:464
(5) Open space and landscape development plan, including:
(a) Areas proposed as common open space.
(b) Proposed improvements to common open space, i.e.,
playgrounds, play areas, etc.
(c) Proposed screening or landscape buffer areas and plant lists.
(d) Typical landscape planting plan for multifamily structures.
(6) Typical building elevations and floor plans of proposed units,
including floor areas per building/unit.
(7) Perimeter survey of proposed development area, including size
(acreage), to be considered as prepared by a registered
professional land surveyor.
(8) Land use intensity calculations based on proposed units and their
respective floor areas.
(9) The substance of covenants, grants of easements, or other
restrictions proposed to be imposed upon the use of the land,
buildings, and structures, including proposed easements or grants
for public utilities, stormwater retention facilities, open space
facilities, etc.
(10) In the case of development plans which call for construction over a
period of years, the developer must submit a phased development
plan showing when each and all sections of the planned residential
development will be filed (submitted) for final approval. This
schedule must be updated annually on the anniversary of its
approval until the development is completed and accepted.
(11)Water supply. If water is to be provided by means other than by
private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of
lots within the planned residential development, applicants shall
present evidence to the Borough Council that the planned
residential development is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a
municipal corporation, authority or utility. A copy of a certificate of
public convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission or an application for such certificate, a cooperative
agreement, or a commitment or agreement to serve the area in
question, whichever is appropriate, shall be acceptable evidence.
D. The foregoing shall be considered minimum requirements for
acceptance of a complete planned residential development application,
and all required documents shall be prepared in accordance with this
chapter, Chapter 370, Subdivision and Land Development, and the
developer standards, as amended. Where unique design concepts or
other circumstances exist and where deviation from the required
§ 425-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-57
1:465
§ 425-58. Procedure for granting tentative approval. [Amended
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
format is required, the developer shall submit such additional data as is
necessary to fully and completely explain the proposal.
E. The application for tentative approval of a planned residential
development shall include a written statement by the landowner setting
forth the reasons why, in his opinion, a planned residential development
would be in the public interest and would be consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Borough.
A. All applications for tentative approval shall be filed with the Borough
Council, or its designated representative, who shall:
(1) Issue a written dated receipt acknowledging submission of the
application, the date of which shall begin the review process.
(2) Forward copies of the application and related plans to the following
agencies for review and comment:
(a) The Borough Planning Commission. The Commission shall
forward its comments to the Council within 30 days or forfeit
its rights of review.
(b) The Borough Engineer, who shall review the application as to
the accuracy of the data submitted under § 425-57C(1) through
C(10) of this article, as amended. The Engineer shall have 45
days to complete his review.
(c) The Erie County Department of Planning (ECDP). The ECDP
shall forward its comments to the Council within 30 days or
forfeit its right of review.
B. Public hearings.
(1) Within 60 days after the filing of an application for tentative
approval of a planned residential development pursuant to this
chapter, a public hearing pursuant to public notice on said
application shall be held by the Borough Council.
(2) Public notice shall be given, and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer and to any person who has made
timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such
time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by rules of the
Borough Council. In addition to the written notice provided herein,
written notice of said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the
affected tract of land at least one week prior to the hearing.
(3) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations permitted to appear by the
§ 425-57 GIRARD CODE § 425-58
1:466
§ 425-59. Grant or denial of tentative approval. [Amended
10-19-1992 by Ord. No. 614]
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(4) The Chairman, or Acting Chairman in the absence of the Chairman,
of the Borough Council shall have power to administer oaths and
issue subpoenas to compel the attendance of witnesses and the
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(5) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(6) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(7) The Borough Council shall keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Borough Council. The cost
of the original transcript shall be paid by the Borough Council if the
transcript is ordered by the Borough Council or shall be paid by the
person appealing from the decision of the Borough Council, if such
appeal is made, and, in either event, the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(8) The Borough Council shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representatives in connection with any issue
involved, except upon notice for all parties to participate; shall not
take notice of any communication, reports, staff memoranda, or
other materials, except advice from the Solicitor, unless the parties
are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so noticed; and
shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative
unless all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
(9) The Borough Council may continue the hearing from time to time
and may refer the matter back to the Planning Commission for a
report; provided, however, that, in any event, the public hearing or
hearings shall be concluded within 60 days after the date of the
first public hearing.
A. The Borough Council, within 60 days following the conclusion of the
public hearing(s) provided for in this article, or within 180 days after
§ 425-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-59
1:467
the date of filing of the application, whichever occurs first, shall, by
official written communication to the landowner:155
(1) Grant tentative approval for the development plan as submitted;
(2) Grant tentative approval subject to specified conditions not
included in the development plan as submitted; or
(3) Deny tentative approval to the development plan.
B. Failure to act within said period shall be deemed to be a grant of
tentative approval of the development plan as submitted. However, if
tentative approval is granted subject to conditions, the landowner may,
within 30 days after receiving a copy of the official, written
communication of the Borough Council, notify such Borough Council of
his refusal to accept any or all said conditions, in which case the
Borough Council shall deny tentative approval of the development plan.
If the landowner does not notify the Borough Council of his refusal to
accept all said conditions within the thirty-day period, tentative
approval of the development, with all said conditions, shall stand as
granted.
C. The grant or denial of tentative approval by official written
communication shall include not only conclusions but also findings of
fact related to the specific proposal. It shall set forth the reasons for the
granting of approval, with or without conditions, or for the denial of
approval. Said communication shall also set forth, with particularity, in
what respects the development plan would or would not be in the public
interest, including, but not limited to, findings of fact and conclusions
on the following:
(1) Whether the development plan is or is not consistent with the
Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Borough;
(2) The extent to which the development plan departs from zoning and
subdivision regulations otherwise applicable to the subject
property, including, but not limited to, density, bulk and use, and
the reasons why such departures are or are not deemed to be in the
public interest;
(3) The purpose, location, and amount of the common open space in
the planned residential development, the reliability of the
proposals for maintenance and conservation of the common space,
and the adequacy or inadequacy of the amount and purpose of the
common open space as related to the proposed density and type of
residential development;
(4) The physical design of the development plan and the manner in
which it does or does not make adequate provision for public
services, provide adequate control over vehicular traffic, and
155. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 425-59 GIRARD CODE § 425-59
1:468
§ 425-60. Status of plan after tentative approval.
further the amenities of light and air, recreation, and visual
enjoyment;
(5) The relationship, either beneficial or adverse, of the proposed
planned residential development to the neighborhood in which it is
proposed to be established; and
(6) In the case of a development plan which proposed development
over a period of years, the sufficiency of the terms and conditions
intended to protect the interests of the public and of the residents
of the planned residential development in the integrity of the
development plan.
D. When a development plan is granted tentative approval, with or without
conditions, the Borough Council may set forth, in the official written
communication, the time within which an application for final approval
of the development plan shall be filed; or, in the case of a development
plan which provides for development over a period of years, the periods
of time within which applications for final approval of each part thereof
shall be filed. Except upon the consent of the landowner, the time
established between the grant of tentative approval and application for
final approval shall not be less than three months; and in the case of
developments over a period of years, the time between applications for
final approval of each part of a plan shall not be less than 12 months.
A. The official written communication provided for in this article shall be
certified by the Borough Secretary and shall be filed in his office, and a
certified copy shall be mailed to the landowner. Where tentative
approval has been granted, the same shall be noted on the Zoning Map.
B. Tentative approval of a development plan shall not qualify a plat of the
planned residential development for recording or authorize
development or the issuance of any building permits. A development
plan given tentative approval as submitted, or with conditions accepted
by the landowner, shall not be modified or revoked, nor otherwise
impaired, by action of the Borough during the preparation of an
application for final approval without the consent of the landowner,
provided that the landowner has not defaulted nor violated any of the
conditions of tentative approval; and an application(s) for final approval
is filed within the time period specified in the official written
communication granting tentative approval.
C. If the landowner abandons a development plan between the time
tentative approval was granted, but prior to receiving final approval,
the tentative approval shall be revoked, and the area included in the
development plan shall again be subject to all applicable local
ordinances. "Abandonment by the developer" shall mean that the
developer has notified the Borough Council of his intentions to abandon
§ 425-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-60
1:469
§ 425-61. Application for final approval.
the project or failed to file an application(s) for final approval within the
time period stated in the grant of tentative approval.
A. There shall be no sale of lots until final approval.
B. Final approval shall not be given until all improvements have either
been completed in accordance with tentative plan approval or a
performance bond in the estimated amount of improvements not
completed is posted with the Borough. Bonding shall be in accord with
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code, as amended.156
C. Within six months following the tentative approval of the development
plan, the applicant shall file with the Borough Council a final
development plan containing, in final form, the information required on
the preliminary plan. The Council may extend, upon written request of
the landowner, the period for filing the final development plan up to six
months, provided good cause is shown.
D. A public hearing on an application for final approval of the development
plan, or part thereof, shall not be required, provided the development
plan, or part thereof, submitted for final approval is in compliance with
the development plan theretofore given tentative approval and with any
specified conditions attached thereto.
E. Within 30 days after the application for final approval is filed, the
Borough shall grant final approval of the development plan if it meets
all requirements of this article and the official written communication
granting tentative approval.
F. If the final development plan as submitted contains variations from the
development plan given tentative approval, the Borough may refuse to
grant final approval and shall, within 30 days from the filing of the
application for final approval, so advise the landowner, in writing, of
said refusal, setting forth the reasons why one or more of said
variations are not in the public interest.
G. If the final development plan is disapproved, the landowner may either:
(1) Refile his application for final approval without the objected
variations.
(2) File a written request with the Borough asking that it hold a public
hearing on the application for final approval. The request must be
submitted during the period of time the landowner is entitled to
apply for final approval or within 30 additional days, if the time for
applying for final approval shall have already passed at the time
when the landowner was advised that the development plan was
not in substantial compliance.
156. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-60 GIRARD CODE § 425-61
1:470
§ 425-62. Status of plan after final approval. [Added 10-19-1992 by
Ord. No. 614]
(a) Procedure if a public hearing is requested.
[1] The hearing shall be held within 30 days pursuant to
public notice after the request was submitted by the
landowner.
[2] The hearing shall be conducted in the manner prescribed
in this article for public hearings on applications for
tentative approval.
[3] Within 30 days after the conclusion of the hearing, the
Borough shall, by official written communication, grant or
deny final approval to the development plan.
[4] The grant or denial of final approval of the development
plan shall, in cases arising under this section, be presented
in the same format required for an application for tentative
approval. (See § 425-57.)
A. A development plan, or any part thereof, which has been given final
approval shall be so certified without delay by the Borough Council and
shall be filed of record forthwith in the office of the Recorder of Deeds
before any development shall take place in accordance therewith. Upon
the filing of record of the development plan, the zoning and subdivision
regulations otherwise applicable to the land included in such plan shall
cease to apply thereto. Pending completion, in accordance with the time
provisions stated in Section 508 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code (hereinafter "MPC"), 53 P.S. § 10508, of said planned
residential development or of that part thereof, as the case may be, that
has been finally approved, no modification of the provisions of said
development plan, or part thereof, as finally approved, shall be made,
except with the consent of the landowner. Upon approval of a final plat,
the developer shall record the plat in accordance with the provisions of
Section 513(a) of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10513(a), and post financial
security in accordance with Section 509 of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10509,
and in accordance with Chapter 370, Subdivision and Land
Development.
B. In the event that a development plan, or a section thereof, is given final
approval, and thereafter the landowner shall abandon such plan or the
section thereof that has been finally approved, and shall so notify the
Borough Council, in writing, or, in the event the landowner shall fail to
commence and carry out the planned residential development in
accordance with the time provisions stated in Section 508 of the MPC,
53 P.S. § 10508, after final approval has been granted, no development
or further development shall take place on the property included in the
development plan until after the said property is reclassified by
enactment of an amendment to this chapter in the manner prescribed
§ 425-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-62
1:471
§ 425-63. Enforcement; modification of plan provisions.
To further the mutual interest of the residents of a planned residential
development and the public in preserving the integrity of the development
plan as approved, and to insure that modifications in the development
plan shall not impair the reasonable reliance of said residents upon the
provisions of the development plan, nor result in changes that would
adversely affect the public interest, the enforcement and modification of the
provisions of the development plan as finally approved, whether they are
recorded by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, shall be subject to the
following provisions:
for such amendments in Article VI of the MPC, 53 P.S. § 10601 et seq.,
and this chapter.
A. The provisions of the development plan relating to the use, bulk, and
location of buildings and structures; the quantity and location of
common open space, except as otherwise provided in this article; and
the intensity of use or the density of residential units shall run in favor
of the Borough and shall be enforceable in law or in equity by the
Borough, without limitation on any powers of regulation otherwise
granted the Borough.
B. All provisions of the development plan shall run in favor of the residents
of the planned residential development, but only to the extent expressly
provided in the development plan and in accordance with the terms of
the development plan and to the extent said provisions, whether
recorded by plat, covenant, easement or otherwise, may be enforced at
law or equity by said residents acting individually, jointly or through an
organization designated in the development plan to act on their behalf;
provided, however, that no provisions of the development plan shall be
implied, except as to those portions of the development plan which have
been finally approved and have been recorded.
C. All those provisions of the development plan authorized to be enforced
by the Borough under this section may be modified, removed, or
released by the Borough, except grants or easements relating to the
service or equipment of a public utility, subject to the following
conditions:
(1) No such modification, removal, or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the Borough shall affect the rights of the
residents of the planned residential development to maintain and
enforce those provisions at law or equity as provided in this
section.
(2) No modification, removal or release of the provisions of the
development plan by the Borough shall be permitted, except upon a
finding by the Council following a public hearing thereon pursuant
to public notice called and held in accordance with the provisions of
this article that the same is consistent with the efficient
§ 425-62 GIRARD CODE § 425-63
1:472
§ 425-64. Judicial review.
Any decision of the Girard Borough Council under this article granting or
denying tentative or final approval of a development plan shall be subject to
appeal to court in the same manner, and within the same time limitation, as
provided for zoning appeals by Act 247 of 1968, as amended, and known as
the "Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code."157
§ 425-65. Violations and penalties. [Amended 10-19-1992 by Ord.
No. 614]
development and preservation of the entire planned residential
development, does not adversely affect either the enjoyment of
land abutting upon or across the street from the planned
residential development or the public interest, and is not granted
solely to confer a special benefit upon any person.
D. Residents of the planned residential development may, to the extent and
in the manner expressly authorized by the provisions of the
development plan, modify, remove, or release their rights to enforce the
provisions of the development plan, but no such action shall affect the
right of the Borough to enforce the provisions of this section.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
planned residential development provisions of this chapter shall, upon
being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500,
plus all court costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, incurred by
the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall commence or be
imposed, levied or payable until the date of the determination of a
violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the defendant neither pays
nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough may enforce the
judgment pursuant to the appropriate Rules of Civil Procedure. Each
day that a violation continues shall constitute a separate violation,
unless the Magisterial District Judge determining that there has been a
violation further determines that there was a good faith basis for the
person, partnership or corporation violating these provisions to have
believed that there was no such violation, in which event there shall be
deemed to have been only one such violation until the fifth day
following the date of the determination of a violation by the Magisterial
District Judge, and thereafter, each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable
attorneys' fees collected for the violation of planned residential
development provisions of this chapter shall be paid over to the
Borough.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
157. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 425-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-65
1:473
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction over
proceedings brought under this section.
§ 425-65 GIRARD CODE § 425-65
1:474
DERIVATION TABLE
Chapter DT
DERIVATION TABLE
§ DT-1. Derivation Table of 1974 Code to 2012 Code.
NCM = Not Code material (legislation is not general or permanent in nature).
REP = Repealed effective with adoption of Code; see Ch. 1, Art. I.
NI = Not included in Code but saved from repeal.
NLP = New legislation is pending.
Chapter/Title From 1974 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. I, Administration and Government
Part 1, Elected and Appointed Officers
Sec. 1, Salaries of Mayor and Council
Members
Ch. 75, Art. I
Secs. 2 - 3, Tax Collector Superseded by Ord. No. 707
Secs. 4 - 5, Independent Auditor Ch. 39, Art. I
Secs. 6 - 9.4, Manager Ch. 39, Art. II
Part 2, Authorities (Reserved) Omitted
Part 3, Boards and Commissions
Sec. 21, Planning Commission Ch. 50
Secs. 22 - 27, Civil Service Commission Ch. 12
Secs. 28 - 31, Recreation Board Ch. 68
Part 4, Fireman's Relief Ch. 23
Part 5, Police Department Ch. 54
Part 6, Pensions, Retirement and Social
Security
A. Police Pensions Ch. 44, Art. I
B. Social Security for Borough
Employees and Officers
REP
Part 7, Fire Insurance Proceeds Escrow Ch. 193
Ch. II, Air Pollution (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. III, Animals
Part 1, Running at Large Ch. 120, Art. I
Ch. IV, Bicycles Ch. 366, Art. I
Ch. V, Buildings
Part 1, Building Code REP
§ 425-65 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:475
Chapter/Title From 1974 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 2, One- and Two-Family Dwelling
Code
Ch. 145, Art. I
Part 3, Numbering of Buildings Ch. 270
Part 4, Flood-Plain Areas Ch. 205
Part 5, Dangerous Structures Superseded by Ord. No.
685; see Ch. 266
Ch. VI, Conduct
Part 1, Firearms Repealed by Ord. No. 721;
see Ch. 185
Part 2, Prohibited Acts on Public Property
Secs. 11 - 12, Ballplaying Ch. 299, Art. I
Secs. 13 - 18, Tampering Ch. 299, Art. II
Part 3, Smoking Restricted on School
Property
REP
Part 4, Alcoholic Beverages Ch. 112, Art. I
Part 5, Sexually Oriented Business
Operations
Ch. 325
Part 6, Human Body Massage
Establishments
Ch. 250
Part 7, Disorderly Conduct Ch. 157
Ch. VII, Curfew (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. VIII, Electric Department
Part 1, Electric Rates Ch. 168
Ch. IX, Fire Prevention and Fire Protection Ch. 199
Ch. X, Franchises
Part 1, Electricity NCM
Part 2, Gas NCM
Part 3, Telephone NCM
Part 4, Television Cable NCM
Ch. XI, Garbage and Refuse
Part 1, Solid Waste Disposal and Recycling Repealed by Ord. No. 711;
see Ch. 354
Ch. XII, Health and Sanitation
Part 1, Health Administration Ch. 27
Part 2, Grass, Weeds and Other Vegetation Ch. 217
Part 3, Storage of Motor Vehicles on
Private Grounds
Ch. 409
Ch. XIII, Housing
§ DT-1 GIRARD CODE § DT-1
1:476
Chapter/Title From 1974 Code Location in 2012 Code
Part 1, Housing Ch. 228
Ch. XIV, Libraries (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XV, Licenses, Permits and General
Business Regulations
Part 1, Amusement Devices Ch. 116
Part 2, Fire Hydrants Ch. 189
Part 3, Transient Retail Business Ch. 388
Part 4, Advertising Matter Distribution Ch. 100
Part 5, Drilling Natural Gas Wells Ch. 212
Part 6, Burglar or Fire Alarms Ch. 108, Art. I
Ch. XVI, Mobile Homes and Mobile Home
Parks (Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. XVII, Motor Vehicles and Traffic Ch. 400
Ch. XVIII, Parks and Recreation Ch. 283, Art. I
Ch. XIX, Planned Residential Developments
(Reserved)
Omitted
Ch. XX, Sewers and Sewage Disposal
Part 1, Sanitary Sewer System Ch. 320, Art. I
Ch. XXI, Signs and Billboards
Part 1, Political Signs Ch. 331, Art. I
Ch. XXII, Streets and Sidewalks
Part 1, Street Naming NCM
Part 2, Sidewalks Ch. 366, Art. II
Part 3, Streets and Sidewalks Ch. 366, Art. III
Ch. XXIII, Subdivision and Land
Development
Ch. 370
Ch. XXIV, Swimming Pools (Reserved) Omitted
Ch. XXV, Taxation, Special
Part 1, Earned Income Ch. 377, Art. I
Part 2, Per Capita Ch. 377, Art. II
Part 3, Realty Transfer Tax Ch. 377, Art. III
Ch. XXVI, Trees Ch. 392
Ch. XXVII, Water
Part 1, Rates and Charges Ch. 414, Art. II
Part 2, Connections Ch. 414, Art. I
Part 3, Stormwater Management Superseded by Ord. No.
720; see Ch. 360
§ DT-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DT-1
1:477
Chapter/Title From 1974 Code Location in 2012 Code
Ch. XXVIII, Zoning Ch. 425
Appendix
I, Agreements and Contracts NCM
II, Annexation of Territory NCM
III, Bond Issues and Loans NCM
IV, Electricity NCM
V, Governmental and Intergovernmental
Affairs
NCM
VI, Plan Approval (Reserved) NCM
VII, Public Property NCM
VIII, Sewers NCM
IX, Sidewalks NCM
X, Streets NCM
XI, Taxation and Budget NCM
XII, Water NCM
XIII, Zoning Reclassification NCM
DISPOSITION LIST
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ord. No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
724 12-17-2012 2013 tax rate NCM
725 1-21-2013 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
726 2-18-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 400
727 7-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 425
728 7-15-2013 Zoning amendment Ch. 425
729 7-15-2013 Parks and recreation:
tobacco-free areas
Ch. 283, Art. II
§ DT-1 GIRARD CODE § DL-1
1:478