Part I: Administrative Legislation
Chapter 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
1:1

ARTICLE I
Adoption of Code
[Adopted 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
§ 1-1. Approval, adoption and enactment of Code.
Pursuant to Section 1008(b) of the Borough Code [53 P.S. § 46008(b)], the
codification of a complete body of legislation for the Borough of Hellertown,
County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as revised,
codified and consolidated into chapters, articles and sections by General
Code, and consisting of Chapters 1 through 450, together with an Appendix,
are hereby approved, adopted, ordained and enacted as a single ordinance
of the Borough of Hellertown, which shall be known and is hereby
designated as the "Code of the Borough of Hellertown," hereinafter referred
to as the "Code."
§ 1-2. Effect of Code on previous provisions.
The provisions of this Code, insofar as they are substantively the same
as those of ordinances and resolutions in force immediately prior to the
enactment of this ordinance, are intended as a continuation of such
ordinances and resolutions and not as new enactments, and the
effectiveness of such provisions shall date from the date of adoption of the
prior ordinance or resolution. All such provisions are hereby continued in
full force and effect and are hereby reaffirmed as to their adoption by the
Borough Council of the Borough of Hellertown, and it is the intention of
said Borough Council that each such provision contained within the Code
is hereby reenacted and reaffirmed as it appears in said Code. Only such
provisions of former ordinances as are omitted from this Code shall be
deemed repealed or abrogated by the provisions of § 1-3 below, and only
changed provisions, as described in § 1-6 below, shall be deemed to be
enacted from the effective date of this Code, as provided in § 1-15 below.
§ 1-3. Inconsistent ordinances repealed.
Except as provided in § 1-4, Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not
affected by repeal, below, all ordinances or parts of ordinances inconsistent
with the provisions contained in the Code adopted by this ordinance are
hereby repealed as of the effective date given in § 1-15; provided, however,
that such repeal shall only be to the extent of such inconsistency, and any
valid legislation of the Borough of Hellertown which is not in conflict with
the provisions of the Code shall be deemed to remain in full force and effect.
§ 1-4. Ordinances saved from repeal; matters not affected by repeal.
The adoption of this Code and the repeal of ordinances provided for in
§ 1-3 of this ordinance shall not affect the following ordinances, rights
and obligations, which are hereby expressly saved from repeal; provided,
however, that the repeal of ordinances pursuant to § 1-3 or the saving from
repeal of ordinances pursuant to this section shall not be construed so as to
§ 1-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-4
1:3
revive any ordinance previously repealed, superseded or no longer of any
effect:
A. Any ordinance adopted subsequent to 7-2-2012.
B. Any right or liability established, accrued or incurred under any
legislative provision of the Borough prior to the effective date of this
ordinance or any action or proceeding brought for the enforcement of
such right or liability or any cause of action acquired or existing.
C. Any offense or act committed or done before the effective date of this
ordinance in violation of any legislative provision of the Borough or any
penalty, punishment or forfeiture which may result therefrom.
D. Any prosecution, indictment, action, suit or other proceeding pending
or any judgment rendered prior to the effective date of this ordinance,
brought pursuant to any legislative provision of the Borough.
E. Any franchise, license, right, easement or privilege heretofore granted
or conferred by the Borough or any lawful contract, obligation or
agreement.
F. Any ordinance appropriating money or transferring funds, promising or
guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance and
delivery of any bond of the Borough or other instruments or evidence of
the Borough's indebtedness.
G. Any ordinance adopting an annual budget or establishing an annual tax
rate.
H. Any ordinance providing for the levy, imposition or collection of special
taxes, assessments or charges.
I. Any ordinance authorizing the purchase, sale, lease or transfer of
property or acquiring property by acceptance of deed, condemnation or
exercise of eminent domain.
J. Any ordinance annexing land to the Borough.
K. Any ordinance providing for or requiring the construction or
reconstruction or opening of sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
L. Any ordinance or part of an ordinance providing for laying out, opening,
altering, widening, relocating, straightening, establishing grade,
changing name, improvement, acceptance or vacation of any right-ofway,
easement, street, road, highway, sidewalk, park or other public
place or property or designating various streets as public highways.
M. Any ordinance establishing water, sewer or other special purpose
districts and designating the boundaries thereof; providing for a system
of sewers or water supply lines; or providing for the construction,
extension, dedication, acceptance or abandonment of any part of a
system of sewers or water supply lines.
§ 1-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 1-4
1:4
§ 1-5. Inclusion of new legislation prior to adoption of Code.
All ordinances of a general and permanent nature adopted subsequent
to the date given in § 1-4A and/or prior to the date of adoption of this
ordinance are hereby deemed to be a part of the Code and shall, upon being
printed, be included therein. Attested copies of all such ordinances shall be
temporarily placed in the Code until printed supplements are included.
§ 1-6. Changes and revisions in previously adopted ordinances.
N. Any ordinance providing for the making of public improvements.
O. Any ordinance providing for the salaries and compensation of officers
and employees of the Borough or setting the bond of any officer or
employee.
P. Any ordinance concerning changes and amendments to the Zoning
Map.
Q. Any ordinance relating to or establishing a pension plan or pension fund
for municipal employees.
R. Any ordinance or portion of an ordinance establishing a specific fee
amount for any license, permit or service obtained from the Borough.
A. Nonsubstantive grammatical changes. In compiling and preparing the
ordinances and resolutions of the Borough for adoption and revision as
part of the Code, certain nonsubstantive grammatical and style changes
were made in one or more of said ordinances. It is the intention of the
Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as part of the Code
as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had been previously
formally amended to read as such.
B. Nomenclature. The following outdated terms, where they appeared in
the Borough's ordinances, have been changed:
(1) "Health Department" or "Health Officer" to "Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee."
(2) "Justice of the Peace," "District Magistrate" or "Alderman" to
"Magisterial District Judge."
(3) "Department of Environmental Resources" to "Department of
Environmental Protection," where applicable.
(4) "Department of Community Affairs" to "Department of Community
and Economic Development."
C. Substantive changes and revisions. In addition to the changes and
revisions described above, changes and revisions of a substantive
nature, as set forth in Schedule A attached hereto and made a part
hereof, are hereby made to various ordinances and resolutions included
in the Code. These changes are enacted to bring provisions into
§ 1-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-6
1:5
§ 1-7. Interpretation of provisions.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of the Code, they shall be held to
be the minimum requirements for the promotion of the public health, safety,
comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where the provisions of the
Code impose greater restrictions or requirements than those of any statute,
other ordinance, resolution or regulation, the provisions of the Code shall
control. Where the provisions of any statute, other ordinance, resolution or
regulation impose greater restrictions or requirements, the provisions of
such statute, other ordinance, resolution or regulation shall control.
§ 1-8. Titles and headings; editor's notes.
§ 1-9. Filing of copy of Code.
At least one copy of the Code in a post-bound volume shall be filed with
the Ordinance Book in the office of the Borough Secretary and shall remain
there for use and examination by the public. Upon adoption, such copy
or copies shall be certified to by the Borough Secretary, as provided by
law, and such certified copy or copies shall remain on file in the office of
the Borough Secretary, available to persons desiring to examine the same
during all times while said Code is in effect.
conformity with the desired policies of the Borough Council, and it is
the intent of the Borough Council that all such changes be adopted as
part of the Code as if the ordinances and resolutions so changed had
been previously formally amended to read as such. All such changes
and revisions shall be deemed to be in effect as of the effective date of
the Code specified in § 1-15.1
A. Chapter and article titles, headings and titles of sections and other
divisions in the Code or in supplements made to the Code are inserted
in the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
B. Editor's notes indicating sources of sections, giving other information
or referring to the statutes or to other parts of the Code are inserted in
the Code and may be inserted in supplements to the Code for the
convenience of persons using the Code and are not part of the
legislation.
1. Editor's Note: In accordance with § 1-6C, the chapters, parts and sections which were
added, amended, adopted or deleted by this ordinance are indicated throughout the Code
by a footnote referring to Chapter 1, General Provisions, Article I. During routine
supplementation, footnotes indicating amendments, additions or deletions will be
replaced with the following history: "Amended (added, deleted) 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775." Schedule A, which contains a complete description of all changes, is on file in the
Borough offices.
§ 1-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 1-10
1:6
§ 1-10. Amendments to Code.
Any and all additions, deletions, amendments or supplements to the Code,
when passed and adopted in such form as to indicate the intention of the
Borough Council to be a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated
into such Code so that reference to the Code shall be understood and
intended to include such changes. Whenever such additions, deletions,
amendments or supplements to the Code shall be adopted, they shall
thereafter be printed and, as provided hereunder, inserted in the postbound
book containing said Code as amendments and supplements thereto.
§ 1-11. Code books to be kept up-to-date.
It shall be the duty of the Borough Secretary or someone authorized and
directed by him or her to keep up-to-date the certified copy or copies
of the book containing the Code required to be filed in the office of the
Borough Secretary for the use of the public. All changes in said Code and all
ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Borough Council subsequent to
the effective date of this codification which the Borough Council shall adopt
specifically as part of the Code shall, when finally adopted, be included
therein by reference until such changes or new ordinances or resolutions
are printed as supplements to said Code books, at which time such
supplements shall be inserted therein.
§ 1-12. Publication of notices.
The Borough Secretary, pursuant to law, shall cause to be published in the
manner required a notice of the introduction and of the adoption of the
Code in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. The enactment
and application of this ordinance, coupled with the publication of the
notices of introduction and adoption, as required by law, and the availability
of a copy or copies of the Code for inspection by the public, shall be deemed,
held and considered to be due and legal publication of all provisions of the
Code for all purposes.
§ 1-13. Altering or tampering with Code; penalties for violation.
It shall be unlawful for anyone to improperly change or amend, by additions
or deletions, or to alter or tamper with the Code or any part or portion
thereof, in any manner whatsoever, which will cause the law of the Borough
to be misrepresented thereby. Anyone violating this section of this
ordinance shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not
exceeding $600, plus costs of prosecution, and, in default of payment
thereof, by imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days.
§ 1-14. Severability.
The provisions of this ordinance and of the Code adopted hereby are
severable, and if any clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter
or part thereof shall be adjudged by any court of competent jurisdiction to
be illegal, invalid or unconstitutional, such judgment or decision shall not
§ 1-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 1-14
1:7
affect, impair or invalidate the remainder thereof but shall be confined in
its operation and application to the clause, sentence, subsection, section,
article, chapter or part thereof rendered illegal, invalid or unconstitutional.
It is hereby declared to be the intent of the Borough Council that this
ordinance and the Code would have been adopted if such illegal, invalid
or unconstitutional clause, sentence, subsection, section, article, chapter or
part thereof had not been included therein.
§ 1-15. Amendment to fines, fees and costs. [Added 4-18-2016 by
Ord. No. 8062]
The Borough Council shall amend all costs, fees and/or penalties set forth
in the Code by resolution.
§ 1-16. Effective date.
All provisions of this ordinance and of the Code shall be in force and effect
on and after September 17, 2012.
2. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 1-15 as § 1-16.
§ 1-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 1-16
1:8
Chapter 4
AUDITOR, INDEPENDENT
§ 4-1. Office of elected Borough Auditors abolished.
The office of elected Borough Auditors is hereby abolished.
§ 4-2. Appointment of independent auditor authorized.
The Borough Council shall appoint an independent auditor who shall be a
certified public accountant, registered in Pennsylvania, a firm of certified
public accountants so registered or a competent public accountant or a
competent firm of public accountants.
§ 4-3. Annual appointment of auditor; independent examination of
accounting records.
The independent auditor shall be appointed annually, by resolution of the
Borough Council, before the close of a fiscal year, to make an independent
examination of the accounting records of the Borough for such fiscal year.
§ 4-4. Other duties and powers of independent auditor.
The independent auditor shall also perform the other duties and exercise
the powers as conferred upon him by subdivision (k) of Article XI of the
Borough Code, the Act of February 1, 1966, P.L. (1965), No. 581 § 1196, as
amended, (53 P.S. § 46196).
§ 4-5. Elected auditors remain in office until term expires; duties
limited.
The Borough Auditors presently in office shall continue to hold their office
during the term for which elected and the Borough Auditors shall not audit,
settle or adjust the accounts audited by such independent auditor but shall
perform the other duties of their office.
Chapter 7
AUTHORITIES, MUNICIPAL
§ 1-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 4-5
1:9

ARTICLE I
Hellertown Borough Authority
[Adopted 4-29-1940 by Ord. No. 148]
§ 7-1. Desire and intention to organize Hellertown Borough
Authority.
The Borough Council hereby signifies its intention and desire to organize an
authority under the provisions of the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1935,"
as amended.
§ 7-2. Articles of incorporation of Hellertown Borough Authority.
[Amended 8-6-1956 by Ord. No. 2353]
The Mayor, the President of the Borough Council and the Secretary are
hereby authorized and directed to execute on behalf of the Borough of
Hellertown, Articles of Incorporation for said Authority, in substantially the
following form:
ARTICLES OF INCORPORATION
To the Secretary of the Commonwealth
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:
In compliance with the requirements of the Act of June 28, 1935, P.L.
463, known as the "Municipality Authorities Act of 1935," as amended,
the Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County, Pennsylvania, desiring to
incorporate an authority thereunder, does hereby certify:4
(a) The name of the Authority is "Hellertown Borough Authority."
(b) Said Authority is formed under the provisions of the Act of June 28,
1935, P.L. 463, as amended.
(c) No other Authority organized under said Act of June 28, 1935, P.L. 463,
as amended, or under the Act of December 27, 1933 (Special Session,
1933, P.L. 114) is in existence in or for the incorporating municipality,
the Borough of Hellertown.
(d) The name of the incorporating municipality is Borough of Hellertown,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, and the names and addresses of
its municipal authorities area as follows: (Here followed the names and
addresses of its original municipal authorities.)
(e) The names, addresses and terms of office of the first members of
the Board of said Authority are as follows: (Here followed the names,
addresses and terms of office of the members of the first Board of the
Authority.)
(f) The term of existence of said Authority shall be 50 years from the
date of approval of these Articles of Amendment to the Articles of
Incorporation.5
3. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
4. Editor's Note: See 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq., for the current Municipality Authorities Act.
§ 7-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 7-3
1:11
§ 7-3. Water project designated first project of authority.
The project which shall be undertaken by the said Authority is to acquire,
hold, construct, improve, maintain, operate, own, lease, either as lessor or
as lessee, waterworks, water supply works and water distribution systems
for the Borough of Hellertown and for such other territory as it may be
authorized to serve.
5. Editor's Note: Res. No. 04-10, adopted 11-15-2004, extended the term of the Authority to
May 31, 2030, providing as follows: WHEREAS, the Hellertown Borough Authority was
incorporated under the Municipal Authorities Act of 1935, as amended, and WHEREAS, a
Certificate of Incorporation was issued by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to the
Hellertown Borough Authority (hereinafter called "Authority") on the 31st day of May,
1940 with authorization to operate the Authority and to transact business for a period of
50 years from the date thereof, and WHEREAS, pursuant to Section 3.2A, Subsection (2)
of the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945: "An Authority, in the manner hereinafter
provided, may, from time to time amend its articles: — (2) To add a provision therein
increasing its term of existence to a date not exceeding 50 years from the date of approval
of the articles of amendment or to modify any provision thereof limiting its terms of
existence, by increasing such term to such a date;" and WHEREAS, pursuant to
subparagraph B of Section 3.2, the amendment to the Articles was proposed by the
Authority by the adoption of the following Resolution. "NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT
RESOLVED, and it is hereby resolved, as follows: 1. The Authority hereby recommends to
the Borough of Hellertown (the "Borough") that the Articles of Incorporation of the
Hellertown Borough Authority be amended as follows: "The Certificate of Incorporation of
the Hellertown Borough Authority, dated May 31, 1940, is hereby amended so that the
term of the Authority is extended to May 31, 2030. 2. The Chairman of the Authority and
Secretary of the Authority are hereby authorized to execute and deliver a certified copy of
this resolution to the Borough pursuant to the Municipal Authorities Act of 1945."
WHEREAS, the Municipal Authorities Act of Pennsylvania provides that after the
amendment is proposed by the Authority, it shall be submitted to the governing body of
the municipality for adoption or rejection by Resolution or Ordinance. NOW, THEREFORE,
BE IT RESOLVED, and it is hereby resolved by the Borough Council of the Borough of
Hellertown that the aforesaid Resolution of the Hellertown Borough Authority to amend
its Certificate of Incorporation by extending its termination date to May 31, 2030, is
hereby approved.
§ 7-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 7-3
1:12
Chapter 18
ETHICS
§ 18-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to establish and impose on elected and
appointed officials and employees of the Borough of Hellertown the highest
possible ethical standards.
§ 18-2. Union activity.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit the rights granted under
the laws of Pennsylvania or the United States to any employee or employee
organization.
§ 18-3. Job discrimination.
No individual shall be favored or disfavored with respect to any position
or office because of age, sex, race, color, religion, national origin, political
opinions or affiliations or lawful activity in any employee organization.
§ 18-4. Soliciting of employment favors.
No individual who seeks promotions or appointment with respect to any
position or office shall directly or indirectly give, render, or pay any money,
service or other valuable thing to any person for or in connection with
his past appointment, proposed appointment, promotion or proposed
promotion.
§ 18-5. Political activity.
§ 18-6. Conflicts of interest.
A. Employees of the Borough may participate or refrain from participating
in political activity, but no employee shall engage in political activity
while performing the duties of his or her position with the Borough.
B. No employee of the Borough shall hold any elective position within the
Borough such as Mayor, Councilman, Auditor, Controller, Assessor or
Tax Collector. Nothing herein contained shall prevent an employee from
running for such an elective position within the Borough, but upon
election, he or she shall forthwith submit his or her resignation as an
employee of the Borough to be effective upon the date such employee
assumes his or her duties as such elected official.
C. No person in any way shall solicit any assessment, subscription or
contribution for any political party, organization, committee or
candidate from any employee of the Borough.
§ 7-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 18-6
1:13
§ 18-7. Violations and penalties.
Any elected or appointed official or employee who knowingly and willfully
violates any of the provisions of this chapter shall be dismissed from his
office or employment by Council.
Chapter 23
FIRE COMPANY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire department — See Ch. 27. Firemen's relief association — See Ch. 33.
A. The purpose of this section is to prevent elected and appointed officials
and employees from securing any financial benefits from their public
positions other than their compensation provided by law.
B. No elected or appointed official or employee shall receive benefit from
the profits or emoluments of any contract, job, work or service for the
Borough or accept anything of value upon terms more favorable than
those granted to the public generally from any person dealing with the
Borough. No elected or appointed official or employee shall solicit or
receive anything of value for any act done in the course of public
business, except from the Borough. This subsection shall not be
construed to prohibit elected or appointed officials or employees from
accepting group discounts, group insurance, or other economic
advantages offered to all elected and appointed officials and employees.
C. No elected or appointed official or employee in his official capacity shall
participate in the consideration or approval of any Borough business in
which he or she has a direct or indirect financial interest.
D. Any elected or appointed official or employee who is aware that he or
she has ownership or any interest in any person, firm or corporation
dealing or doing business with the Borough, shall disclose such interest
by sending a letter setting forth such facts to the Secretary of Borough
Council, who shall distribute copies of the letter to the members of the
Borough Council.
E. The Borough Council shall determine whether a conflict exists. If a
conflict exists as to a member of the Borough Council, that member
shall not participate in, debate or vote on the matter. The Borough
Council shall have the power to void any contract made in violation of
this section.
§ 18-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 23-1
1:14
§ 23-1. Fire company recognized.
The Dewey Fire Company No. 1, to include the Dewey Ambulance Squad,
organized and existing in the Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, is hereby designated as the officially recognized company for
the Borough.
§ 23-2. Authorized activities of the fire company.
§ 23-3. Authorized activities of members of the fire company.
In addition to actually participating in the activities of the fire company as
authorized above, or in going to or returning from any activity, the members
of the fire company recognized by the Borough are also authorized to do the
following things:
A. The fire company recognized by the Borough is hereby authorized to
provide such services to the Borough as may be necessary for the
protection of the property and persons situate therein, which include,
by way of example and not limitation, the extinguishment and
prevention of loss of life and property from fire, automobile accidents,
medical emergencies, hazardous materials incidents and other
dangerous situations.
B. The company may also provide non-emergency and public service
function, such as, again by way of example and not limitation, removing
water from property after storms and issuing in the removal, abatement
and prevention of damage or injury to persons or property whether
natural causes or man-made situations.
C. The company may also conduct and participate in such training
activities and drills, either within or outside of the Borough, as may be
deemed necessary by the officers of the company to maintain
proficiency in providing service.
D. The company may also respond to calls and provide services to
municipalities outside of the Borough.
A. Engage in any type of drill, training, ceremony, practice, test or parade
when duly called for or authorized by an officer or officers of the fire
company.
B. Engage in fund-raising activities for the fire company, when authorized
by an officer or officers of the fire company.
C. Engage in the performance of any other duty or activity authorized by
any officer of the recognized fire company.
§ 23-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 23-4
1:15
§ 23-4. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to recognize the fire company as the official
fire company of the Borough and to state additional authorized activities for
firefighters for workers' compensation purposes.
Chapter 27
FIRE DEPARTMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire company — See Ch. 23.
Firemen's relief association — See Ch. 33.
Fire prevention — See Ch. 200.
§ 27-1. Department created.
A fire department is hereby created for the Borough of Hellertown, to be
composed of the Dewey Fire Company No. 1 and any other fire company or
companies that may hereafter be organized in the Borough and admitted to
the Fire Department by amendment of this chapter.
§ 27-2. Fire Chief.
The chief executive officer of the Fire Department, to be known as the
"Fire Chief," shall be elected triennially by the active members of the
Fire Company but shall not assume office until his election shall have
been confirmed and approved by the Borough Council. His term of office,
however, shall commence as of the date of his election by the active
members of the Fire Company.
§ 27-3. Assistant Fire Chief.
Subordinate to the Fire Chief shall be the Assistant Fire Chief, elected in
accordance with the Fire Company Bylaws by the active members of the
Fire Company, with his election subject to approval or confirmation by the
Borough Council. The Assistant Fire Chief shall be second in command of
the Fire Department and shall take over the duties of the Fire Chief in
case of the absence thereof or in case of vacancy in the office, pending the
election of a successor.
§ 27-4. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the office of Fire Chief and Assistant Fire Chief shall be filled
for the unexpired portion of the original term by vote of the active members
of the Fire Company, subject to approval or confirmation of Borough
Council.
Chapter 33
§ 23-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 27-4
1:16
FIREMEN'S RELIEF ASSOCIATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire company — See Ch. 23. Fire department — see Ch. 27.
§ 33-1. Recognition of firemen's relief association.
§ 33-2. Certification to Auditor General.
The Borough Council shall annually certify to the Auditor General of the
commonwealth, the name(s) of the active associations and the percentage of
service they contribute to the protection of the Borough. Such certification
shall be on forms prescribed by the Auditor General.
§ 33-3. Annual appropriation.
There is annually appropriated from the Borough treasury all such sums
of money that may hereafter be paid into the Borough treasury by the
Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania on account of taxes paid on
premiums of foreign fire insurance companies pursuant to the Foreign Fire
Insurance Tax Distribution Law, the Act of December 18, 1984, P.L. 1005,
No. 205, 53 P.S. § 895.701 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented,
modified or reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania. Such
monies received by the Borough Treasurer from the State Treasurer shall
be distributed to the duly recognized association(s) with 60 days of receipt.
The funds shall be distributed on the basis of the percentage of service
established in the certification to the Auditor General and with other
provisions of the Act.
A. The following association is hereby recognized as actively engaged in
providing fire protection and/or emergency services in the Borough of
Hellertown:
(1) Dewey Fire Company No. 1.
B. The above-named association has been formed for the benefit of its
members and their families in case of death, sickness, temporary or
permanent disability or accident suffered in the line of duty.
C. The above-named association of the Borough is designated the proper
association to receive such funds as are due and payable to the Borough
Treasurer by the Treasurer of the State of Pennsylvania from the tax on
premiums from foreign fire insurance companies.
§ 27-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 33-3
1:17
Chapter 49
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Ethics — See Ch. 18.
§ 33-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 33-3
1:18
ARTICLE I
Borough Manager
[Adopted 11-8-1958 by Ord. No. 263]
§ 49-1. Office of Borough Manager created; authority to abolish
office.
The office of Borough Manager is hereby created by the Borough of
Hellertown, subject to the right of the Borough, by ordinance, at any time
to abolish the office.
§ 49-2. Appointment; indefinite tenure; removal; vacancies.
[Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 320; 2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 510]
As soon as practicable after the enactment of this article, the Borough
Council shall elect, by a majority vote of all its members, one person to
fill the office of Borough Manager, who shall serve for an indefinite term,
subject to removal at any time by a vote of the majority of the members of
the Council. In case of a vacancy, the Council shall fill the office of Manager
by a majority vote of its members.
§ 49-3. Qualifications. [Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 320;
2-1-1982 by Ord. No. 510]
The Manager shall be chosen solely on the basis of his or her executive
and administrative abilities, with special reference to his or her actual
experience in or his or her knowledge of accepted practices in respect to the
duties of the office as herein outlined. The Manager need not be a resident
of the Borough or of the State of Pennsylvania at the time of his or her
appointment but shall reside within 15 miles of Borough Hall during his or
her tenure as Manager.
§ 49-4. Bond. [Amended 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 423; 11-15-1993 by
Ord. No. 588]
Before entering upon his duties, the Borough Manager shall give a bond
to the Borough, with a bonding company as surety, in the sum of $60,000,
conditioned for the faithful performance of his duties, premium for the said
bond to be paid by the Borough of Hellertown. The bond of the Borough
Manager may be included in, and the Manager may be bonded under
and covered by, the blanket bond now in force and effect for all Borough
employees in the aforesaid amount of $60,000, said amount bonded either
under a separate bond or under a blanket bond that covers all Borough
employees or any combination thereof.
§ 49-5. Compensation. [Amended 1-11-1962 by Ord. No. 281]
The Borough Manager shall receive such compensation as shall be fixed by
Borough Council, from time to time, by resolution.
§ 49-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-6
1:19
§ 49-6. General powers and duties.6
The Manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the Borough, and
he shall be responsible to the Council as a whole for the proper and efficient
administration of the affairs of the Borough. His powers and duties shall
relate to the general management of all Borough business not expressly,
by statute or ordinance, imposed or conferred upon other Borough officers.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to delegate to the Borough Manager,
subject to recall by written notification at any time, any of his nonlegislative
and nonjudicial powers and duties.
§ 49-7. Specific powers and duties. [Amended 12-11-1967 by Ord.
No. 361; 4-6-1970 by Ord. No. 386; 11-15-1993 by Ord. No. 588]
Subject to recall by ordinance, the powers and duties of the Manager shall
include the following:
A. He shall supervise and be responsible for the activities of all municipal
departments, except such departments the supervision of which shall
not have been delegated to the Manager by the Mayor or by Council, as
the case may be.
B. He shall hire and, when he shall deem it necessary for the good of the
service, shall suspend or discharge all employees under his supervision,
provided that persons covered by the civil service provisions of the
Borough Code shall be hired, suspended or discharged in accordance
with such provisions; provided, further, that the Manager shall report
the same at the next regular meeting thereafter of Council, and Council
shall decide to reinstate or discharge the employee as the case may be.
C. He shall prepare and submit to Council before the close of the fiscal
year, or on such alternate date as Council shall determine, a budget for
the next fiscal year and an explanatory budget message. In preparing
the budget, the Manager or any officer designated by him shall obtain
from the head of each department, agency, board or officer, estimates of
revenues and expenditures and other supporting data as he requests.
The Manager shall review such estimates and may revise them before
submitting the budget to the Council.
D. The Borough Manager shall be responsible for the administration of the
budget after its adoption by the Council.
E. With approval of Borough Council, the Mayor may delegate to the
Borough Manager any of his nonlegislative and nonjudicial powers and
duties.7
F. The Borough Manager shall hold the offices of Borough Secretary,
Building Inspector, Zoning Officer and such other offices as may be
required by Borough Council and shall perform all the duties of all such
6. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
7. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 49-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 49-7
1:20
officers, in addition to the specific duties assigned to the Manager by
this article.
G. The Borough Manager shall attend all meetings of the Borough Council
and of its committees, with the right to take part in the discussion, and
he shall receive notice of all special meetings of Council and of its
committees.
H. The Borough Manager shall prepare the agenda for each meeting of
Council and supply facts pertinent thereto.
I. The Borough Manager shall keep the Council informed as to the
conduct of Borough affairs, submit periodic reports on the condition of
the Borough finances and such other reports as the Council shall
request and shall make such recommendations to the Council as he
deems necessary.
J. The Borough Manager shall submit to Council, as soon as possible after
the close of the fiscal year, a complete report on the financial and
administrative activities of the Borough for the preceding year.
K. The Borough Manager shall see that the provisions of all franchises,
leases, permits and privileges granted by the Borough are observed.
L. The Borough Manager may employ, by and with the approval of Council,
experts and consultants to perform work and to advise in connection
with any of the functions of the Borough.
M. The Borough Manager shall attend to the letting of contracts in due
form of law and he shall supervise the performance and faithful
execution of the same except insofar as such duties are expressly
imposed upon some other Borough officer by statute.
N. The Borough Manager shall see that all money owed to the Borough is
promptly paid and that proper proceedings are taken for the security
and collection of all the Borough's claims.
O. The Borough Manager shall be the Purchasing Officer of the Borough
and he shall purchase all supplies and equipment for the various
agencies, boards, departments and other offices of the Borough in
accordance with the provisions of the Borough Code, P.L. 1656, No. 581
of 1966.8 The Borough Manager shall keep an account of all purchases
and, from time to time, or when so directed by Council, shall make a full
written report thereof. The Borough Manager also shall issue rules and
regulations, subject to the approval of Council, governing the
requisition and purchasing of all Borough supplies and equipment.
P. The Borough Manager shall cooperate with the Borough Council at all
times and in all matters that the best interests of the Borough and of the
general public may be maintained.
8. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46402.
§ 49-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-7
1:21
§ 49-8. Delegation of person to serve during illness or absence of
Manager.
In case of illness or absence of the Manager from the Borough, he shall
delegate one qualified member of his staff who shall perform the duties
of the Manager during his absence or disability. The person so designated
shall not perform such duties for a period longer than two weeks without
the approval of the Council.
Q. All complaints regarding services or personnel of the Borough shall be
referred to the office of the Manager. The Borough Manager, or an
officer designated by him, shall investigate and dispose of such
complaints, and the Manager shall report thereon to Council.
§ 49-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 49-8
1:22
Chapter 55
PENSIONS
§ 49-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 49-8
1:23

ARTICLE I
Nonuniformed Employees Money Purchase Retirement Plan
[Adopted 11-4-1991 by Ord. No. 579]
§ 55-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Hellertown Borough
Nonuniformed Employees Money Purchase Retirement Plan Ordinance of
1991."
§ 55-2. Establishment of plan.
Employer hereby establishes a money purchase plan ("plan") in the form
of the ICMA Retirement Corporation Prototype Money Purchase Plan and
Trust, pursuant to the specific provisions of the adoption agreement, copies
of which are attached hereto, as Appendix A (Plan and Trust) and Appendix
B (Adoption Agreement)9, and both hereby are adopted and incorporated as
fully as if both were set out at length herein.
§ 55-3. Exclusivity of plan.
The plan shall be maintained for the exclusive benefit of eligible employees
and their beneficiaries.
§ 55-4. Execution of trust.
Employer hereby authorizes and directs its President of Council to execute
the ICMA Retirement Corporation Prototype Money Purchase Plan and
Trust Adoption Agreement (Appendix B) and to deliver same to Corporation.
§ 55-5. Designation of trustee.
Employer hereby agrees to serve as trustee under the plan and to invest all
funds held under the plan in the ICMA Retirement Trust.
§ 55-6. Designation of plan coordinator; duties of plan coordinator.
The Hellertown Borough Manager shall be the coordinator of the plan and
shall receive necessary reports, notices, etc., from the Corporation or the
ICMA Retirement Trust, and shall cast, on behalf of employer, any required
votes under the ICMA Retirement Trust. Administrative duties relating
to the plan may be delegated further to appropriate departments and/or
personnel.
§ 55-7. Designation of authorized signatory.
Employer hereby designates and authorizes its President of Council to
execute all necessary agreements with the Corporation incidental to the
administration of the plan.
9. Editor's Note: Appendixes An and B are on file in the Borough office.
§ 55-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-7
1:25

ARTICLE II
Police Pension Plan
[Adopted 11-15-2004 by Ord. No. 670]
§ 55-8. Adoption.
The Police Pension Plan Ordinance of the Borough of Hellertown found in
Ordinance No. 447, and as amended, shall be rescinded and a new Police
Pension Plan Ordinance shall be adopted as follows.10
10.Editor's Note: The Police Pension Plan is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 55-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 55-8
1:27
Chapter 61
PLANNING COMMISSION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 61-1. Creation of Borough Planning Commission recognized.11
The creation of the Hellertown Borough Planning Commission is hereby
ratified and confirmed.
§ 61-2. Name of Planning Commission.
The Planning Commission heretofore created, ratified and confirmed shall
hereinafter be known as "Borough of Hellertown Planning Commission"
(hereinafter referred to in this chapter as the "Commission").
§ 61-3. Composition of Planning Commission. [Amended 2-6-1984
by Ord. No. 527; 11-6-2006 by Ord. No. 702; 2-6-2012 by Ord. No.
767]
The Commission shall consist of seven members, who shall be residents
of the Borough of Hellertown and who shall serve without compensation.
Two members may be appointed from Borough Council. In the event that a
Borough Council appointee shall no longer serve the Council, that person
shall be deemed to have resigned, and Borough Council shall appoint
another person to fill the unexpired term. At least five members shall be
designated as citizen members, who shall not be officers or employees of
the Borough.
§ 61-4. Expenses of Planning Commission.
The Council of the Borough of Hellertown may reimburse the Commission
for any necessary and reasonable expenses in carrying out the functions and
purposes of its office.
§ 61-5. Term of office of Planning Commission members.
The present members of the Commission shall continue to serve as
members of the Commission; however, the term of each of the members
of the Commission shall be four years and no more than two shall be
reappointed or replaced during any future calendar year.
11.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 55-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 61-6
1:28
§ 61-6. Election of officers of Planning Commission; rules and
regulations authorized; records and reports.
The Commission shall elect from its own a Chairman and Vice Chairman and
create and fill such other offices as it may determine. Officers shall serve
annual terms and may succeed themselves. The Commission may make and
alter bylaws and rules and regulations to govern its procedures consistent
with the ordinances of the Borough and the laws of the commonwealth. The
Commission shall keep a full record of its business and shall annually make
a written report by March 1 of each year of its activities to the Borough
Council. Interim reports may be made as often as may be necessary or as
requested by the Borough Council.
§ 61-7. Preparation of Comprehensive Plan by Planning
Commission; records.
The Commission shall, at the request of the Council of the Borough of
Hellertown, have the power and shall be required to:
§ 61-8. Powers and duties of Commission.
The Commission, at the request of the Borough Council, may:
A. Prepare the Comprehensive Plan for the development of the Borough as
set forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,12 and
present it for the consideration of the Borough Council.
B. Maintain and keep on file records of its action. All records and files of
the Commission shall be in the possession of the Borough Council.
A. Make recommendations to the Borough Council concerning the
adoption or amendment of an official map.
B. Prepare and present to the Borough Council of the Borough a Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 450) and make recommendations to the Borough
Council on proposed amendments to it as set forth in the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
C. Prepare, recommend and administer subdivision and land development
(Chapter 390) and planned residential development regulations as set
forth in the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
D. Prepare and present to the Borough Council of the Borough a Building
Code (Chapter 160) and a housing code and make recommendations
concerning proposed amendments thereto.
E. Do such other act or make such studies as may be necessary to fulfill
the duties and obligations imposed by the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
12.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 61-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 61-8
1:29
§ 61-9. Engineering consideration.
In the performance of its powers and duties, any act or recommendation of
the Commission which involves engineering consideration shall be subject
to review and comments of the Borough Engineer, which shall be
incorporated and separately set forth in any report, written act or
recommendation of the Commission.
Chapter 66
POLICE DEPARTMENT
§ 66-1. Department established; classification; number of members.
[Amended 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 42413]
A police department is hereby established in and for the Borough of
Hellertown. The Police Department shall be composed of a Chief of Police,
any other officers of rank under the Chief of Police, and as many patrolmen
as the Borough Council shall, from time to time, determine.
§ 66-2. Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police, under the direction of the Mayor, shall be in charge of
the Police Department and shall have supervision over the members thereof
in the exercise of their powers, duties and authority.
F. Prepare and present to the Borough Council of the Borough an
environmental study.
G. Submit to the appointing authority of the Borough a recommended
capital improvements program.
H. Promote public interest in and understanding of the Comprehensive
Plan and planning.
I. Make recommendations to governmental, civic and private agencies
and individuals as to the effectiveness of the proposals of such agencies
and individuals.
J. Hold public hearings and meetings.
K. Require from other departments and agencies of the Borough such
available information as relates to the work of the Commission.
L. In the performance of its functions, enter upon any land to make
examinations and land surveys with the consent of the owner.
13.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 61-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 66-3
1:30
§ 66-3. Status of existing police force.
The existing police force of the Borough of Hellertown is hereby established
as the Police Department established by this chapter.
§ 66-4. Appointment of special policemen by Mayor.
Nothing herein shall affect the authority of the Mayor to appoint special
policemen during emergencies.
Chapter 72
RECORDS
§ 66-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 66-4
1:31

ARTICLE I
Open Records
[Adopted 1-5-2009 by Ord. No. 734]
§ 72-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to assure compliance with Act 3 of 2008,
the Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law,14 as amended; to provide access to
public records of the Borough of Hellertown (hereinafter "the Borough");
to preserve the integrity of the Borough's records; and to minimize the
financial impact to the residents of the Borough regarding the resources
utilized in the receipt and processing of public record requests and the
retrieval and copying of public records.
§ 72-2. Designated Open Records Officer. [Amended 2-22-2011 by
Res. No. 11-02]
It is the policy of the Borough to require the presence of a designated
employee when public records are examined and inspected and to charge
reasonable fees for duplication of the records of the Borough. The Borough
of Hellertown designates the Borough Manager, Cathy L. Kichline, as the
Open Records Officer, responsible for assuring compliance with the
Pennsylvania Right-to-Know Law, in accordance with the following
guidelines:
§ 72-3. Request for records.
A. The Borough Manager may designate certain employees to process
public records requests.
B. The Borough Manager is responsible for minimizing, where possible,
the financial impact to the Borough regarding the resources utilized in
the receipt and processing of public record requests and the retrieval
and copying of public records.
C. The Open Records Officer shall be appointed on an annual basis by
resolution at the Borough's reorganization meeting.
A. All requests for public records of the Borough under this article shall be
specific in identifying and describing each public record requested. In
no case shall the Borough be required to create a public record which
does not exist or to compile, maintain, format or organize a public
record in a manner in which the Borough does not currently compile,
maintain, format or organize the public record. All requests for public
records shall be submitted in writing and include the date of the
request; requestor's name, address and telephone number; certification
of United States residency; signature of requestor; and if duplication is
requested, appropriate payment. A sample open records request form is
attached hereto.15
14.Editor's Note: See 65 P.S. § 67.101 et seq.
§ 72-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-3
1:33
§ 72-4. Fees.
§ 72-5. Response.
B. The designated employee shall make a good faith effort to determine
whether each record requested is a public record.
C. The Borough shall facilitate a reasonable response to a request for the
Borough's public records. In no case is the Borough expected to provide
extraordinary staff to respond to the request but will respond in a
manner consistent with the Borough's administrative responsibilities
and consistent with the requirements of the Pennsylvania Right-to-
Know Law.
D. The designated employee shall respond to the requestor within five
business days from the date of receipt of the written request. If the
Borough does not respond within five business days of receipt thereof,
the request is deemed denied.
E. The response provided by the Borough shall consist of:
(1) Approval for access to the public record;
(2) Review of the request by the designated employee; or
(3) Denial of access to the record requested.
F. If access to the public record requested is approved, the public record
shall be available for access during the regular business hours of the
Borough. The designated employee shall cooperate fully with the
requestor, while also taking reasonable measures to protect Borough
public records from the possibility of theft and/or modification. The
presence of a designated employee is required when public records are
examined and inspected.
A. Fees for duplication of public records shall be as established by the
Commonwealth's Office of Open Records. The Borough may, at its
discretion, waive fees.
B. In the event the estimated cost of fulfilling a request submitted under
this article is expected to exceed $100, the designated employee(s)
shall obtain the expected cost in advance of fulfilling the request to
avoid unwarranted expense of Borough resources.
A. If the request is being reviewed, the notice provided by the Borough
shall be in writing and include the reason for the review and the
expected response date, which shall be within 30 days of the notice of
review. If the Borough does not respond within 30 days thereof, the
request is deemed denied. Review of the request is limited to situations
where:
15.Editor's Note: Request forms are on file in the Borough office.
§ 72-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 72-5
1:34
§ 72-6. Appeals.
(1) The record requested contains information which is subject to
access, as well as information which is not subject to access that
must be redacted prior to a grant of access. The redacted
information is considered a denial as to that information;
(2) The record requires retrieval from a remote location;
(3) A timely response cannot be accomplished due to staffing
limitations;
(4) A legal review is necessary to determine whether the record
requested is a public record;
(5) The requestor has failed to comply with the Borough's policy and
procedure requirements;
(6) The requestor refuses to pay the applicable fees; or
(7) The extent or nature of the request precludes a response within the
required time period.
B. Upon determination that one of the factors listed above applies, the
Borough shall send written notice to the requestor within five business
days of receipt of the request for access. The notice shall include a
statement notifying the requestor that the request for access is being
reviewed, the reason for the review, a reasonable date that a response
is expected to be provided and an estimate of applicable fees owed
when the record becomes available. If the date that a response is
expected to be provided is in excess of 30 days, following the five
business days allowed for, the request for access shall be deemed
denied unless the requestor has agreed, in writing, to an extension to
the date specified in the notice. If the requestor agrees to the extension,
the request shall be deemed denied on the day following the date
specified in the notice if the Borough has not provided a response by
that date.
A. If access to the record requested is denied, the notice provided by the
Borough shall be in writing as indicated on the form attached hereto
entitled "Denial of Request to Review and/or Duplicate Borough
Records."16
B. If the request is denied or deemed denied, the requestor may file an
appeal with the commonwealth's Office of Open Records within 15
business days of a deemed denial. The appeal shall state the grounds
upon which the requestor asserts that the record is a public record and
shall address any grounds stated by the Borough for delaying or
denying the request.
16.Editor's Note: Said denial form is on file in the Borough office.
§ 72-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-6
1:35
C. Within 30 days of the mailing date of the final determination of the
appeals officer, the requestor or the Borough may file a petition for
review or other documents as required by rule of court with the Court
of Common Pleas for Northampton County. The decision of the Court
shall contain findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon the
evidence as a whole. The decision shall clearly and concisely explain the
rationale for the decision. A petition for review under this section shall
stay the release of documents until a decision is issued.
D. This article shall be available for review at the Borough office.
§ 72-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 72-6
1:36
Chapter 80
SALARIES AND COMPENSATION
§ 72-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 72-6
1:37

ARTICLE I
Mayor and Council
[Adopted 2-20-1996 by Ord. No. 610]
§ 80-1. Mayor's salary.
The Mayor of the Borough of Hellertown shall receive as annual
compensation the sum of $2,400, payable in monthly installments of $200
each.
§ 80-2. Compensation of President of Council.
The President of the Council of the Borough of Hellertown shall receive as
annual compensation the sum of $2,400, payable in monthly installments of
$200 each.
§ 80-3. Compensation of Councilmen.
The members of the Council of the Borough of Hellertown, other than the
President of said Council, shall receive as annual compensation the sum of
$1,920, payable in monthly installments of $160 each.
§ 80-4. Eligibility to receive compensation.
In order to be eligible to receive the established monthly compensation
installment, the Mayor, President of Council or other members of Borough
Council shall have been in attendance at no less than 50% of all the
meetings of the Council of the Borough of Hellertown as may have been
convened during the calendar month for which the monthly compensation
is to be tendered.
§ 80-5. Annual compensation.
The total annual compensation as paid to the Mayor or to the President of
Council or to the other members of Council may be modified from time to
time in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Borough Code, Act
of February 1, 1966, (1965 P.L. 1656, No. 581, as amended)17 and pursuant
to a resolution as the same may be adopted by the Council of the Borough
of Hellertown.
17.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 80-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 80-5
1:39
Part II: General Legislation
Chapter 100
ALARM SYSTEMS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.Z
Fire prevention — See Ch. 200.
Reimbursement for police services — See Ch.
303, Art. I.
§ 100-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall
have the meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense include the future,
the singular includes the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine
gender. Use of the term "shall" indicates a mandate and is not directory,
"may" implies permissiveness.
ALARM — An audible signal emitted by a warning device indicating that
a crime, fire or other emergency situation, warranting immediate response
action by the police, the Fire Department and/or other emergency service
provider agencies, is occurring or has occurred. This definition includes,
but shall not be limited to, those alarm devices which provide for the
transmission of a telephonic message to a monitoring service agency or to
the Northampton County E-911 Center, and which, in turn, results in the
notification of Hellertown Borough emergency service provider agencies for
response action.
ALARM DEVICE — An electrical, electronic, mechanical and/or combination
electro-mechanical appliance which transmits a notification by wire,
telephone, radio or other means to a person or service who, in turn, notifies
the Northampton County E-911 Center and/or one or more of the
Hellertown Borough emergency service providers of the occurrence of an
alarm activation or activates a bell, gong, klaxon, siren, horn or other
sounding device to be heard outside of a premises, and which is intended to
alert the police, Fire Department and/or other emergency service providers
to the existence or the possible existence of a crime, fire or other emergency
situation, and which warrants, or may warrant the response of said
providers.
AMBULANCE SERVICE — The Dewey Ambulance Service, Hellertown,
Pennsylvania, its officers, agents, employees and servants.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, its officers, agents, employees and servants.
EMERGENCY SERVICE PROVIDER AGENCY — Any one of those several
agencies which exist in the Borough of Hellertown to provide aid and
§ 80-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 100-1
1:40
assistance to the public during times of distress and urgencies, and which
shall include, but shall not be limited to, the Borough of Hellertown, Dewey
Ambulance Service, Dewey Fire Company No. 1 and the Hellertown Police
Department, together with the officers, agents, employees and servants of
said agencies, as well as those other area agencies pursuant to a mutual
cooperation agreement.
FALSE ALARM — An alarm to which the police, Fire Department or other
emergency service provider agency responds, and which has resulted from
the activation of an alarm device when a crime, fire or other emergency
warranting the response action of the provider(s) has not, in fact, occurred.
The term "false alarm" shall not include those occurrences which can
be shown to constitute "intentional false alarms," as that term is defined
elsewhere in this chapter.
FIRE DEPARTMENT — The Dewey Fire Company No. 1, Hellertown,
Pennsylvania, it officers, agents, employees and servants.
INTENTIONAL FALSE ALARM — A false alarm resulting from the
purposeful and willful activation of an alarm device by a person, under
circumstances where that person has no reasonable basis to believe that a
crime, fire or other emergency, warranting immediate action by emergency
service provider agencies, is occurring or has occurred.
NORTHAMPTON COUNTY E-911 CENTER — The central emergency
services communications and dispatch agency which serves the emergency
services provider agencies of the Borough of Hellertown, which term shall
include the officers, agents, employees and servants of said Center.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association,
institution, agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as being subject to the rights and duties of an individual.
POLICE DEPARTMENT — The Hellertown Police Department, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania, its officers, agents, employees and servants.
TELEPHONE DIALER ALARM DEVICE — An alarm appliance designed to
transmit a notice over telephone lines to a service which, in turn, notifies
the Northampton County E-911 Center or directly to said E-911 Center.
§ 100-2. Registration of alarm devices.
A. All existing alarm devices, as the same are identified in § 100-1 above,
shall be registered with the Borough on a form prescribed and provided
by the Borough within 30 days of the date upon which this chapter is
adopted.
B. All newly installed alarm devices, as the same are identified in § 100-1
above, shall be registered with the Borough on a form as prescribed and
provided by the Borough within 30 days of their installation.
C. The registration of alarm devices with the Borough in no way shall
expand or extend the liability of the Borough, its emergency service
provider agencies or that of the Northampton County E-911 Center in
§ 100-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-2
1:41
§ 100-3. Testing of alarm devices.
§ 100-4. False alarms.
the areas of response and/or lack of response to the premises served
by the alarm devices, beyond those liabilities normally associated with
situations of a similar nature on premises without alarm devices.
D. The failure of a person to register an alarm device, as set forth above,
shall constitute a violation of this chapter and may subject the owner of
any such unregistered alarm device to fines and penalties as are
provided elsewhere in this chapter.
A. In those circumstances when it is necessary to test an alarm device, it
shall be the responsibility of the owner of such device, or his designated
agent, to first notify the Northampton County E-911 Center of the need
to test the device, and receive the Center's authorization to proceed
with the proposed test. No alarm device shall be so tested without first
making the required contact with the Center; otherwise, such
activation shall be considered to have constituted a false alarm, as
defined elsewhere in this chapter.
B. All alarm device testing shall occur Monday through Friday only,
excluding holidays, and only between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 5:00
p.m. (0900 to 1700 hours), inclusive.
A. The owner of each and every alarm device from which there occurs a
false alarm, as that term is defined at § 100-1 above, shall pay to the
Borough a false alarm fee for each and every such false alarm to which
one or more of the Borough's emergency service provider agencies
respond in any given calendar year (January 1 through December 31),
as follows: [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(1) First and/or second false alarm in an amount to be established,
from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
(2) Third and/or subsequent false alarm in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council.
B. Upon the occurrence of a false alarm, the primary responding
emergency service provider agency shall notify the administrative
offices of the Borough, in writing, within 10 days of said occurrence by
the filing of a false alarm report with those Borough offices.
C. Within 10 days of receipt of a false alarm report, the Borough shall
provide a copy of said report to the registered owner of the alarm
device from which the false alarm emanated, by way of United States
mail, to said owner's address as the same is reflected in the alarm
registration form on file with the Borough. Accompanying such report
copy shall be a bill for the false alarm fee in an amount as set forth in
Subsection A above, if such fee shall be due and payable.
§ 100-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 100-4
1:42
§ 100-5. Charges by others.
Nothing contained herein shall preclude other organizations involved in
the alarm process, such as the Northampton County E-911 Center, a
commercial alarm monitoring company, or the like, from assessing charges
and/or fees for the registration, maintenance, testing, monitoring or other
services provided upon the owner of an alarm device.
§ 100-6. Liability of Borough.
§ 100-7. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
D. Any and all fees imposed hereunder shall be due within 30 days of the
date reflected on said bill and payable to the Borough of Hellertown.
E. The failure to tender the proper false alarm fee within the said 30 days
shall subject the owner to further action pursuant to the other
provisions of this chapter.
F. No person shall activate any alarm device, nor shall he cause any alarm
device to be activated, with the knowledge that such activation would
constitute an "intentional false alarm," as that term is defined in § 100-1
above.
G. All Borough-owned property shall be exempt from the requirements of
§ 100-4A. [Added 8-17-2015 by Ord. No. 799]
A. The registration of an alarm device shall not constitute acceptance by
the Borough, nor any of the Borough's emergency service provider
agencies, nor the Northampton County E-911 Center, of any liability to
maintain any equipment, to respond to alarms or otherwise render
these agencies liable to any person for any loss or damage relating to
the processes and procedures as are promulgated hereunder.
B. Further, the registration of the alarm device under this chapter shall
not be construed by any person, as defined under this chapter, as a
guarantee, warranty and/or statement by the Borough of Hellertown,
the Borough's emergency service provider agencies or the
Northampton County E-911 Center that the alarm device is in good
operating condition and will function as designed in the event of an
emergency situation. At all times, the testing, maintenance and
operation of the alarm device shall be the sole responsibility of the
owner.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
B. Those persons who shall violate the provision of § 100-2D above by
failing to register alarm devices as required by this chapter, upon
§ 100-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 100-7
1:43
Chapter 108
AMUSEMENT DEVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Business registration and licensing — See Ch.
140.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties set forth in
Subsection A.
C. Those persons who shall violate the provisions of § 100-4E above by
failing to tender proper false alarm fees in a timely manner, upon
conviction thereof, shall be subject to the penalties as set forth in
Subsection A above.
D. Those persons who shall violate the provisions of § 100-4F by causing
an intentional false alarm, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to
the penalties as set forth in Subsection A above, notwithstanding any
other fines and penalties as may result from the filing of charges under
the Pennsylvania Crimes Code, Title 18.
§ 100-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 100-7
1:44
ARTICLE I
Coin-Operated Amusement Devices
[Adopted 12-20-1982 by Ord. No. 516]
§ 108-1. General scope.
The subject matter of this article is the regulation, licensing and fines for
the operation of machines operated as games of skill played for amusement
in the Borough of Hellertown, for which patrons pay a sum of money to use
pursuant to the Pennsylvania Borough Code. The coin-operated machines
are to include, but not be limited to, pinball machines, electronically
operated shuffleboard, bowling, video games, electronically operated
tennis, billiards and other games of amusement. These games of amusement
are not to include any coin-operated musical devices.
§ 108-2. License required. [Amended 2-7-1983 by Ord. No. 518;
12-20-1993 by Ord. No. 596]
§ 108-3. License application.
The application for the aforementioned license shall be filed, in writing, with
the Secretary on a form to be provided by the Borough and shall specify:
A. It is the purpose of this article that, after the effective date of this
article, it shall be unlawful for any person, persons, corporations,
companies or firms to have, keep, lease or maintain for purposes of
operation any of the aforementioned coin-operated amusement
machines without first having obtained the proper license from the
Secretary of the Borough (hereinafter called "Secretary").
B. This license shall be posted at all times by affixing same in a
conspicuous manner so as to be easily seen and read by all parties who
visit the premises wherein the machines are operated.
C. This article shall apply to any place or premises where coin-operated
machines are located, the maximum number of coin-operated machines
permitted shall be in accordance with this article, as amended thereof,
as established elsewhere in this article.
A. The name and address of the applicant, and if a firm, corporation,
partnership or association, the principal officers thereof and their
addresses.
B. The name and address of the owner of the machines or the business
(one who leases or distributes for the purpose of operation by another)
if it be different from the applicant.
C. The address of the premises where the licensed devices are to be
operated, together with the general nature of the business as carried on
at such place.
§ 108-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-3
1:45
§ 108-4. License fee. [Amended 2-7-1983 by Ord. No. 518]
§ 108-5. Restrictions. [Amended 2-7-1983 by Ord. No. 518]
D. The trade name(s), serial numbers, names of the manufacturer and the
number of devices to be licensed, along with the general description of
the devices to be licensed.
E. The fee that is paid and the effective date of the application shall be
from whatever date the applicant starts the business of that year until
December 31 of that year.
A. No license shall be issued under this article for any coin-operated
amusement devices until the annual fee shall have been paid to the
Secretary. The Borough Council shall have the power, by resolution, to
establish a schedule of fees and a system for the collection thereof, and
to amend said schedule and system from time to time if the need for
amendment may arise. The proceeds of the said fee shall go into the
general fund. For purposes of yearly renewal, the fee shall be paid on or
before January 31 of each year.
B. However, should any device or machine be installed after July 1 of any
year and application is made after that date, then the license fee of that
machine shall be 1/2 or 50% of the annual license fee provided for in
this section.
C. This license shall not be transferable from one applicant to another. A
new owner, proprietor or operator shall be required to secure a new
license and pay the fees thereof. However, it shall not be required to
secure a new or different license when one machine is replaced by
another as long as the total number of machines remains the same.
A. There shall be no more than 20 machines of any type or types permitted
to be operated, maintained or in use in any one place, location or
premises.
B. It shall be prohibited to license, maintain, place or operate machines as
described in this article at any location within 300 feet of an entrance to
any house of worship, public school or public playground. The 300 feet
shall be measured along the street line.
C. It shall be unlawful to permit any person to operate or play machines
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
D. It shall be prohibited to offer any prize or any other award to any person
playing a coin-operated amusement device. Furthermore, it shall be
prohibited to permit any said machine to be used for any gambling
purpose.
§ 108-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 108-6
1:46
§ 108-6. Inspections.
The Hellertown Police Department, Zoning Officer or any other duly
authorized Borough official shall make periodic inspections of all premises
where machines of amusement and games of skill for amusement are
operated for the purpose of enforcing this article.
§ 108-7. Violations and penalties.18
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 108-8. Zoning requirements.
The requirement that the business venture shall comply with the Zoning
Ordinance, Chapter 450 of the Code, shall remain in full force and effect.
18.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 108-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 108-8
1:47
Chapter 112
ANIMALS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 108-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 108-8
1:48
ARTICLE I
Pigs and Pig Pens
[Adopted 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 323]
§ 112-1. Keeping of pigs and maintenance of pig pens unlawful.
[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
No person, firm or corporation shall keep any pig or hog at any place within
the Borough of Hellertown or maintain any pig pen or hog pen at any place
therein.
§ 112-2. Violations and penalties. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 112-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-2
1:49

ARTICLE II
Permit to Keep Animals
[Adopted 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 324]
§ 112-3. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
EXOTIC ANIMAL — "Wild or exotic animal" shall mean any animal of a
species prohibited by Title 50, Code of Federal Regulations, or otherwise
controlled by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. It shall include any
animal which is wild, fierce, dangerous, noxious or naturally inclined to do
harm.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
PERSON — Includes any natural person, partnership, association, firm or
corporation. In this article, the singular shall include the plural, the plural
shall include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
§ 112-4. Permit required to keep animals, birds and fowl under
certain conditions.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any animal, bird or fowl at
any place within the Borough of Hellertown for the purpose of breeding
the same or for any purpose of manufacture, art, trade or business in
connection therewith or for any purpose other than as a household pet,
except under special permit to be issued by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee and in strict conformity with the conditions set forth in such
permit and in this article.
§ 112-5. Maximum number of animals, birds and fowl may be
stipulated.
In issuing a permit under this article, the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee may stipulate, as a condition of such permit, the maximum number
of animals, birds or fowl, as the case may be, which may be kept upon any
premises thereunder, and it shall be a violation of this article to keep more
than such stipulated maximum number of animals, birds or fowl upon such
premises. In determining such maximum, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee shall be guided by the type and nature of such animals, birds
or fowl, and the location, size and character of the premises on which such
animals, birds or fowl are to be kept.
§ 112-6. Conditions under which animals, birds and fowl may be
kept. [Amended 6-1-1970 by Ord. No. 388]
All animals, birds and fowl kept within the Borough of Hellertown, whether
kept solely as household pets or whether kept under a permit issued by
authority of this article, shall be kept in good, clean condition and free
from disease. For animals, birds or fowl kept under permit and for such
§ 112-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-6
1:51
household pets as normally are not at all times kept uncaged indoors,
an adequate coop or pen shall be provided, which shall be substantially
constructed, and so constructed as to prevent entry therein by rats, mice
and other vermin, and so as to be easily cleaned and kept in a sanitary
condition. No such coop or pen shall be kept in any cellar or within 75 feet
of any house or dwelling or within 10 feet of an alley. All such coops and
pens shall be dry, airy, well-lighted and not overcrowded. All refuse food and
excrement shall be removed as often as necessary to prevent odors from
developing therefrom and to prevent flies from being attracted thereto. The
ground floor of each such coop or pen shall be elevated at least five inches
above the ground in order to permit the control of rats, mice and other
vermin underneath said coop or pen. All runways surrounding such coop
or pen shall be aerated at least once a year by the spreading of lime or
charcoal thereon.
§ 112-7. Revocation of permit.
The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee may revoke any permit
issued under this article when any of the conditions of this article or of such
permit shall not be complied with.
§ 112-8. Wild and exotic animals. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
A. Wild or exotic animals prohibited. No person shall keep a wild or exotic
animal in any place other than a zoological park, veterinary hospital or
clinic, humane society, or circus, sideshow, amusement show or facility
used for educational or scientific purposes, which provides proper
cages, fences and other protective devices adequate to prevent such
animal from escaping or injuring the public or causing a health hazard
due to fecal matter or otherwise.
B. Sale, adoption, exchange or transfer of wild or exotic animals
prohibited. No person shall sell, offer for sale, adoption, exchange or
transfer, with or without charge, any wild or exotic animal. This section
is not intended to apply to a person owning or possessing wild or exotic
animals prior to the passage of this section, provided that the person or
persons taking possession of such wild or exotic animal following said
sale, adoption, exchange or transfer is/are not a resident of the Borough
of Hellertown.
C. Disposition and impoundment. Any person who keeps a wild or exotic
animal in contravention of this section must dispose of the animal by
removal of the animal from the Borough or by giving the animal to the
animal control officer, as designated by the Borough. The designated
Borough official is authorized to release the animal to the wild, to a
zoological park, or to dispose of the animal in some humane manner.
Cost of removal and/or placement at a park or other facility shall be
charged to and accepted by the owner.
§ 112-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 112-9
1:52
§ 112-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 112-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-9
1:53

ARTICLE III
Dogs
[Adopted 5-1-1978 by Ord. No. 484; amended in its entirety
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
§ 112-10. Unlawful for dogs to run at large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner, custodian or keeper of any dog to allow
such dog to run at large at any time, either upon any of the streets, alleys or
public grounds in the Borough of Hellertown or upon the property of anyone
other than the owner, custodian or keeper of such dog, unless leashed and
under the immediate control of such owner, custodian or keeper.
§ 112-11. Responsibility for removing feces.
It shall be the immediate responsibility of the owner, custodian or keeper of
the dog to clean up the feces discharged by the dog on any public recreation
grounds, sidewalks, streets and from the owner's private property.
§ 112-12. Duties of animal control officer/police officer.
It shall be the duty of any police officer or his designee or any animal control
officer of the Borough of Hellertown who witnesses any dog running at large
in conflict with the provisions of § 112-10 or who receives information of
any dog so running at large to seize such dog and to convey it to the place
designated by the Borough Council as a pound. Notice of such seizure shall
be sent to the owner of such dog, if known, in the manner prescribed by
law, and such dog may be redeemed by the owner thereof within the time
specified by law, upon payment of the charges incurred by reason of such
detention. Rates for such charges shall be determined from time to time by
the Borough Council. Until changed by resolution of Borough Council, the
rates beginning the effective date of this article shall be $25 to cover the
initial cost and seizure plus $25 per day after the first day.
§ 112-13. Violations and penalties.
A. Any owner, custodian or keeper of any dog who shall violate any of the
provisions of § 112-10 of this article plus any payments required under
§ 112-12 of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of § 112-10 or 112-12 continues shall
constitute a separate offense. Such fines and costs may be in addition to
any payments required to be made under § 112-12.
B. Any owner, custodian or keeper of any dog who shall violate any of the
provisions of § 112-11 of this article may, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay fine of not less than $100 nor more than $300 and
costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fines and costs,
to imprisonment for not more than five days.
§ 112-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-14
1:55
§ 112-14. Disposition of unclaimed dogs.
In the event that a dog is not claimed within five days, the dog shall be
transferred to a public animal protection agency.
§ 112-15. Position of Animal Control Officer established.
In order to assist the Borough Police Department, the position of Animal
Control Officer is hereby established. It shall be the duty of this officer to
catch and impound dogs running at large, to provide for their care while
in the custody of the Borough and to enforce the provisions of this article,
including arrest. The method of payment of such officer shall be determined
from time to time by Borough Council, and the Borough Manager shall
be vested with the responsibility of hiring a competent officer, subject to
approval of Borough Council.
§ 112-16. Requirements are additional.
The provisions of this article shall be in addition to the provisions of existing
laws of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and particularly the Dog Law
of Pennsylvania, approved April 1921, P.L. 522, as amended,19 and the
provisions thereof may be enforced notwithstanding any proceedings which
may be instituted under any Act of Assembly of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
§ 112-17. Responsibility for costs of veterinary services.
In the event it shall be deemed necessary by any police officer or his
designee of the Borough of Hellertown or the Animal Control Officer of
the Borough of Hellertown to seek veterinary services for any domestic
animal as may be seized by him in the performance of his duties under
this article, said police officer or his designee or Animal Control Officer
shall do so as soon as possible. The costs of these veterinary services shall
be borne by the owner, custodian or keeper of the animal so receiving
these services and paid directly to the service provider or as reimbursement
to the Borough upon presentation of the statement of veterinary services
as may be received by the Borough. These veterinary service costs shall
be in addition to any charges that may be imposed by the Borough for
custodial costs as provided for elsewhere in this article. Failure of any
owner, custodian or keeper to reimburse the Borough for veterinary service
costs within 10 days of receipt of a service statement from the Borough shall
be treated as a violation under this article and addressed in accordance with
the violation provisions of this article.
19.Editor's Note: See 3 P.S. § 459-101 et seq.
§ 112-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 112-17
1:56
ARTICLE IV
Cats
[Adopted 5-19-2014 by Ord. No. 780]
§ 112-18. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
FERAL CAT — Any homeless, wild or untamed cat.
STRAY CAT — Any cat whose owner or keeper from time to time allows the
cat to run free off of the property of the owner or keeper.
§ 112-19. Responsibilities of owners regarding stray cats.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of any cat to permit such cat to run free
outside the residence of its owner or keeper.
§ 112-20. Feeding of feral cats limited.
§ 112-21. Violations and penalties.
Any person failing to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall,
upon summary conviction before a District Justice, be subject to a fine of not
less than $100 and not more than $500 and to imprisonment of not more
than 30 days for each offense, together with the costs of prosecution.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to feed feral cats, as feeding feral
cats creates a condition contrary to the health, safety, and welfare of
the community.
B. Any person feeding stray or feral cats can only do so if said person is
cooperating with any humane program sponsored by the Borough or
operating under the Borough's auspices that traps feral cats for the
purpose of spaying/neutering the cats, immunizing the cats from rabies,
"tipping" the cat's left ear and then returning the cat to its environment
in the general vicinity in which it was trapped. Any feeding of a feral cat
pursuant to a humane program sponsored by the Borough must be done
on the person's property and not on public property. It shall be unlawful
for any person to destroy said traps or to release any cats which have
been captured pursuant to the Borough's program.
§ 112-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 112-21
1:57
Chapter 119
BICYCLES AND SKATEBOARDS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 425.
§ 112-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 112-21
1:58
ARTICLE I
Bicycles
[Adopted 2-6-1978 by Ord. No. 482]
§ 119-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BICYCLE — Referred to as "pedalcycle" and, as used in this article, shall
mean and include any device propelled solely by human power. "Pedalcycle"
is further defined as a vehicle with at least two wheels, front and back, with
a seat or saddle between and propelled by means of pedals working on a
crankshaft.20
§ 119-2. Applicability of Vehicle Code to pedalcycles.
Every person riding a pedalcycle upon any roadway or sidewalk shall be
granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all of the duties applicable to
the driver of a vehicle by virtue of Part III, Chapter 35, Subchapter A, of the
Vehicle Code,21 which subchapter is incorporated herein by reference and
made a part hereof as if each and every provision contained therein were
set forth herein at length.
§ 119-3. Violations and penalties.22
Any person who violates this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be
punishable as provided in 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3502.
20.Editor's Note: Original ordinance sections 2, Pedalcycles to be registered and tagged; 3,
Registration; 4, Tag to be affixed to pedalcycle; registration fee; and 5, Once-and-done
registration, which immediately followed this section, were repealed at time of adoption of
Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
21.Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
22.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-3
1:59

ARTICLE II
Use of Helmets
[Adopted 12-5-1994 by Ord. No. 603]
§ 119-4. Definitions.
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms,
as used in this article, shall have the following meanings:
BICYCLE — A vehicle with two wheels, propelled solely by human power
and having pedals, handlebars and a saddle-like seat. This term also shall
include any such human-powered vehicle designed for operation by two or
more persons and having multiple tandem seats and corresponding sets of
pedals.
IN-LINE SKATES — Roller skates whose wheels are arranged in a straight
line.23
SCOOTERS — A light two-wheeled open motor vehicle on which a driver
sits over an enclosed engine with legs together and feet resting on a
floorboard.24
SKATEBOARD — A vehicular device consisting of a platform constructed of
wood, fiberglass or other similar material to which are affixed a number of
paired wheel assemblies ("trucks") and which is ridden by standing upon
said platform and propelled by the rider, in the manner of a scooter, by
pushing the foot against the ground.
§ 119-5. Bicycle, skateboard, in-line skates and scooter operators,
riders and/or passengers under age 16 required to wear approved
helmets.25
No person under the age of 16 years shall ride, either as the operator or as a
passenger, a bicycle or skateboard unless said person is wearing a properly
fitted and securely fastened bicycle helmet which meets the standards of
the American National Standards Institute (ANSI 290.4, Bicycle Helmet
Standard) or the Snell Memorial Foundation's 1984 "Standard for
Protective Headgear for Use in Bicycling." This requirement also shall apply
to any such person who rides as a passenger on a bicycle while in a
restraining seat which is attached to the bicycle or as a passenger in a
trailer towed by a bicycle. Individuals engaged in in-line skating or using a
scooter are required to wear helmets when under the age of 16.
§ 119-6. Violations and penalties.26
Any person who shall violate the terms of this article shall be warned
of said violation by the enforcing official of the Borough. The parent or
23.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
24.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
25.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
26.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 119-6
1:61
legal guardian of said person also may be fined a maximum of $25 for the
violator's first offense, together with the costs of prosecution, or a maximum
of $100 for each and every subsequent offense, together with the costs of
prosecution. The prescribed fines, as imposed pursuant to this section, may
be waived, provided that the violator and/or his/her parent or legal guardian
is able to present proof, as may be acceptable to the enforcing official, that
an approved helmet was owned at the time of any such violation or has been
purchased subsequent to the occurrence of a violation.
§ 119-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 119-6
1:62
Chapter 134
BUILDINGS, NUMBERING OF
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 200. Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
§ 134-1. Property owners to number buildings. [Amended
12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 30227]
It shall be the duty of the owner or owners of every store, residence or
other building now or hereafter erected within the Borough of Hellertown
to have conspicuously placed upon it, within 20 days after completion of
the building or within 20 days after notice from the Borough to do so, the
number of the building. Buildings shall have approved address numbers
placed in a position to be plainly legible and visible from the street or road
fronting the property. These numbers shall contrast with their background.
Address numbers shall be Arabic numerals or alphabet letters. Numbers
shall be a minimum of four inches (102 mm) high with a minimum stroke
width of 0.5 inch (12.7 mm).
§ 134-2. Notice to number building; violations and penalties.
[Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 30228]
The number required to be fixed or placed upon any building as aforesaid
shall be given by the Borough Engineer, and after such number shall have
been determined, the Borough Secretary shall give notice to the owner
or owners of improved property who shall have failed to comply with the
several sections of this chapter to have the proper number or numbers
placed or put up in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within
20 days after such notice has been given to the owner or owners of any
building as aforesaid, and if he, she or they shall neglect or refuse to
comply with the same, he, she or they shall, upon conviction thereof, be
sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default
of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section
of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
§ 134-3. Numbering system on east-west streets.
The plan or system of numbering of houses or buildings shall be as follows:
27.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
28.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 119-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 134-3
1:63
There shall not be more than 100 numbers between one street and the next
one, and the first house or building on each side of the street at each corner
in its proper direction shall always be 1, 101, 201, 301, 401, and etc., and 2,
102, 202, 302, 402, and etc. On streets and alleys running eastwardly and
westwardly, Main Street shall be the dividing line, and any and all portions
of any street intersecting or running from the said Main Street, that portion
extending eastwardly from the said Main Street shall be known as East
_____ Street and that portion of any street extending westwardly from
the said Main Street shall be known as West _____ Street. On any street
extending eastwardly from the said Main Street, the first door on the
northerly side shall be No. 1, and the first door on the southerly side shall
be No. 2, these numbers to continue until the next street is reached, where
the first door as aforesaid shall be No. 101 and 102, respectively. On any
street extending westwardly from said Main Street, the first house on the
northerly side shall be No. 1 and that on the southerly side No. 2 and to
continue in the manner as set forth above.
§ 134-4. Numbering system on north-south streets.
On streets and alleys running north and south, and all that run in a general
northerly or southerly direction, the numbering of the house and buildings
shall be in the same order as those running eastwardly and westwardly, the
numbers 1, 3, 5, 7 on the east side of the street and the numbers 2, 4, 6, 8
on the west side of the street; No. 100 to start at Walnut Street.
Chapter 138
BURNING, OPEN
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 200.
§ 138-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the "Hellertown
Borough Open Burning Ordinance."
§ 138-2. Purpose.
This chapter is being adopted to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Borough of Hellertown and to secure the safety of
persons and property within the Borough by regulating open burning and
providing penalties for the violation of such regulations.
§ 134-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 138-3
1:64
§ 138-3. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated in this section:
BONFIRE — An outdoor fire utilized for ceremonial purposes.
COMMERCIAL BURNING — The burning of any materials for profit or the
burning of any materials at a commercial site associated with the business,
trade or profession being conducted on that site.
CONTAINED FIRE — Any fire contained in an incinerator, burn barrel,
fireplace or cooking grill or other contained enclosure designated for
outdoor cooking or in a fireproof container.
ENFORCEMENT OFFICER — The Fire Chief of the Borough of Hellertown
and any member of the Hellertown Police Department and the Hellertown
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall be designed enforcement officers
under this chapter. Any citation must be issued by a police officer.
FIRE — Any fire set and maintained outside of a building at any stage,
including, but not limited to, smoldering or open flame.
OPEN BURNING — The burning of any materials wherein products of
combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber. For the purpose of
this definition, a chamber shall be regarded as enclosed when, during the
time combustion occurs, only apertures, ducts, stacks, flues or chimneys
necessary to provide combustion air and permit the escape of exhaust gas
are open.
PERSON — Any individual, organization, corporation, partnership,
governmental agency, association or other legal or commercial entity.
RECREATIONAL FIRE — An outdoor fire utilized to cook food for human
consumption.
UNCONTAINED FIRE — Any fire not included in the definition of a
"contained fire" or a "recreational fire."
§ 138-4. Prohibition.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow open burning and
commercial burning within the municipal boundaries of the Borough of
Hellertown except as is provided for in this article. No person or persons,
partnership, firm or corporation or other legal entity shall burn in the open
or in any container trash, refuse, paper, leaves, branches, twigs, wood,
metal or other waste materials of any kind whatsoever, including weeds,
crops or other vegetable matter, whether living or dead, within the limits of
the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 138-5. Allowable open burning.
A. Open burning shall be allowed in the following instances without
obtaining a permit from the Borough of Hellertown:
§ 138-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-5
1:65
§ 138-6. Open burning ban.
At the order of the Borough, with the recommendation of the Fire Chief,
all open burning shall cease immediately due to dry conditions which could
cause a threat to the community. Any such prohibition will be published
in a newspaper of local circulation. In addition, any open burning ban
instituted by the County of Northampton shall supersede the provisions of
this chapter.
§ 138-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, whether as principal, agent or employee, or otherwise, violating
or assisting in the violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof by summary proceedings before any Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less then $300 nor more
than $1,000 together with the costs of prosecution. Each violation of any
provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate offense, for which a
summary conviction may be sought.
§ 138-8. Liability.
The Borough of Hellertown and its agents, officials and representatives
shall not, under any circumstances, be liable or responsible for damages
(1) Any recreational fire, including to cook or prepare food, provided
that said fire is contained in a fireproof container, which shall
include but not be limited to a patio stove, cooking grill, chimineas
or factory-built novelty stoves.
(2) If smoke, ash or smell emitting from such patio stove, cooking grill,
chimineas, or factory-built novelty stoves becomes objectionable or
offensive to neighboring properties, the Fire Official, police or code
enforcement officers may suspend the operation of same.
(3) Materials may be burned by the Borough Fire Department for
training of its members only. Said burning, however, shall be
permitted in specifically designated areas which receive prior
approval of Borough Council and which locations shall not be near
or in close proximately to any streets.
B. Open burning shall be allowed in the following instances only after a
permit is obtained from the Borough of Hellertown:
(1) Bonfires for ceremonial purposes, provided Borough Council
receives written notice and issues an approval at least 30 days
prior to the date of the bonfire. No fee shall be charged for the
issuance of a permit as set forth below.
C. At no time shall any open burning be allowed to occur unattended
without a reasonable adult being present at all times or without a
sufficient water source and/or fire extinguishers available to extinguish
the fire.
§ 138-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 138-8
1:66
caused to any person or property by reason of the provisions of this chapter
or by reason of conduct of any burning activity in compliance with the terms
and provisions of this chapter. The individual person or party responsible
for any such fire shall bear sole liability for any damages caused as a result
thereof
Chapter 140
BUSINESSES, REGISTRATION AND LICENSING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 411. Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 138-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 138-8
1:67

ARTICLE I
Temporary Businesses
[Adopted 12-4-2000 by Ord. No. 633]
§ 140-1. Definitions.
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall
have the meanings given to them in this section, unless the context clearly
indicates otherwise. Words used in the present tense include the future; the
singular includes the plural; masculine shall include the feminine gender.
Use of the term "shall" indicates a mandate and is not directory, "may"
implies permissiveness.
OPEN AIR MARKET — An outdoor market for the retail sale of new or used
merchandise, produce or other farm products, whether operated by a single
vendor or composed of stalls, stands or spaces rented or otherwise provided
to vendors. The term does not include the outside display of merchandise as
an incidental part of retail activities regularly conducted from a permanent
building on sidewalks or other areas immediately adjacent to, and upon the
same lot as, such building. The term also does not include merchandise
sold at festivals or other special events, temporary in duration, at which
the display and sale of merchandise is incidental to the primary cultural,
informational or recreational activities of such festival or special
event.[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 792]
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, firm, association,
institution, agency or any other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as being subject to the rights and duties of an individual.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS — To engage in the vending, selling, canvassing,
soliciting or the taking of orders, either by sample or otherwise, for any
and all goods, wares, merchandise, products and/or commodities, from any
street, alley, sidewalk or other public place, or from any private property,
or from premises to premises, be they public and/or private, within the
Borough of Hellertown, on a transitory basis.
§ 140-2. License required to engage in temporary business.
[Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
Within the Borough, no person shall engage in any temporary business
without first having obtained from the Zoning Officer a license to conduct
such temporary business, provided that each license issued pursuant to the
terms of this article shall so be issued on an individual basis to the person
engaging in such business; every person shall obtain a license, which shall
be nontransferable, issued to him in his name; and the license fee imposed
hereunder shall be applicable to each license as may be issued.
§ 140-3. License fee imposed. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
A. For each such license issued hereunder, a fee in an amount to be
established, from time to time, by resolution of Borough Council hereby
§ 140-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-3
1:69
§ 140-4. Application for license. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 792]
Every person desiring to obtain a license pursuant to this article first shall
make application for same to the Hellertown Zoning Officer, upon forms
provided by the Officer for those purposes. Pursuant to measures adopted
by the Hellertown Borough Council, any organization, group or individual
desiring to hold a special event and/or open air market which is to occur
wholly or in part upon private property is required to fully execute and
submit this permit application to the Borough of Hellertown no later than
30 days in advance of the proposed date (or initial date, if it is a multiday
event) of said event. If such person also shall be required to obtain a license
or permit from any other governmental regulatory agency, upon making
application for a license to the Officer, he shall evidence such other required
license(s) and/or permit(s), provided, further, the applicant shall give his
name and home address; the location address of the event; the zoning
district in which the event will be held; the name and address of the person
by whom he is employed or which he represents; the type of goods, wares,
merchandise in which he proposes to deal; the name and address of each
person who shall be additional employees of the temporary enterprise to be
conducted in the Borough; the identification, to include make, model and
license/tag number of every vehicle that is to be used in the conduct of the
temporary business; and the full license fee as may be imposed pursuant to
the terms of this article.
§ 140-5. Investigation; issuance of license; refusal thereof.
[Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 792]
Upon receipt of an application for a temporary business license, the Officer
shall not issue any such license until such time as an investigation regarding
the applicant and the representatives contained in the application has
been conducted. The Officer shall complete such investigation within three
consecutive business days of the receipt of a complete, acceptable
application. Following such investigation, the Officer may refuse to issue a
is imposed, is due and payable to the Borough of Hellertown and shall
be so tendered to the Borough as a prior condition of issuance of the
license, provided that no license fee shall be imposed under this article:
(1) To those such persons as are exempted from having to pay
transient retail business license fees pursuant to Article XXIX,
§ 2901 of the Borough Code, 53 P.S. § 47901 et seq., as amended.
(2) By those persons whose efforts are being made on behalf and for
the sole benefit of a recognized charitable, nonprofit and/or
philanthropic organization.
B. The amount of the licensee fee so imposed pursuant to this article shall
be established by the Hellertown Borough Council either by ordinance
or resolution and may be changed, from time to time, as the Council
sees fit.
§ 140-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 140-5
1:70
license in those instances where the investigation shall disclose a false or
misleading statement, information or representation by the applicant and/
or upon the submitted application and/or for any other reasonable and just
cause, including but not limited to failure to comply with the requirements
of Chapter 140. In those instances when a license is denied, the fee shall be
retained by the Borough as reimbursement for the costs incurred relative to
the conduct of the investigation.
§ 140-6. Custody; display and exhibit of license.
Every person so issued a license pursuant to the terms of this article
shall maintain such license upon his person or shall display the same upon
any and all vehicles as may be engaged in the temporary business if the
same shall be conducted from premises to premises, or from any of the
streets, alleys, sidewalks or other public places of the Borough, or he shall
display such license at the place where such temporary business is being
conducted, if doing so from a single location. Every licensee shall exhibit his
license, upon request, to all police officers, Borough officials and/or citizens.
§ 140-7. Special license conditions; prohibited acts.
A. Those persons who shall make application for and receive a license to
engage in a temporary business from a fixed, single location shall do so
only from sites that are within either the TC Town Center, M Mixed, HC
Highway Commercial or SC Shopping Center Zoning District, as
defined on the Official Map of the Borough of Hellertown (Chapter 450).
This condition shall not apply to those circumstances in which the
temporary, fixed-point business location is upon premises owned by the
applicant who is a charitable, nonprofit and/or philanthropic
organization. [Amended 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 792]
B. All temporary business licenses issued hereunder shall be valid for a
period of seven consecutive or nonconsecutive days, the initial date of
which shall be established at the request of the applicant but not earlier
than the fourth day following the date upon which the complete,
acceptable application was received by the Zoning Officer. An applicant
who proposes a use for seven nonconsecutive days shall provide the
Borough with the proposed dates that the business shall operate. Any
license issued hereunder to a charitable, nonprofit and/or philanthropic
organization shall not be limited to a valid period of seven days; rather,
such license shall be valid for a period not to exceed four months.
[Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775; 6-16-2014 by Ord. No.
792]
C. General requirements and procedures applicable to all districts.
[Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 79229]
29.This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections C through E as Subsections D
through F, respectively.
§ 140-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-7
1:71
(1) A plan depicting the layout of the site, including dimensions of the
sale area, accessways, parking areas and location of trash
receptacles.
(2) Specific days and hours of operation.
(3) The means, such as stalls, tables or other structures, by which
merchandise is to be displayed and the provision for a twelve-footwide
aisle to which emergency services can be accommodated.
(4) Vehicular parking shall be provided on site or a signed/notarized
shared parking agreement with an adjoining property. One vendor
parking and one customer off-street parking space shall be
provided.
(5) One trash receptacle per 1,000 square feet of sales area. All trash
shall be emptied regularly so as not to overflow, and litter and
debris shall not be allowed to accumulate. The operator shall be
responsible for removing from the property, adjacent property, and
abutting sidewalks and streets any trash which resulted from the
event within 24 hours.
(6) One sanitary portable facility shall be provided and maintained for
every 20 vendor stalls/spaces. The facility shall be removed from
the area within 72 hours following the event.
(7) Merchandise, stalls or other structures and materials shall not be
stored outdoors while the use is not open for business.
(8) Operation shall be restricted to the time between 9:00 a.m. and
5:00 p.m. unless otherwise specified in the conditional use permit.
(9) The operation shall not interfere with the reasonable use and
enjoyment of neighboring properties by reason of excessive noise,
traffic or overflow parking.
(10) The Borough may impose any other condition it deems necessary or
appropriate to minimize noise or other potential adverse effects
upon neighboring areas.
(11) Location, number, size, and design of signs used to advertise the
event shall be submitted with the application for approval by the
Zoning Officer.
(a) Event sign. One event sign advertising the event may be posted
at the event site not more than 30 days prior. The event sign
shall be removed within 48 hours after the close of the event.
Event signs shall be no larger than 30 square feet and meet all
other current requirements per the Borough Zoning
Ordinance. Signs shall not be lit.
(b) Directional sign. Only during the operation of the event may
two temporary off-site sandwich board signs (up to eight
§ 140-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 140-7
1:72
§ 140-8. Suspension or revocation of license. [Amended 9-17-2012
by Ord. No. 775]
The Zoning Officer is authorized to suspend or revoke any license issued
hereunder when it is deemed that such action would be in the best interests
of the public health, safety or morals, or for giving any false or misleading
statement, information or representation upon any application for such
license. An appeal from any license suspension or revocation may be made,
in writing, to the Borough Council, the same to be filed with the Borough
Manager or his designee within 10 days of the suspension or revocation
action. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to a person whose license
shall have been suspended or revoked.
square feet) be installed to direct patrons to the event. Offsite
signs shall not obstruct clear sight lines nor obstruct the
sidewalk.
(c) Other signs. The use of paper or other temporary signs posted
on utility poles, trees, or similar, is prohibited.
D. No license, once it has been issued, shall be extended beyond the sevenday
period of validity and no license shall be renewed. This condition
shall not apply to a charitable, nonprofit and/or philanthropic licensee.
E. An applicant shall be entitled only to one temporary business license in
any three-month period, said period to commence coincident with the
first day of the seven-day license validity period. This condition shall not
apply to a charitable, nonprofit and/or philanthropic organization.
F. No person engaged in any temporary business shall:
(1) Sell any product or type of product not referenced in his license.
(2) Call out or hawk his wares and products upon any of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or other public places in the Borough, or use any
loudspeaker, voice-amplification system, horn or other device
which shall cause annoyance to the general public.
(3) When conducting business from a vehicle, stop, stand or park his
vehicle upon any public way of the Borough in such a manner as to
impede the flow of vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic and for
longer than necessary to complete the commercial transaction.
(4) Engage in any premises-to-premises activity, except by prior
appointment, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.
(5) Display or sell items which are adult oriented or not legally sold to
minors. [Added 6-16-2014 by Ord. No. 792]
§ 140-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-9
1:73
§ 140-9. Violations and penalties. [Amended 6-16-2014 by Ord. No.
792]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 140-9 HELLERTOWN CODE § 140-9
1:74
ARTICLE II
Registration of Businesses
[Adopted 1-19-2004 by Ord. No. 659]
§ 140-10. Definitions.
§ 140-11. Business registry established; fees must be paid.
A. In this article, the following words shall have the meanings hereby
respectively ascribed thereto:
BUSINESS — For purposes of this article, a business includes any
person, entity, corporation or partnership which has an actual place
of business within the Borough or has its mail delivered to a location
within the Borough or a post office box at the Hellertown Post Office.
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
limited-liability company, limited-liability partnership, unincorporated
association, firm enterprise or any other entity whatsoever which is
recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of a person.
B. In this article, the singular shall included the plural, the plural shall
include the singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and
the neuter.
A. In order that the Borough may best perform its services for the benefit
of the community and the businesses therein, a centralized registry of
all businesses is hereby established. Every person who shall first
commence to engage in or conduct any business within the Borough at
any time after the first day of January of any year shall register such
business within 30 days of the commencement of such business and pay
the full registration fee of $50, provided that, when such initial
registration shall take place in the month of December of any year, such
registration also shall be applicable for the calendar year ensuing;
provided, further, that every person who shall continue to engage in or
conduct any business within the Borough, at any time after the first day
of January of any year shall have reregistered said business no later
than the first day of March of said year and shall pay the full
reregistration fee of $50. The initial registration or subsequent
registration of a business shall be upon a form furnished by the
Borough, and the person shall pay the registration or reregistration fee,
as the case may be, at the time of the registration or reregistration.
Such fees shall be payable to the Borough of Hellertown for deposit into
the general fund and for the general use of the Borough. The failure of
any person to register or reregister a business in complete compliance
with the terms herein provided shall be deemed to constitute a violation
of said terms, and the Borough shall take such remedies as may be
available to it pursuant to law to prosecute such a violation.
B. Any person who is delinquent in the payment of the full registration fee
at the time of a subsequent registration shall not be registered until any
§ 140-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-11
1:75
§ 140-12. Business changes.
§ 140-13. Late fees; violations and penalties.
§ 140-14. Establishment of fees.
The fees for the initial registration and for the reregistration shall be
established by a motion approved by a majority of the Council of the
Borough of Hellertown and shall remain in effect until changed by the same
procedure as aforementioned.
and all delinquent fees have been paid in full, and any delinquent fees
can be prosecuted pursuant to this article.
A. When any person registered under this article shall change his place of
business within the Borough, shall remove such business to a place
outside the Borough, shall discontinue such business, or shall transfer
the business to any person, he shall furnish the information of such
change, removal, discontinuance, as the case may be, within 10 days
after the same, to the Borough Secretary, so that the register of
businesses may be changed accordingly.
B. Upon any change of ownership of any business which shall have been
registered under this article, the new owner thereof, within 10 days
after the acquisition thereof, shall furnish such information to the
Borough Secretary, so that the register of businesses may be changed
accordingly.
A. In the event that any business should fail to pay the registration fee by
the first day of March, a late fee charge of 10% shall be added to the
registration fee.
B. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions
of this article or any resolutions or regulations made in pursuance
thereof shall, upon conviction thereof by a Magisterial District Judge,
be subject to a fine of not more than $600, together with the costs of
prosecution, for any single violation and, in default of such fine and
costs, shall be imprisoned for a period of not more than 30 days. Every
violator of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day such a violation shall continue
and shall be subject to penalties imposed by this article for each and
every such separate offense. The Borough may take any other action
permitted by law to collect the outstanding business registration fee,
including any civil action or use of a collection agency to collect any
unpaid fees. [Amended 2-7-2005 by Ord. No. 679]
§ 140-11 HELLERTOWN CODE § 140-14
1:76
Chapter 153
CODE ENFORCEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Nuisances — See Ch. 278.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Licensing of rental premises — See Ch. 326,
Art. I.
§ 140-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 140-14
1:77

ARTICLE I
Issuance of Nontraffic Summary Citations
[Adopted 11-3-2008 by Ord. No. 731]
§ 153-1. Authority.
In addition to Borough law enforcement officers, it is hereby expressly
granted to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer the authority on behalf
of the Borough Council to issue nontraffic summary citations and to enforce
any and all Borough ordinances.
§ 153-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-1
1:79

ARTICLE II
Administrative Search Warrants
[Adopted 1-20-2009 by Ord. No. 736]
§ 153-2. Right of entry; administrative search warrants.
The Borough Code Officer or Deputy Code Official(s) and/or designee of
the Borough may apply to a judge of the Magisterial District Court for
an administrative search warrant to enter any premises to conduct any
inspection required or authorized by law to determine compliance with
the provisions of any Borough property ordinance, code and/or nuisance
ordinance.
§ 153-3. Application for warrant.
A. The application for an administrative search warrant shall be in writing
and sworn to by the applicant and shall particularly describe the place,
structure, premises, etc., to be inspected and the nature, scope and
purpose of the inspection to be performed by the applicant.
B. Before filing an application for an administrative search warrant with a
court, the Borough Code Officer and/or Deputy Borough Code Officer
and/or the Borough designee shall obtain approval by the Borough
Solicitor as to its legality in both form and substance under the
standards and criteria of this section, and a statement to this effect
shall be included as part of the application.
C. A judge of a court referred to in this section may issue the warrant on
finding that:
(1) The applicant has sought access to the property for the purpose of
making an inspection; and
(a) After requesting, at a reasonable time, the owner, tenant or
other individual in charge of the property to allow access, has
been denied access to the property; or
(b) After making a reasonable effort, the applicant has been
unable to locate any of these individuals.
(2) The requirements of § 152-3 of this article are met.
(3) The Borough Code Officer and/or Deputy Borough Code Officer
and/or the Borough designee is authorized by law to make an
inspection of the property for which the warrant is sought.
(4) Probable cause for the issuance of the warrant has been
demonstrated by the applicant by specific evidence of an existing
violation of any provision of a Borough code and/or Borough
ordinance or any rule, regulation and/or ordinance adopted under
the Borough Code or by showing:
§ 153-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 153-3
1:81
§ 153-4. Repealer.
Any other ordinances, or parts of ordinances or resolutions inconsistent
herewith, and the same are repealed. The administrative search warrant
procedures in Ordinance No. 65430 entitled "Requiring all owners of
residential properties to register their rental premises with the Borough
of Hellertown and to create a systematic inspection program of residential
rental units," regarding routine and systematic inspections for residential
rental properties, shall remain in full force and effect and is not modified
nor repealed by this article.
(a) That a reasonable administrative inspection program exists
regarding the condition of the property; and
(b) That the proposed inspection comes within that program.
D. An administrative search warrant issued under this section shall specify
the place, structure, premises, vehicle or records to be inspected. The
inspection conducted may not exceed the limits specified in the
warrant.
E. An administrative search warrant issued under this section authorizes
the applicant and other officials or employees of the Borough to enter
specified property to perform the inspection, sampling and other
functions authorized by law to determine compliance with provision of
this Code.
F. An administrative search warrant issued under this section shall be
executed and returned to the judge by whom it was issued within:
(1) The time specified in the warrant, not to exceed 30 days; or
(2) If no time period is specified in the warrant, 15 days from the date
of its issuance.
30.Editor's Note: See Ch. 326, Rental Property, Art. I, Licensing of Rental Premises.
§ 153-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 153-4
1:82
Chapter 160
CONSTRUCTION CODES, UNIFORM
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153. Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
§ 160-1. Election to administer and enforce.
This municipality hereby elects to administer and enforce the provisions of
the Pennsylvania Construction Code Act, Act 45 of 1999, 35 P.S. §§ 7210.101
to 7210.1103, as amended from time to time, and its regulations.
§ 160-2. Adoption of code.
The Uniform Construction Code, contained in 34 Pa. Code, Chapters 401
to 405, as amended from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated
herein by reference as the municipal building code of this municipality.
§ 160-3. Means of administration and enforcement.
Administration and enforcement of the code within this municipality shall
be undertaken in any of the following ways, as determined by the governing
body of this municipality from time to time by resolution:
§ 160-4. Board of appeals.
A board of appeals shall be established by resolution of the governing body
of this municipality in conformity with the requirements of the relevant
provisions of the code, as amended from time to time, and for the purposes
A. By the designation of an employee of the municipality to serve as the
municipal code official to act on behalf of the municipality;
B. By the retention of one or more construction code officials or thirdparty
agencies to act on behalf of the municipality;
C. By agreement with one or more other municipalities for the joint
administration and enforcement of this act through an intermunicipal
agreement;
D. By entering into a contract with another municipality for the
administration and enforcement of this act on behalf of this
municipality; and/or
E. By entering into an agreement with the Pennsylvania Department of
Labor and Industry for plan review, inspections and enforcement of
structures other than one-family or two-family dwelling units and utility
and miscellaneous use structures.
§ 153-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 160-4
1:83
set forth therein. If at any time enforcement and administration is
undertaken jointly with one or more other municipalities, said board of
appeals shall be established by joint action of the participating
municipalities.
§ 160-5. Effect of preexisting ordinances.
§ 160-6. Fees.
Fees assessable by the municipality for the administration and enforcement
undertaken pursuant to this chapter and the code shall be established by
the governing body by resolution from time to time.
Chapter 168
DISORDERLY CONDUCT
§ 168-1. Disorderly conduct prohibited.
A. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which were
adopted by this municipality on or before July 1, 1999, and which equal
or exceed the requirements of the code, shall continue in full force and
effect until such time as such provisions fail to equal or exceed the
minimum requirements of the code, as amended from time to time.
B. All building code ordinances or portions of ordinances which are in
effect as of the effective date of this chapter and whose requirements
are less than the minimum requirements of the code are hereby
amended to conform with the comparable provisions of the code.
C. All relevant ordinances, regulations and policies of this municipality not
governed by the code shall remain in full force and effect.
A. Disorderly conduct, as defined in the Crimes Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5503,
is hereby prohibited within the Borough of Hellertown. A person is
guilty of disorderly conduct if, with intent to cause public
inconvenience, annoyance or alarm, or recklessly creating a risk
thereof, he:
(1) Engages in fighting or threatening or in violent or tumultuous
behavior.
(2) Makes unreasonable noise.
(3) Creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition by any act
which serves no legitimate purpose of the actor.
(4) Uses obscene language or makes an obscene gesture.
B. Provided that, as used in this section, the word "public" means affecting
or likely to affect persons in a place to which the public or a substantial
group has access. Among the places included are streets, alleys and
§ 160-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 168-1
1:84
§ 168-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $50 but not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 175
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA
§ 175-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Hellertown Controlled
Substance Paraphernalia Prohibition Ordinance."
§ 175-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
DRUG PARAPHERNALIA —
sidewalks, transport facilities, schools, prisons, apartment houses,
places of business or amusement, any neighborhood or any premises
which are open to the public.
All equipment, products and materials of any kind which are used,
intended for use, or designed for use in injecting, ingesting, inhaling or
otherwise introducing into the human body a controlled substance in
violation of the Controlled Substance, Drug Device and Cosmetic Act. It
includes, but is not limited to:
Hypodermic syringes, needles and other objects used, intended
for use, or designed for use in parenterally injecting controlled
substances into the human body.
(1)
Objects used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting,
inhaling or otherwise introducing marijuana, cocaine, hashish or
hashish oil into the human body, such as:
Metal, wood, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipes
with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or
punctured metal bowls.
(a)
(b) Water pipes.
(c) Carburetion tubes and devices.
(2)
A.
§ 168-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 175-2
1:85
(d) Smoking and carburetion masks.
Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material,
such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too
short to be held in the hand.
(e)
(f) Miniature cocaine spoons and cocaine vials.
(g) Chamber pipes.
(h) Carburetor pipes.
(i) Electric pipes.
(j) Air-driven pipes.
(k) Chillums.
(l) Bongs.
(m) Ice pipes or chillers.
In determining whether an object is "drug paraphernalia," a court
or other authority should consider, in addition to all other logically
relevant factors, the following:
Statement by an owner or by anyone in control of the object
concerning its use.
(1)
Prior convictions, if any, of an owner, or of anyone in control of the
object, under any municipal, state, or federal law relating to any
controlled substance.
(2)
The proximity of the object, in time and space, to a direct violation
of this chapter.
(3)
(4) The proximity of the object to controlled substances.
(5) The existence of any residue of controlled substances on the object.
Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of an owner or of
anyone in control of the object to deliver it to persons whom he
knows, or should reasonably know, intend to use the object to
facilitate a violation of this chapter, the innocence of an owner or
of anyone in control of the object as to a direct violation of this
chapter shall not prevent a finding that the object is intended for
use or designed for use as "drug paraphernalia."
(6)
Instructions, oral or written, provided with the object concerning
its use.
(7)
Descriptive materials accompanying the object which explain or
depict its use.
(8)
(9) National and local advertising concerning its use.
B.
§ 175-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 175-2
1:86
§ 175-3. Possession, manufacture and sale of drug paraphernalia.
§ 175-4. Violation and penalties.31
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 nor more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 181
EATING ESTABLISHMENTS
§ 181-1. Health officer.32
It shall be the duty of the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or his designee
to perform such duties as are vested in local health officers by state laws
(10)The manner in which the object is displayed for sale.
(11)Expert testimony concerning its use.
A. It is unlawful for any person to use, or to possess with intent to use,
drug paraphernalia to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into
the human body a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.
B. It is unlawful for any person to deliver, give, sell, possess with intent to
deliver or sell, or manufacture with intent to deliver or to sell drug
paraphernalia, knowing, or under circumstances where one reasonably
should know, that it will be used to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise
introduce into the human body a controlled substance in violation of
this chapter.
C. It is unlawful for any person to place in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication any advertisement, knowing, or under
circumstances where one reasonably should know, that the purpose of
the advertisement, in whole or in part, is to promote the sale of objects
intended for use as drug paraphernalia.
D. Any person 18 years of age or over who violates Subsection C above by
delivering drug paraphernalia to a person under 18 years of age who is
at least three years his junior is guilty of a special offense.
E. Any drug paraphernalia used in violation of this section shall be seized
and forfeited to the Borough.
31.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
32.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 175-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 181-1
1:87
and regulations. He shall make sanitary inspections and shall, in the
performance of his duties, have the power and authority of a policeman as
cited in the Borough Code, Section 3105.33
§ 181-2. Annual health license for eating establishments.
It shall also be the duty of the Borough Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee to issue an annual health license to all public eating
establishments in the Borough of Hellertown at an annual fee of $5 by
November 1 of each year.
§ 181-3. Inspections.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer or his designee has the authority to
conduct health inspections of public eating establishments in the Borough
of Hellertown on a monthly basis and is empowered to enforce any and all
violations, infringements or remediation requirements as may be necessary
for the health, cleanliness, comfort and safety of the residents of the
Borough of Hellertown.
§ 181-4. Amendment of fees.
From time to time, as Borough Council may deem necessary, the fees may
be amended by motion of a majority of the Council of the Borough of
Hellertown and shall remain in effect until changed by the same procedure
as aforementioned.
Chapter 197
FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS
§ 197-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following term(s) shall have the meaning(s)
indicated:
FIREARM(S) — Any pistol or revolver with a barrel less than 15 inches; any
shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches; or any rifle with a barrel less than
16 inches; or any pistol, revolver, rifle or shotgun with an overall length of
less than 26 inches. The barrel length of a firearm shall be determined by
measuring from the muzzle of the barrel to the face of the closed action,
bolt or cylinder, whichever is applicable.
§ 197-2. Discharge of firearms prohibited.
Except in necessary defense of person and property and except as provided
in § 197-4 of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to use, fire or
discharge any gun or other firearm within the Borough of Hellertown.
33.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 48105.
§ 181-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 197-3
1:88
§ 197-3. Use of air rifle, bow and arrow or similar device prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any air rifle, air pistol,
spring gun, spring pistol, B-B gun, bow and arrow or similar device, or
any implement that is not a firearm but which impels a pellet of any kind
with a force that can reasonably be expected to cause bodily harm, at any
place within the Borough of Hellertown, except as provided in § 197-4 of
this chapter.
§ 197-4. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to:
§ 197-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $300 but not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 200
FIRE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 160.
§ 200-1. Adoption of International Fire Code.
The Borough of Hellertown hereby adopts, for the purpose of establishing
rules and regulations for regulating and governing the safeguarding of life
and property from fire and explosion hazards arising from the storage,
handling and use of hazardous substances, materials and devices and from
conditions hazardous to life or property in the occupancy of buildings
and premises in the Borough of Hellertown, including administration,
enforcement and penalties, the following provisions of the International
Fire Code, 2009 Edition, or any subsequent edition(s), if any, save and
except such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended, of
which three copies have been and are now filed in the office of the Code
A. Members of any organization incorporated under laws of this
commonwealth engaged in target shooting upon the grounds or
property belonging to or under the control of such organization.
B. Any law enforcement officer when used in the discharge of his official
duties.
§ 197-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-1
1:89
Enforcement Official and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated by
reference as fully as if set out at length herein.
§ 200-2. Inserted text.
§ 200-3. Applicability.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to construction, alteration,
or repairs to new structures, or the construction or alteration of existing
structures, land development, or new subdivisions under the Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 200-4. Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
respectively ascribed to them in this section unless from the particular
context it clearly appears that some other meaning is intended. Other than
the words in this section, those words which are defined in the International
Fire Code, 2009 Edition, shall have the same definitions as that employed in
the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition.
EXISTING — Buildings, facilities, or conditions that are already in
existence, constructed or officially authorized prior to the adoption of this
code.
NEW — Buildings, renovations, additions, facilities or conditions not in
existence prior to the adoption of this code. Such buildings, facilities or
conditions shall be regulated by the Pennsylvania Uniform Construction
Code, land development, or new subdivisions under the Municipalities
Planning Code.
§ 200-5. Adoption, amendments and deletions.
A. Section 101.1, Title: Insert "Borough of Hellertown, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania" in place of the bracketed phrase [Name of
Jurisdiction].
B. Section 109.3, Violations penalties: Insert "summary offense" in place
of the bracketed phrase [specify offense] and insert "$1,000" in place of
the bracketed phrase [amount] and insert "five days" in place of the
bracketed phrase [number of days].
A. The following provisions set forth in Chapter 1 of the International Fire
Code shall be adopted:
(1) Sections 101.1 and 101.2-1 through 101.2-3.
(2) Section 101.2-5.
(3) Section 101.3.
(4) Section 102.2-2.
§ 200-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 200-5
1:90
(5) Section 103 in its entirety.
(6) Section 104.3.
(7) Sections 104.10 and 104.10-1.
(8) Sections 105.6 and 105.6.1 through 105.6.31 (Note: not Section
105.6.32).
(9) Sections 105.6.33 through 105.6.46.
(10) Section 105.6.39, as written in the 2009 International Fire Code.
(11) Sections 106.1 through 106.2.
(12) Section 107 in its entirety.
(13) Section 108 in its entirety.
(14) Section 108.3, as amended to read: For the purpose of the
International Fire Code, Edition 2009, the term "Board of Appeals"
shall mean the Board of Appeals established under § 160-4 of the
Code of Ordinances, known as the "UCC Board of Appeals."
(15) Sections 109.1 through 109.3, as amended below:
(a) Section 109.1 is deleted and the following is inserted: 109.1
Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or
corporation to utilize a building, occupancy, premises or
systems regulated by this code, or cause the same to be done,
in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this
code.
(b) Section 109.3 is deleted and the following is inserted: 109.3
Violation penalties. Persons who shall violate a provision of this
code or shall fail to comply with any of the requirements
thereof or directive of the Fire Code Official shall be guilty of a
summary offense, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000
or by imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both such fine
and imprisonment. Each day that a violation continues after
due notice has been served shall be deemed a separate offense.
(16) Section 111.4 is amended by inserting "$300" and "$1,000,"
respectively, in the appropriate location in Section 111.4, Failure to
comply.
B. Adopt Chapter 2 in its entirety.
C. Adopt Chapter 3 in its entirety.
D. Adopt Chapter 4 in its entirety.
E. Chapter 5. Adopt:
(1) Sections 503.3 through 503.4.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:91
(2) Section 504.2.
(3) Section 505.1.
(4) Section 506 in its entirety.
(5) Sections 507.5.4 through 507.5.5.
F. Chapter 6. Adopt:
(1) Section 605 in its entirety.
(2) Sections 608.1 through 608.8.
(3) Sections 609.3 through 609.3.4.
G. Chapter 7. Adopt Chapter 7 in its entirety.
H. Chapter 8. Adopt Section 807 in its entirety.
I. Chapter 9. Adopt:
(1) Sections 901.6 through 901.9.
(2) Sections 904.11.5 through 904.11.63.
(3) Section 906 in its entirety.
(4) Section 912.3.
(5) Section 912.3.2.
(6) Section 912.3.3.
(7) Section 912.4.
(8) Section 913.5.
J. Chapter 10. Adopt Section 1030 it its entirety.
K. Chapter 12. Adopt Sections 1205 and 1207 in their entirety.
L. Chapter 13. Adopt Chapter 13 in its entirety.
M. Chapter 15. Adopt Chapter 15 in its entirety.
N. Chapter 17. Adopt Chapter 17 in its entirety.
O. Chapter 19. Adopt:
(1) Sections 1901 through 1903.
(2) Sections 1905 through 1909.
P. Chapter 20. Adopt Chapter 20 in its entirety.
Q. Chapter 21. Adopt Chapter 21, Section 2107 in its entirety.
§ 200-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 200-5
1:92
R. Chapter 22. Adopt:
(1) Sections 2205.2 through 2205.7.
(2) Sections 2211.2 through 2211.3.
(3) Section 2211.5.
(4) Section 2211.6.
S. Chapter 24.
(1) Adopt Chapter 24 in its entirety.
(2) Amend Section 2403.2 to delete the following language: "having an
area in excess of 400 square feet."
(3) Amend Section 2403.6 by deleting the following language: "with an
occupant load of 50 or more."
T. Chapter 25. Adopt:
(1) Section 2505.
(2) Section 2507.
(3) Section 2508.2.
(4) Section 2509.
U. Chapters 26 through 27 are adopted in their entirety.
V. Chapter 33, Explosives and Fireworks, is hereby amended by modifying
and amending portions thereof as hereinafter set forth:
1. Statement of purpose. This part has as its purpose the protection of
the health, safety and welfare of the general public through limiting
the use of fireworks. Fireworks contain explosives which can
damage property and endanger human life when misused, or used
under conditions which create hazards which would not exist for
the presence of such conditions. This Part 2 will allow for outdoor
display of fireworks to be put on by professional, competent
pyrotechnicians in a safe manner.
2. Definitions.
a. Words employed herein which are defined in the International
Fire Code, 2009 Edition, shall have the same definition as that
employed in the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition.
b. Display Property. The lot, parcel or tract of real estate on which
a permitted outdoor display of fireworks is to be conducted.
3. Incorporation of International Fire Code. Chapter 33, Explosives
and Fireworks, of the International Fire Code, 2009 Edition, shall
constitute reasonable rules and regulations for displays of
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:93
consumer fireworks and "display fireworks," as set forth in the
Act of November 30, 2004, P.L. 1598, No. 204 § 5, Title 35 P.S.
Health and Safety, Chapter 13A, entitled Fireworks and Explosives
in § 1275.2, incorporated into this chapter by reference.
Supervised public displays permitted; permits, and the provisions
thereof are hereby incorporated by reference as if set forth here
at length. In the event of any irreconcilable conflict between the
provisions of the International Fire Code and this section, those
provisions which provide greater safety and protection to person
and property of which is more restrictive on the conduct of outdoor
display of fireworks shall apply.
4. Delegation of authority. The Borough Council of Hellertown
Borough hereby authorizes the Hellertown Borough Fire Code
Official to act as its duly authorized agent to enforce the
requirements of Title 35 P.S. Health and Safety, Chapter 13A,
Fireworks and Explosives, § 1275.2, Supervised public displays
permitted; permits, to grant permission and issue permits for
outdoor displays of fireworks, provided that the permit applicant
fully meets the requirements of the International Fire Code,
including, without limitation, the requirements of Chapter 33,
Explosives and Fireworks, and including, but not limited to, Section
3308, Fireworks displays, thereof, and the additional rules and
regulations set forth in this section.
5. Permit required for displays. It shall be unlawful, and in violation of
this section, for any person or entity to conduct an outdoor display
of fireworks within the limits of the Borough of Hellertown unless a
permit therefor has first been issued by the Hellertown Borough
Fire Code Official.
6. Permit applications. All applications for a permit for an outdoor
display of fireworks shall be made, in writing, by use of a
Hellertown Borough application form, and submitted to the
Hellertown Borough Fire Code Official with all required
information, documentation and plans not later than 45 days prior
to the scheduled display. No permit shall be issued for any late
application.
7. Permittee to be owner of display property. The applicant and
proposed permittee shall be the record owner of the display
property, other than displays conducted on Borough property, with
the permission of the Borough.
8. Structures disallowed in display site. The permittee shall ensure
that there are no dwellings, buildings, or any other structures
(including tents) located within the display site, whether or not the
dwelling, building or structure will be unoccupied during the
display, and whether or not the dwelling, building or other
structure provides protection through substantial noncombustible
or fire-resistant construction for the occupants. No permit shall be
§ 200-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 200-5
1:94
issued for any outdoor display of fireworks where plans submitted
to the Hellertown Borough Fire Code Official evidence, at the sole
discretion of the Borough Fire Code Official, that there are or will
be dwellings, buildings, or any other structures (including tents)
located within the display site.
9. Financial responsibility requirements. After the permit application
is approved, but before a permit is issued by the Hellertown
Borough Fire Code Enforcement Official, the applicant or operator
shall file with the Hellertown Borough Fire Code Enforcement
Official a corporate surety bond of not less than $1,000,000, or a
public liability insurance policy for the same amount, for the
purpose of the payment of all potential damages to a person or
persons or to property by reason of the permitted display or the
conduct of any act authorized by the permit, and arising from any
acts of the permittee, the operator, and their agents, employees or
subcontractors.
10. Location of display site on the display property. The display site
shall be situated on the display property at such location as is the
greatest distance from the nearest dwelling, building structure
(including tents), or public street while still meeting the
International Fire Code clearance and separation distance
requirements.
11. Revocation of permit; cancellation or discontinuance of display. The
permit for any outdoor display of fireworks may be immediately
revoked and the display immediately cancelled or discontinued at
any time deemed necessary by the Hellertown Borough Fire Code
Official or any authorized representative of the Hellertown
Borough Fire Company, at his/her sole and absolute discretion, as a
result of any noncompliance with any legal requirements,
including, without limitation, the requirement of this section, or
due to weather conditions such as drought, extremely low humidity,
or wind factors. Any permitted outdoor display of fireworks shall be
cancelled if wind gusts exceed 25 miles per hour as measured
immediately prior to the commencement of display, and shall be
discontinued if wind gusts exceed 25 miles per hour any time prior
to the end of the display. The display may also be ordered
discontinued immediately whenever, in the sole and absolute
discretion of the Hellertown Borough Fire Code Official, an
authorized representative of a Hellertown Borough Fire Company
or the operator determines that a hazardous condition exists, and
shall not resume until such time as the hazardous condition is
corrected to the sole and absolute satisfaction of the Hellertown
Borough Fire Code Official or authorized Fire Company
representative. The permit shall be immediately revoked and the
display shall be discontinued in the event of accidental ignition of
any form of combustible or flammable materials as a result of
falling debris from the display.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-5
1:95
12. Fire company presence at and call for emergency medical services
to display property. The permittee shall make arrangements with a
Hellertown Borough Fire Company to ensure the presence at the
display property a Hellertown Borough fire pumper and/or other
fire-fighting equipment as determined by such fire company, and a
minimum of three firefighters, for a period beginning 30 minutes
prior to the display and ending 30 minutes after the display is
concluded. All costs related to the provision of fire personnel and
apparatus, and calls for emergency medical services and
apparatus, shall be paid by the permittee in an amount determined
by Hellertown Borough.
13. Traffic control arrangements with Hellertown Borough Police
Department. Not less than 10 business days prior to conducting the
display, the permittee shall make arrangements acceptable to the
Hellertown Borough Police Department for traffic control. Traffic
control shall be conducted by either Hellertown Borough police
officers, or special fire police officers of the Dewey Fire Company
No. 1. Traffic control measures shall be sufficient to prevent
motorists, whether or not attending the display, from parking,
stopping or standing motor vehicles within the right-of-way or
shoulder of that portion of any public street abutting the display
property, or that portion of any public street in sufficiently close
proximity to the display property to be affected by the traffic to be
generated thereby as determined by the Hellertown Borough Police
Department. The permittee shall submit to the Hellertown Police
Department for its review and approval its traffic control plans.
Such plans shall include provisions for handling ingress and egress
of motor vehicles to and from the display property, interior
circulation of vehicles within the display property, and demonstrate
adequate parking on the display property. In the event that the
permittee anticipates the necessity for additional parking facilities,
other than those available on the display property, the permittee
may contract with a nearby property owner or owners for overflow
parking, provided that either shuttle service from the overflow
parking site to the display property is provided; or safe pedestrian
pathways are available from the overflow parking to the display
property. Such plans shall be sufficiently detailed so as to permit
meaningful review by the Hellertown Police Department. All costs
related to the provisions of police officers and police vehicles shall
be paid by the permittee in an amount determined by Hellertown
Borough. The permittee shall not conduct the display unless such
traffic control measures and plans have been approved, in writing,
by the Hellertown Police Department.
14. Enforcement of requirements. The Hellertown Borough Fire Code
Official and Hellertown Borough police officers are authorized to
enforce all legal requirements relating to outdoor displays of
fireworks, including the requirements of this section or other
Borough ordinance and/or state law, and, in addition to criminal
§ 200-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 200-5
1:96
§ 200-6. Authority of state laws and regulations.
In all matters that are regulated by the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania or by regulations of departments or agencies of the
commonwealth promulgated by authority of law, such laws or regulation,
as the case may be, shall control where requirements thereof are more
restrictive than the provisions of this International Fire Code.
sanctions or civil remedies, he/she may revoke any permit and
order the cancellation and/or discontinuance of a display upon
any failure of refusal of the permittee to comply with such legal
requirements, including, without limitation, this chapter, other
Borough ordinances and/or state law, or upon any failure or refusal
to comply with the orders and directives of the Hellertown Borough
Fire Code Official, a Hellertown Borough police officer, or an
authorized representative of a Hellertown Borough Fire Company.
15. Property owners to be notified. The permittee shall notify, in
writing, the owners of all real estate located within 2,000 feet of all
boundaries of the display property. The notice shall be mailed by
USPS certified mail, return receipt requested, to such owners not
later than 10 days prior to the date on which the display is to take
place, and proof of such mailing shall be delivered to the
Hellertown Borough Fire Code Official not later than three days
prior to the date on which the display is to take place. The notice
shall contain not less than the following information: the name,
address and phone number of the permittee and of its contract
person responsible for the display; the name, address and phone
number of the operator and of its contact person directly
responsible for conducting the display; the date, time and location
of the display; and a general statement describing the display. The
permittee shall not conduct the display unless such proof of mailing
has been delivered to the Hellertown Borough Fire Code Official.
16. Removal of debris and trash from display area. The permittee shall
remove all combustible debris and trash from the display areas
prior to the commencement of the display.
17. Inspection and approval of discharge site setup. After the discharge
site has been completely set up, and prior to the commencement of
the display, the permittee shall cause the discharge site to be
inspected and approved by an authorized representative of a
Hellertown Borough fire company. The permittee shall not conduct
the display unless such approval has been obtained.
18. Removal of display debris. In the event that any property owner or
occupant notifies the Borough, the permittee, or the operator that
debris from the display has fallen on such property, the permittee
shall remove such debris from such property within 24 hours'
notice to the permittee or the operator from the owner, occupant,
or the Borough.
§ 200-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-7
1:97
§ 200-7. Fire Marshal. [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 81634]
The Borough hereby creates the position of Fire Marshal. The Borough
shall determine the duties of the Borough Fire Marshal as permitted by
the Borough Code and Act 291 and shall designate which department and
position the Borough Fire Marshal shall hold within the Borough.
§ 200-8. Repealer.
Ordinance No. 338 and Ordinance No. 430 of the Borough of Hellertown,
entitled Fire Prevention Code, as amended, and all other ordinances or
parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are hereby repealed.
§ 200-9. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. The Borough Council
hereby declares that it would have passed this chapter, and each section,
subsection, clause or phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one
or more sections, sentences, clauses and phrases are declared
unconstitutional.
§ 200-10. Construal of provisions.
Nothing in this chapter or in the Fire Code hereby adopted shall be
construed to affect any suit or proceeding impending in any court, or any
rights acquired, or liability incurred, or any cause or causes of action
acquired or existing, under any act or ordinance hereby repealed as cited
in § 200-8 of this chapter, nor shall any just or legal right or remedy of any
character be lost, impaired or affected by this chapter.
§ 200-11. Publishing of summary.
That the Fire Code Official is hereby ordered and directed to cause a
summary of this chapter to be published one time in a newspaper of general
circulation and make available its full content to the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 200-12. When effective.
This chapter and the rules, regulations, provisions, requirements, orders
and matters established and adopted hereby shall take effect and be in full
force and effect 30 days from and after the date of its final passage and
adoption.
34.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 200-7 through 200-11 as
§§ 200-8 through 200-12, respectively.
§ 200-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 200-12
1:98
Chapter 202
FIRE SAFETY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Fire prevention — See Ch. 200.
§ 200-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 200-12
1:99

ARTICLE I
Fire Safety and Emergency Equipment Inspections Program
[Adopted 7-7-2014 by Ord. No. 793]
§ 202-1. Program authorized; applicability.
A program of fire safety and emergency equipment inspection is authorized
for the following facilities located in the Borough of Hellertown: industrial
facilities, commercial facilities, retail businesses, banks and all other
facilities used for retail, wholesale, educational and daycare purposes, and
places of worship.
§ 202-2. Jurisdiction.
The program will be a cooperative endeavor between the Borough and the
community under the jurisdiction of the Code Enforcement Officer and Fire
Code Official of Hellertown Borough.
§ 202-3. Frequency of inspections.
The Fire Safety and Emergency Equipment inspections shall be performed
every five years, and more frequently, if at the discretion of the Fire Code
Official, such more frequent inspection of a property or properties subject
to this article is required. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner
to have said inspection performed.
§ 202-4. Code adopted by reference; inspection matters.
A. The Borough Council of Hellertown Borough hereby adopts and
incorporates by reference, as if set out at length herein, for the purpose
of prescribing regulations to safeguard life and property from the
hazards of fire and explosion arising from the storage, handling and use
of hazardous substances, materials, and devices and from conditions
hazardous to life or property in the use or occupancy of buildings or
premises, that certain code known as the 2009 Edition of the
International Fire Code, as published by the International Code
Council, Inc., and as amended from time to time. The facilities will be
evaluated in accordance with the 2009 International Fire Code during
the inspections.
B. The inspections shall include, but need not be limited to, the following
matters:
(1) Fire suppression and alarm systems.
(2) Means of egress.
(3) Fire Department access.
(4) Electric service and panels.
(5) Utility and storage areas.
§ 202-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-4
1:101
§ 202-5. Fee.
The fee for the fire safety and emergency equipment inspections shall
be established as set forth in the Hellertown Borough Fee Schedule, as
amended from time to time.
§ 202-6. Board of Appeals.
A Board of Appeals has been established in conformity with the requirement
of the relevant provisions of the International Fire Code, and for the
purposes set forth therein.
§ 202-7. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(6) Commercial cooking.
(7) Emergency planning.
(8) Storage and handling of hazardous substances and materials.
(9) Any other aspect of a building or operation regulated by the 2009
International Fire Code, as amended.
A. The provisions of this article shall be enforced by the Hellertown
Borough Council or its designee. The owner or occupier of any use
required to comply with the terms of this article who shall fail to comply
herewith shall be in violation of this article. Violations of this article
shall be enforced by an action brought by citation and tried before a
Magisterial District Justice in the same manner provided for the
enforcement of summary offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure.
B. Upon conviction in a summary proceeding, the violator shall be subject
to a fine not exceeding $1,000 per violation and/or imprisonment for up
to 30 days in the Northampton County Correctional Facility.
C. Violations of this article include but are not limited to the failure to
permit an inspection, failure to pay the inspection fee and failure to
correct any deficiencies noted during an inspection within the required
time frame.
D. The imposition of any one penalty for any violations shall not excuse the
violation or permit it to continue, and all persons who violate any of the
provisions of this article shall be required to correct or remedy such
violation or defect within a reasonable time period, but in no event shall
a violation remain uncured for longer than 45 days. When not otherwise
specified, a separate offense shall be deemed to have been committed
on each day during which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
§ 202-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 202-8
1:102
§ 202-8. Liability.
This Fire Safety and Emergency Equipment Inspection Ordinance shall not
be construed to affect the responsibility of any party owning, operating,
maintaining or installing any equipment, or owning, operating or
maintaining any building, for injuries or damage to persons or property
caused by any defect therein; nor shall the Borough be held to assume any
liability by reason of an inspection or reinspection authorized herein by
reason of a permit issued or by reason of the approval or disapproval of any
building or equipment; nor does the Borough assume liability for any death
or personal injury or property damage alleged to have arisen in connection
with any of the places and things inspected and detailed in § 202-4 above,
whereupon it is claimed that an inspection was improperly performed or
that a permit was improperly granted.
§ 202-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 202-8
1:103
Chapter 203
FIREWORKS
§ 203-1. Adoption.
The Borough of Hellertown hereby adopts Act 43 of 2017, and as
amended,35 as its Fireworks Law within the jurisdiction of the Borough of
Hellertown for regulating the use of consumer fireworks.
§ 203-2. Ignition or discharge of fireworks prohibited.
As a result of the "whereas" clauses above,36 which are incorporated herein,
it is hereby ordained and enacted that no person shall be permitted to
ignite or discharge consumer fireworks on the streets of the Borough of
Hellertown, the sidewalks of the Borough of Hellertown or any property
owned by the Borough of Hellertown, including, without limitation, all of the
Borough's parks and public buildings.
§ 203-3. Permitted hours of use.
Consumer fireworks, as permitted by Act 43 of 2017,37 on Borough-owned
property shall not be ignited or discharged after the hour of 10:00 p.m.
§ 203-4. Removal, storage and destruction.
Pursuant to Section 2415 of Act 43,38 the Borough of Hellertown police shall
take, remove or cause to be removed and destroyed at the expense of the
owner all stocks of consumer fireworks or display fireworks or combustibles
in the owner's possession when an owner is in violation of this chapter. The
owner shall also be responsible for the storage and, if deemed necessary,
the destruction of those fireworks.
§ 203-5. Penalties.
Pursuant to 8 Pa.C.S.A. § 3321, any person who fails to comply with the
provisions of this chapter commits a summary offense, and upon conviction
shall pay a fine to the Borough of Hellertown not to exceed $1,000 per
violation and may be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law for the
punishment of a summary offense.
35.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
36.Editor's Note: Refers to the "whereas" clauses of Ord. No. 824, a complete copy of which is
on file in the Borough offices.
37.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9401 et seq.
38.Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 9415.
§ 202-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 203-5
1:104
Chapter 204
FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Uniform Construction Codes — See Ch. 160.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 278.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 203-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 203-5
1:105

ARTICLE I
Statutory Authorization
§ 204-1. Legislative authority.
The Legislature of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania has, by the passage
of the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act of 1978,39 delegated the
responsibility to local governmental units to adopt floodplain management
regulations to promote public health, safety, and the general welfare of its
citizenry. Therefore, the Council of the Borough of Hellertown does hereby
order as follows.
39.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 204-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-1
1:107

ARTICLE II
General Provisions
§ 204-2. Intent.
The intent of this chapter is to:
§ 204-3. Applicability.
§ 204-4. Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter supersedes any other conflicting provisions which may be
in effect in identified floodplain areas. However, any other ordinance
provisions shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that those
provisions are more restrictive. If there is any conflict between any of the
provisions of this chapter, the more restrictive shall apply.
§ 204-5. Severability.
If any section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase of this
chapter shall be declared invalid for any reason whatsoever, such a decision
shall not affect the remaining portions of the ordinance, which shall remain
in full force and effect, and for this purpose the provisions of this chapter
are hereby declared to be severable.
§ 204-6. Warning and disclaimer of liability.
A. Promote the general health, welfare, and safety of the community.
B. Encourage the utilization of appropriate construction practices in order
to prevent or minimize flood damage in the future.
C. Minimize danger to public health by protecting water supply and
natural drainage.
D. Reduce financial burdens imposed on the community, its governmental
units, and its residents, by preventing excessive development in areas
subject to flooding.
E. Comply with federal and state floodplain management requirements.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person, partnership, business or corporation
to undertake, or cause to be undertaken, any construction or
development anywhere within the Borough of Hellertown unless a
permit has been obtained from the Zoning Officer.
B. A permit shall not be required for minor repairs to existing buildings or
structures, provided that no structural changes or modifications are
involved.
A. The degree of flood protection sought by the provisions of this chapter
is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
§ 204-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-6
1:109
accepted engineering methods of study. Larger floods may occur or
flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes, such
as ice jams and bridge openings restricted by debris. This chapter does
not imply that areas outside any identified floodplain areas, or that land
uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood
damages.
B. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the Borough of
Hellertown or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages
that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
§ 204-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-6
1:110
ARTICLE III
Administration
§ 204-7. Designation of Floodplain Administrator.
§ 204-8. Permits required.
A permit shall be required before any construction or development is
undertaken within any area of the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 204-9. Duties and responsibilities of Floodplain Administrator.
A. The Zoning Officer, unless otherwise designated by Borough Council, is
hereby appointed to administer and enforce this chapter and is referred
to herein as the Floodplain Administrator. The Floodplain Administrator
may fulfill the duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations,
delegate duties and responsibilities set forth in these regulations to
qualified technical personnel, plan examiners, inspectors, and other
employees, or enter into a written agreement or written contract with
another agency or private sector entity to administer specific provisions
of these regulations. Administration of any part of these regulations by
another entity shall not relieve the community of its responsibilities
pursuant to the participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program as set forth in the Code of Federal Regulations at 44
CFR 59.22.
B. In the absence of a designated Floodplain Administrator, the Floodplain
Administrator duties are to be fulfilled by the President of Council.
A. The Floodplain Administrator shall issue a permit only after it has been
determined that the proposed work to be undertaken will be in
conformance with the requirements of this and all other applicable
codes and ordinances.
B. Prior to the issuance of any permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review the application for the permit to determine if all other necessary
government permits required by state and federal laws have been
obtained, such as those required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities
Act (Act 1966-537, as amended);40 the Pennsylvania Dam Safety and
Encroachments Act (Act 1978-325, as amended);41 the Pennsylvania
Clean Streams Act (Act 1937-394, as amended);42 and the U.S. Clean
Water Act, Section 404, 33 U.S.C. § 1344. No permit shall be issued
until this determination has been made.
C. In the case of existing structures, prior to the issuance of any
development permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall review the
40.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 750.1 et seq.
41.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 693.1 et seq.
42.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 204-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-9
1:111
§ 204-10. Application procedures and requirements.
history of repairs to the subject building, so that any repetitive loss
issues can be addressed before the permit is issued.
D. During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator or other
authorized official shall inspect the premises to determine that the work
is progressing in compliance with the information provided on the
permit application and with all applicable municipal laws and
ordinances. He/she shall make as many inspections during and upon
completion of the work as are necessary.
E. In the discharge of his/her duties, the Floodplain Administrator shall
have the authority to enter any building, structure, premises or
development in the identified floodplain area, upon presentation of
proper credentials, at any reasonable hour to enforce the provisions of
this chapter.
F. In the event the Floodplain Administrator discovers that the work does
not comply with the permit application or any applicable laws and
ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by any applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
revoke the permit and report such fact to the Borough Council for
whatever action it considers necessary.
G. The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain in perpetuity all records
associated with the requirements of this chapter, including, but not
limited to, permitting, inspection and enforcement.
H. The Floodplain Administrator shall consider the requirements of the 34
PA Code and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or latest revisions thereof.
A. Application for such a permit shall be made, in writing, to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms supplied by the Borough of
Hellertown. Such application shall contain the following:
(1) Name, address, phone number, and email (if available) of applicant.
(2) Name, address, phone number, and email (if available) of owner of
land on which proposed construction is to occur.
(3) Name, address, phone number, and email (if available) of
contractor.
(4) Site location including address.
(5) Listing of other permits required.
(6) Brief description of proposed work and estimated cost, including a
breakout of flood-related cost and the market value of the building
before the flood damage occurred, where appropriate.
§ 204-9 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-10
1:112
(7) A plan of the site showing the exact size and location of the
proposed construction as well as any existing buildings or
structures.
B. If any proposed construction or development is located entirely or
partially within any identified floodplain area, applicants for permits
shall provide all the necessary information in sufficient detail and
clarity to enable the Floodplain Administrator to determine that:
(1) All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood
damage and conform with the requirements of this and all other
applicable codes and ordinances.
(2) All utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water
systems are located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood
damage.
(3) Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood
hazards.
(4) Structures will be anchored to prevent floatation, collapse, or
lateral movement.
(5) Building materials are flood resistant.
(6) Appropriate practices that minimize flood damage have been used.
(7) Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, air-conditioning
equipment, and other service facilities have been designed and
located to prevent water entry or accumulation.
C. Applicants shall file the following minimum information plus any other
pertinent information as may be required by the Floodplain
Administrator to make the above determination:
(1) A completed permit application form.
(2) A plan of the entire site, clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of one
inch being equal to 30 feet or less, showing the following:
(a) North arrow, scale, and date;
(b) Topographic contour lines;
(c) The location of all existing and proposed buildings, structures,
and other improvements, including the location of any existing
or proposed subdivision and development;
(d) The location of all existing streets, drives, and other
accessways; and
(e) The location of any existing bodies of water or watercourses,
identified floodplain areas, and, if available, information
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-10
1:113
pertaining to the floodway, and the flow of water, including
direction and velocities.
(3) Plans of all proposed buildings, structures and other
improvements, drawn at suitable scale showing the following:
(a) The proposed lowest floor elevation of any proposed building
based upon North American Vertical Datum of 1988;
(b) The elevation of the base flood;
(c) Supplemental information as may be necessary under 34 PA
Code, the 2009 IBC or the 2009 IRC.
(4) The following data and documentation:
(a) If available, information concerning flood depths, pressures,
velocities, impact and uplift forces and other factors associated
with a base flood.
(b) Detailed information concerning any proposed floodproofing
measures and corresponding elevations.
(c) Documentation, certified by a registered professional engineer
or architect, to show that the cumulative effect of any proposed
development within an AE Area/District without floodway (See
§ 204-22B.), when combined with all other existing and
anticipated development, will not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point.
(d) A document, certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, which states that the proposed construction or
development has been adequately designed to withstand the
pressures, velocities, impact and uplift forces associated with
the base flood. Such statement shall include a description of
the type and extent of floodproofing measures which have been
incorporated into the design of the structure and/or the
development.
(e) Detailed information needed to determine compliance with
§ 204-28F, Storage, and § 204-29, Development which may
endanger human life, including:
[1] The amount, location and purpose of any materials or
substances referred to in §§ 204-28F and 204-29 which are
intended to be used, produced, stored or otherwise
maintained on site.
[2] A description of the safeguards incorporated into the
design of the proposed structure to prevent leaks or spills
of the dangerous materials or substances listed in § 204-29
during a base flood.
§ 204-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-10
1:114
§ 204-11. Review by County Conservation District.
A copy of all applications and plans for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
shall be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to the County
Conservation District for review and comment prior to the issuance of
a permit. The recommendations of the Conservation District shall be
considered by the Floodplain Administrator for possible incorporation into
the proposed plan.
§ 204-12. Review of application by others.
A copy of all plans and applications for any proposed construction or
development in any identified floodplain area to be considered for approval
may be submitted by the Floodplain Administrator to any other appropriate
agencies and/or individuals (e.g., Planning Commission, municipal engineer,
etc.) for review and comment.
§ 204-13. Other permitted issuance requirements.
Prior to the issuance of any permit, the applicant shall apply for and
obtain all other necessary government permits, such as those required by
commonwealth and federal laws. Copies of such approvals shall be provided
to the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 204-14. Changes.
After the issuance of a permit by the Floodplain Administrator, no changes
of any kind shall be made to the application, permit or any of the plans,
specifications or other documents submitted with the application without
the written consent or approval of the Floodplain Administrator. Requests
for any such change shall be in writing and shall be submitted by the
applicant to Floodplain Administrator for consideration.
§ 204-15. Placards.
In addition to the permit, the Floodplain Administrator shall issue a placard
which shall be displayed on the premises during the time construction is in
progress. This placard shall show the number of the permit, the date of its
issuance and be signed by the Floodplain Administrator.
§ 204-16. Start of construction.
(f) The appropriate component of the Department of
Environmental Protection's "Planning Module for Land
Development."
(g) Where any excavation or grading is proposed, a plan meeting
the requirements of the Department of Environmental
Protection to implement and maintain erosion and
sedimentation control.
§ 204-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-16
1:115
§ 204-17. Inspection and revocation.
During the construction period, the Floodplain Administrator, Building
Codes Official, or other Borough-authorized official may inspect the
premises to determine that the work is progressing in compliance with
the information provided on the permit application and with all applicable
Borough laws and ordinances. In the event the inspection reveals that
the work does not comply with the permit application or any applicable
laws and ordinances, or that there has been a false statement or
misrepresentation by an applicant, the Floodplain Administrator shall
provide notice and assess a penalty per § 204-19, Enforcement; violations
and penalties.
§ 204-18. Fees.
Applications for a permit shall be accompanied by a fee, payable to the
Borough. Such fee shall be in the amount as specified by Borough Council
resolution or ordinance.
§ 204-19. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
A. Work on the proposed construction or development shall begin within
180 days after the date of issuance and shall be completed within 12
months after the date of issuance of the permit or the permit shall
expire unless a time extension is granted, in writing, by the Floodplain
Administrator. The actual start of construction means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as
the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent
construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling, nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways, nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings,
piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms, nor does it
include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or
other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects
the external dimensions of the building.
B. Time extensions shall be granted only if a written request is submitted
by the applicant, which sets forth sufficient and reasonable cause for
the Floodplain Administrator to approve such a request, and the
original permit is compliant with the ordinance and FIRM/FIS in effect
at the time the extension is granted.
A. Notices. Whenever the Floodplain Administrator or other authorized
municipal representative determines that there are reasonable grounds
to believe that there has been a violation of any provisions of this
§ 204-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-19
1:116
§ 204-20. Appeals.
chapter, or of any regulations adopted pursuant thereto, the Floodplain
Administrator shall give notice of such alleged violation as hereinafter
provided. Such notice shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a statement of the reasons for its issuance;
(3) Allow a reasonable time not to exceed a period of 30 days for the
performance of any act it requires;
(4) Be served upon the property owner or his agent as the case may
require; provided, however, that such notice or order shall be
deemed to have been properly served upon such owner or agent
when a copy thereof has been served with such notice by any other
method authorized or required by the laws of this state;
(5) Contain an outline of remedial actions which, if taken, will effect
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Penalties. Any person who fails to comply with any or all of the
requirements or provisions of this chapter or who fails or refuses to
comply with any notice, order of direction of the Floodplain
Administrator or any other authorized employee of the municipality
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall pay a fine
to the Borough of Hellertown of not less than $25 nor more than $600
plus costs of prosecution. In addition to the above penalties, all other
actions are hereby reserved, including an action in equity for the proper
enforcement of this chapter. The imposition of a fine or penalty for any
violation of, or noncompliance with, this chapter shall not excuse the
violation or noncompliance or permit it to continue, and all such
persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations and
noncompliance within a reasonable time. Any development initiated or
any structure or building constructed, reconstructed, enlarged, altered,
or relocated, in noncompliance with this chapter, may be declared by
the Borough Council to be a public nuisance and abatable as such.
A. Any person aggrieved by any action or decision of the Floodplain
Administrator concerning the administration of the provisions of this
chapter may appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board. Such appeal must be
filed, in writing, within 30 days after the decision, determination or
action of the Floodplain Administrator.
B. Upon receipt of such appeal, the Zoning Hearing Board shall set a time
and place, within not less than 10, or not more than 30 days, for the
purpose of considering the appeal. Notice of the time and place at
which the appeal will be considered shall be given to all parties.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Zoning Hearing Board may
seek relief therefrom by appeal to court, as provided by the laws of this
§ 204-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-20
1:117
commonwealth, including the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management
Act.43
43.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 204-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-20
1:118
ARTICLE IV
Identification of Floodplain Areas
§ 204-21. Identification.
§ 204-22. Description and special requirements of identified
floodplain areas.
The identified floodplain area shall consist of the following specific areas:
A. The identified floodplain area shall be any areas of the Borough of
Hellertown classified as special flood hazard areas (SFHAs) in the Flood
Insurance Study (FIS) and the accompanying Flood Insurance Rate
Maps (FIRMs) dated July 16, 2014, and issued by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), or the most recent revision
thereof, including all digital data developed as part of the Flood
Insurance Study and any Borough-identified flood hazard areas, if so
outlined.
B. The above-referenced FIS and FIRMs, and any subsequent revisions
and amendments, are hereby adopted by the Borough of Hellertown
and declared to be a part of this chapter.
A. The Floodway Area/District shall be those areas identified as
"Floodway" on the FIRM as well as those floodway areas which have
been identified in other available studies or sources of information for
those special flood hazard areas where no floodway has been identified
in the FIS. The floodway represents the channel of a watercourse and
the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the
base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation
by more than one foot at any point.
(1) Within any floodway area, no encroachments, including fill, new
construction, substantial improvements, or other development
shall be permitted unless it has been demonstrated through
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis performed in accordance with
standard engineering practice that the proposed encroachment
would not result in any increase in flood levels within the
community during the occurrence of the base flood discharge.
(2) No new construction or development shall be allowed, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental
Protection regional office.
B. AE Area without floodway shall be those areas identified as an AE Zone
on the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA for which base
flood elevations have been provided but no floodway has been
determined.
(1) No permit shall be granted for any construction, development, use,
or activity within any AE Area/District without floodway unless it is
demonstrated that the cumulative effect of the proposed
§ 204-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-22
1:119
§ 204-23. Changes in identification of area.
The identified floodplain area may be revised or modified by the Borough
Council where studies or information provided by a qualified agency or
person documents the need for such revision. However, prior to any such
change to the special flood hazard area, approval must be obtained from
FEMA. Additionally, as soon as practicable, but not later than six months
after the date such information becomes available, a community shall notify
FEMA of the changes to the special flood hazard area by submitting
development would not, together with all other existing and
anticipated development, increase the BFE more than one foot at
any point.
(2) No new construction or development shall be located within the
area measured 50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any
watercourse, unless the appropriate permit is obtained from the
Department of Environmental Protection regional office.
C. A Area/District.
(1) The A Area/District shall be those areas identified as an A Zone on
the FIRM included in the FIS prepared by FEMA and for which no
one-percent annual chance flood elevations have been provided.
For these areas, elevation and floodway information from other
federal, state, or other acceptable source shall be used when
available. Where other acceptable information is not available, the
elevation shall be determined by using the elevation of a point on
the boundary of the identified floodplain area which is nearest the
construction site.
(2) In lieu of the above, the municipality may require the applicant to
determine the elevation with hydrologic and hydraulic engineering
techniques. Hydrologic and hydraulic analyses shall be undertaken
only by professional engineers or others of demonstrated
qualifications, who shall certify that the technical methods used
correctly reflect currently accepted technical concepts. Studies,
analyses, computations, etc., shall be submitted in sufficient detail
to allow a thorough technical review by the municipality.
D. Community identified flood hazard areas shall be those areas where
Hellertown Borough has identified local flood hazard or ponding areas,
as delineated and adopted on a Local Flood Hazard Map, using best
available topographic data and locally derived information such as flood
of record, historic high water marks, soils or approximate study
methodologies.
E. The X Zone shall be those areas identified as other flood areas on the
FIRM and for which have been designated as having 0.2% annual
change flood.
§ 204-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-23
1:120
technical or scientific data. See § 204-26B for situations where FEMA
notification is required.
§ 204-24. Boundary disputes.
Should a dispute concerning any identified floodplain boundary arise, an
initial determination shall be made by the Floodplain Administrator, and any
party aggrieved by this decision or determination may appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board. The burden of proof shall be on the appellant.
§ 204-25. Jurisdictional boundary changes.
Prior to development occurring in areas where annexation or other
corporate boundary changes are proposed or have occurred, the community
shall review flood hazard data affecting the lands subject to boundary
changes. The community shall adopt and enforce floodplain regulations in
areas subject to annexation or corporate boundary changes which meet or
exceed those in 44 CFR 60.3.
§ 204-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-25
1:121

ARTICLE V
Technical Provisions
§ 204-26. General requirements.
A. Alteration or relocation of watercourse.
(1) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse until all adjacent municipalities which
may be affected by such action have been notified by the
municipality, and until all required permits or approvals have been
first obtained from the commonwealth.
(2) No encroachment, alteration, or improvement of any kind shall be
made to any watercourse unless it can be shown that the activity
will not reduce or impede the flood carrying capacity of the
watercourse in any way.
(3) In addition, FEMA and the Pennsylvania Department of Community
and Economic Development shall be notified prior to any alteration
or relocation of any watercourse.
B. Letters of map revision.
(1) Technical or scientific data shall be submitted by the applicant to
FEMA for a letter of map revision (LOMR) as soon as practicable
but within six months of any new construction, development, or
other activity resulting in changes in the BFE. The situations when
a LOMR or a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) are
required are:
(a) Any development that causes a rise in the base flood elevations
within the floodway; or
(b) Any development occurring in Zones A, X, and AE without a
designated floodway, which will cause a rise of more than one
foot in the base flood elevation; or
(c) Alteration or relocation of a stream (including but not limited
to installing culverts and bridges).
(2) The applicant shall (as per 44 CFR 65.12):
(a) Apply to FEMA for conditional approval of such action prior to
permitting the encroachments to occur.
(b) Upon receipt of the Administrator's conditional approval of
map change and prior to approving the proposed
encroachments, a community shall provide evidence to FEMA
of the adoption of floodplain management ordinances
incorporating the increased base flood elevations and/or
revised floodway reflecting the post-project condition.
§ 204-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-26
1:123
§ 204-27. Elevation and floodproofing requirements.
(c) Upon completion of the proposed encroachments, a community
shall provide as-built certifications. FEMA will initiate a final
map revision upon receipt of such certifications in accordance
with 44 CFR 67.
C. Any new construction, development, uses or activities allowed within
any identified floodplain area shall be undertaken in strict compliance
with the provisions contained in this chapter and any other applicable
codes, ordinances and regulations.
D. Within any identified floodplain area (See § 204-22), no new
construction or development shall be located within the area measured
50 feet landward from the top-of-bank of any watercourse, unless a
permit is obtained from the Department of Environmental Protection
regional office.
A. Residential structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement
shall have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to 1.5
feet above the base flood elevation.
(2) In A Zones, where there are no base flood elevations specified on
the FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated up to 1.5 feet
above the base flood elevation determined in accordance with
§ 204-22C of this chapter.
(3) In X Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have the lowest floor (including basement) at or above the highest
adjacent grade at least as high as the depth number specified on
the FIRM.
(4) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC), or the most recent
revisions thereof, and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
B. Nonresidential structures.
(1) In AE Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement of a
nonresidential structure shall have the lowest floor (including
basement) elevated up to 1.5 feet above the base flood elevation or
be designed and constructed so that the space enclosed below the
regulatory flood elevation:
(a) Is floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water; and
§ 204-26 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-27
1:124
(b) Has structural components with the capability of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy.
(2) In A Zones, where no base flood elevations are specified on the
FIRM, any new construction or substantial improvement shall have
the lowest floor (including basement) elevated or completely
floodproofed up to 1.5 feet above the base flood elevation
determined in accordance with § 204-22C of this chapter.
(3) In X Zones, any new construction or substantial improvement shall
have its lowest floor elevated or completely floodproofed above the
highest adjacent grade to at least as high as the depth number
specified on the FIRM.
(4) Any nonresidential structure, or part thereof, made watertight
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be floodproofed in
accordance with the W1 or W2 space classification standards
contained in the publication entitled "Flood-Proofing Regulations,"
published by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (June 1972, as
amended March 1992) or with some other equivalent standard. All
plans and specifications for such floodproofing shall be
accompanied by a statement certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect which states that the proposed design and
methods of construction are in conformance with the abovereferenced
standards.
(5) The design and construction standards and specifications
contained in the 2009 International Building Code (IBC) and in the
2009 International Residential Code (IRC) or the most recent
revisions thereof and ASCE 24 and 34 Pa. Code (Chapters 401
through 405, as amended) shall be utilized.
C. Space below the lowest floor.
(1) Fully enclosed space below the lowest floor (excluding basements)
which will be used solely for the parking of a vehicle, building
access, or incidental storage in an area other than a basement shall
be designed and constructed to allow for the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters for the purpose of equalizing hydrostatic forces
on exterior walls. The term "fully enclosed space" also includes
crawl spaces.
(2) Designs for meeting this requirement must either be certified by a
registered professional engineer or architect or meet or exceed the
following minimum criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 204-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-27
1:125
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices, provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
D. Historic structures. Historic structures undergoing repair or
rehabilitation that would constitute a substantial improvement as
defined in this chapter, must comply with all ordinance requirements
that do not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic
structure. Documentation that a specific ordinance requirement will
cause removal of the structure from the National Register of Historic
Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places must be obtained from
the Secretary of the Interior or the State Historic Preservation Officer.
Any exemption from ordinance requirements will be the minimum
necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure.
E. Accessory structures. Structures accessory to a principal building need
not be elevated or floodproofed to remain dry, but shall comply, at a
minimum, with the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall not be designed or used for human habitation,
but shall be limited to the parking of vehicles, or to the storage of
tools, material, and equipment related to the principal use or
activity.
(2) Floor area shall not exceed 200 square feet.
(3) The structure will have a low damage potential.
(4) The structure will be located on the site so as to cause the least
obstruction to the flow of floodwaters.
(5) Power lines, wiring, and outlets will be elevated to the regulatory
flood elevation.
(6) Permanently affixed utility equipment and appliances such as
furnaces, heaters, washers, dryers, etc., are prohibited.
(7) Sanitary facilities are prohibited.
(8) The structure shall be adequately anchored to prevent flotation or
movement and shall be designed to automatically provide for the
entry and exit of floodwater for the purpose of equalizing
hydrostatic forces on the walls. Designs for meeting this
requirement must either be certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect, or meet or exceed the following minimum
criteria:
(a) A minimum of two openings having a net total area of not less
than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed space.
(b) The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot
above grade.
§ 204-27 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-27
1:126
§ 204-28. Design and construction standards.
The following minimum standards shall apply for all construction and
development proposed within any identified floodplain area:
(c) Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, etc., or other
coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic
entry and exit of floodwaters.
A. Fill.
(1) Within any identified floodplain area, the use of fill shall be
prohibited, unless the applicant:
(a) Shows hardship for requiring fill;
(b) Demonstrates through hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
performed in accordance with standard engineering practice
that the proposed encroachment would not result in any
increase in flood levels within the community during the
occurrence of the base flood discharge; and
(c) Obtains Borough Council approval.
(2) If fill is used, it shall:
(a) Extend laterally at least 15 feet beyond the building line from
all points;
(b) Consist of soil or small rock materials only; sanitary landfills
shall not be permitted;
(c) Be compacted to provide the necessary permeability and
resistance to erosion, scouring, or settling;
(d) Be no steeper than one vertical foot to two horizontal feet
unless substantiated data justifying steeper slopes are
submitted to and approved by the Floodplain Administrator;
and
(e) Be used to the extent to which it does not adversely affect
adjacent properties.
B. Drainage facilities. Storm drainage facilities shall be designed to
convey the flow of stormwater runoff in a safe and efficient manner. The
system shall insure proper drainage along streets, and provide positive
drainage away from buildings. The system shall also be designed to
prevent the discharge or alter the flow of runoff onto adjacent
properties.
C. Water and sanitary sewer facilities and systems.
§ 204-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-28
1:127
(1) All new or replacement water supply and sanitary sewer facilities
and systems shall be located, designed and constructed to minimize
or eliminate flood damages and the infiltration of floodwaters.
(2) Sanitary sewer facilities and systems shall be designed to prevent
the discharge of untreated sewage into floodwaters.
(3) No part of any on-site sewage system shall be located within any
identified floodplain area except in strict compliance with all state
and local regulations for such systems. If any such system is
permitted, it shall be located so as to avoid impairment to it, or
contamination from it, during a flood.
(4) The design and construction provisions of the UCC and FEMA No.
348, Protecting Building Utilities From Flood Damages, and the
International Private Sewage Disposal Code shall be utilized.
D. Other utilities. All other utilities such as gas lines, electrical and
telephone systems shall be located, elevated (where possible) and
constructed to minimize the chance of impairment during a flood.
E. Streets. The finished elevation of all new streets shall be no more than
one foot below the regulatory flood elevation.
F. Storage. All materials that are buoyant, flammable, explosive, or in
times of flooding could be injurious to human, animal, or plant life, and
not listed in § 204-29, Development which may endanger human life,
shall be stored at or above the regulatory flood elevation or
floodproofed to the maximum extent possible.
G. Placement of buildings and structures. All buildings and structures
shall be designed, located, and constructed so as to offer the minimum
obstruction to the flow of water and shall be designed to have a
minimum effect upon the flow and height of floodwater.
H. Anchoring.
(1) All buildings and structures shall be firmly anchored in accordance
with accepted engineering practices to prevent flotation, collapse,
or lateral movement.
(2) All air ducts, large pipes, storage tanks, and other similar objects or
components located below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
securely anchored or affixed to prevent flotation.
I. Floors, walls and ceilings.
(1) Wood flooring used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be installed to accommodate a lateral expansion of the flooring,
perpendicular to the flooring grain, without causing structural
damage to the building.
§ 204-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-28
1:128
(2) Plywood used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be of
a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) Walls and ceilings at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall
be designed and constructed of materials that are water-resistant
and will withstand inundation.
(4) Windows, doors, and other components at or below the regulatory
flood elevation shall be made of metal or other water-resistant
material.
J. Paints and adhesives.
(1) Paints and other finishes used at or below the regulatory flood
elevation shall be of marine or water-resistant quality.
(2) Adhesives used at or below the regulatory flood elevation shall be
of a marine or water-resistant variety.
(3) All wooden components (doors, trim, cabinets, etc.) used at or
below the regulatory flood elevation shall be finished with a marine
or water-resistant paint or other finishing material.
K. Electrical components.
(1) Electrical distribution panels shall be at least three feet above the
base flood elevation.
(2) Separate electrical circuits shall serve lower levels and shall be
dropped from above.
L. Equipment. Water heaters, furnaces, air-conditioning and ventilating
units, and other electrical, mechanical or utility equipment or
apparatus shall not be located below the regulatory flood elevation.
M. Fuel supply systems. All gas and oil supply systems shall be designed to
prevent the infiltration of floodwaters into the system and discharges
from the system into floodwaters. Additional provisions shall be made
for the drainage of these systems in the event that floodwater
infiltration occurs.
N. Uniform Construction Code coordination.
(1) The standards and specifications contained in 34 Pa. Code
(Chapters 401 through 405), as amended and not limited to the
following provisions, shall apply to the above and other sections
and subsections of this chapter, to the extent that they are more
restrictive and supplement the requirements of this chapter.
(2) International Building Code (IBC) 2009 or the latest edition
thereof: Sections 801, 1202, 1403, 1603, 1605, 1612, 3402, and
Appendix G.
§ 204-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-28
1:129
§ 204-29. Development which may endanger human life.
(3) International Residential Building Code (IRC) 2009 or the latest
edition thereof: Sections R104, R105, R109, R323, Appendix
AE101, Appendix E and Appendix J.
A. In accordance with the Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,44
and the regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development as required by the Act, any new or substantially
improved structure which Will be used for the production or storage of
any of the following dangerous materials or substances, or Will be used
for any activity requiring the maintenance of a supply of more than 550
gallons, or other comparable volume, of any of the following dangerous
materials or substances on the premises, or Will involve the production,
storage, or use of any amount of radioactive substances shall be subject
to the provisions of this section, in addition to all other applicable
provisions.
(1) The following list of materials and substances are considered
dangerous to human life:
(a) Acetone.
(b) Ammonia.
(c) Benzene.
(d) Calcium carbide.
(e) Carbon disulfide.
(f) Celluloid.
(g) Chlorine.
(h) Hydrochloric acid.
(i) Hydrocyanic acid.
(j) Magnesium.
(k) Nitric acid and oxides of nitrogen.
(l) Petroleum products (gasoline, fuel oil, etc.).
(m) Phosphorus.
(n) Potassium.
(o) Sodium.
(p) Sulphur and sulphur products.
44.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 204-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-29
1:130
§ 204-30. Special requirements for subdivisions.
All subdivision proposals and development proposals containing at least 50
lots or at least five acres, whichever is the lesser, in identified floodplain
areas where base flood elevation data are not available, shall be supported
by hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analyses that determine base flood
elevations and floodway information. The analyses shall be prepared by
a licensed professional engineer in a format required by FEMA for a
conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision. Submittal
requirements and processing fees shall be the responsibility of the
applicant.
§ 204-31. Special requirements for manufactured homes.
(q) Pesticides (including insecticides, fungicides, and
rodenticides).
(r) Radioactive substances, insofar as such substances are not
otherwise regulated.
(2) Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially
improved structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above,
shall be prohibited. If a variance is obtained in accordance with the
criteria in Article VIII, then the following provisions apply.
B. Within any Floodway Area, any structure of the kind described in
Subsection A, above, shall be prohibited.
C. Within any identified floodplain area, any new or substantially improved
structure of the kind described in Subsection A, above, shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
D. New or improved structures.
(1) Where previously permitted within any identified floodplain area,
any new or substantially improved structure of the kind described
in Subsection A, above, shall be:
(a) Elevated, or in the case of a nonresidential structure elevated
or designed, and constructed to remain completely dry up to at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(b) Designed to prevent pollution from the structure or activity
during the course of a base flood.
(2) Any such structure, or part thereof, that will be built below the
regulatory flood elevation shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards for completely dry floodproofing
contained in the publication "Flood-Proofing Regulations" (U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers, June 1972 as amended March 1992), or
with some other equivalent watertight standard.
§ 204-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-31
1:131
§ 204-32. Special requirements for recreational vehicles.
Recreational vehicles in Zone A or AE must either:
A. Within any Floodway Area/District, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited.
B. Within any identified floodplain areas, manufactured homes shall be
prohibited within the area measured 50 feet landward from the top-ofbank
of any watercourse.
C. Where permitted within any identified floodplain area, all manufactured
homes, and any improvements thereto, shall be:
(1) Placed on a permanent foundation.
(2) Elevated so that the lowest floor of the manufactured home is at
least 1 1/2 feet above base flood elevation.
(3) Anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement.
D. Installation of manufactured homes shall be done in accordance with
the manufacturers' installation instructions as provided by the
manufacturer. Where the applicant cannot provide the above
information, the requirements of Appendix E of the 2009 International
Residential Building Code or the U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development's Permanent Foundations for Manufactured
Housing, 1984 Edition, draft or latest revision thereto, shall apply and
34 Pa. Code, Chapter 401 through 405.
E. Consideration shall be given to the installation requirements of the
2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC, or the most recent revisions thereto, and
34 Pa. Code, as amended, where appropriate and/or applicable to units
where the manufacturers' standards for anchoring cannot be provided
or were not established for the unit's proposed installation.
A. Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days;
B. Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
C. Meet the permit requirements for manufactured homes in § 204-31.
§ 204-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-32
1:132
ARTICLE VI
Prohibited Activities
§ 204-33. General.
In accordance with the administrative regulations promulgated by the
Department of Community and Economic Development to implement the
Pennsylvania Flood Plain Management Act,45 the following activities shall
be prohibited within any identified floodplain area:
A. The commencement of any of the following activities or the
construction, enlargement, or expansion of any structure used, or
intended to be used, for any of the following activities:
(1) Hospitals.
(2) Nursing homes.
(3) Jails or prisons.
B. The commencement of, or any construction of, a new manufactured
home park or manufactured home subdivision, or substantial
improvement to an existing manufactured home park or manufactured
home subdivision.
45.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 679.101 et seq.
§ 204-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-33
1:133

ARTICLE VII
Existing Structures in Identified Floodplain Areas
§ 204-34. Existing structures.
The provisions of this chapter do not require any changes or improvements
to be made to lawfully existing structures. However, when an improvement
is made to any existing structure, the provisions of § 204-35 shall apply.
§ 204-35. Improvements.
The following provisions shall apply whenever any improvement is made to
an existing structure located within any identified floodplain area:
A. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any increase in
BFE.
B. No expansion or enlargement of an existing structure shall be allowed
within an AE Area/District without floodway that would, together with
all other existing and anticipated development, increase the BFE more
than one foot at any point.
C. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction or improvement of any kind
to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of less than 50% of its
market value, shall be elevated and/or floodproofed to the greatest
extent possible.
D. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind to an existing structure, to an extent or amount of 50% or more of
its market value, shall constitute a substantial improvement and shall
be undertaken only in full compliance with the provisions of this
chapter.
E. The above activity shall also address the requirements of the 34 Pa.
Code, as amended, and the 2009 IBC and the 2009 IRC.
F. Any modification, alteration, reconstruction, or improvement of any
kind that meets the definition of "repetitive loss" shall be undertaken
only in full compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
§ 204-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-35
1:135

ARTICLE VIII
Variances
§ 204-36. General.
If compliance with any of the requirements of this chapter would result in
an exceptional hardship to a prospective builder, developer or landowner,
the Hellertown Zoning Hearing Board may, upon request, grant relief from
the strict application of the requirements.
§ 204-37. Variance procedures and conditions.
Requests for variances shall be considered by the Hellertown Zoning
Hearing Board in accordance with the procedures contained in § 204-20 and
the following:
A. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any Floodway Area/District that would cause any
increase in the BFE.
B. No variance shall be granted for any construction, development, use, or
activity within any AE Area/District without floodway that would,
together with all other existing and anticipated development, increase
the BFE more than one foot at any point.
C. Except for a possible modification of the regulatory flood elevation
requirement involved, no variance shall be granted for any of the other
requirements pertaining specifically to development regulated by
prohibited activities (Article VI) or to development which may endanger
human life (§ 204-29).
D. If granted, a variance shall involve only the least modification necessary
to provide relief.
E. In granting any variance, the Hellertown Zoning Hearing Board shall
attach whatever reasonable conditions and safeguards it considers
necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare, and
to achieve the objectives of this chapter.
F. Whenever a variance is granted, the Hellertown Zoning Hearing Board
shall notify the applicant, in writing, that:
(1) The granting of the variance may result in increased premium rates
for flood insurance.
(2) Such variances may increase the risks to life and property.
G. In reviewing any request for a variance, the Hellertown Zoning Hearing
Board shall consider, at a minimum, the following:
(1) That there is good and sufficient cause.
§ 204-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-37
1:137
(2) That failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional
hardship to the applicant.
(3) That the granting of the variance will neither:
(a) Result in an unacceptable or prohibited increase in flood
heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary
public expense; nor
(b) Create nuisances, cause fraud on, or victimize the public, or
conflict with any other applicable state or local ordinances and
regulations.
H. A complete record of all variance requests and related actions shall be
maintained by the Hellertown Zoning Hearing Board. In addition, a
report of all variances granted during the year shall be included in the
annual report to the FEMA.
I. Notwithstanding any of the above, however, all structures shall be
designed and constructed so as to have the capability of resisting the
one-percent annual chance flood.
§ 204-37 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-37
1:138
ARTICLE IX
Definitions
§ 204-38. Word usage.
Unless specifically defined below, words and phrases used in this chapter
shall be interpreted so as to give this chapter its most reasonable
application.
§ 204-39. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCESSORY USE OR STRUCTURE — A use or structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the
principal use or structure.
BASE FLOOD — A flood which has a one-percent chance of being equaled
or exceeded in any given year (also called the "one-hundred-year flood" or
one-percent annual chance flood").
BASE FLOOD DISCHARGE — The volume of water resulting from a base
flood as it passes a given location within a given time, usually expressed in
cubic feet per second (cfs).
BASE FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE) — The elevation shown on the Flood
Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) for Zone AE that indicates the water surface
elevation resulting from a flood that has a one-percent or greater chance of
being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
BASEMENT — Any area of the building having its floor below ground level
on all sides.
BUILDING — A combination of materials to form a permanent structure
having walls and a roof. Included shall be all manufactured homes and
trailers to be used for human habitation.
DEVELOPMENT — Any man-made change to improved or unimproved real
estate, including but not limited to the construction, reconstruction,
renovation, repair, expansion, or alteration of buildings or other structures;
the placement of manufactured homes; streets and other paving; utilities;
filling, grading and excavation; mining; dredging; drilling operations;
storage of equipment or materials; and the subdivision of land.
EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A
manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to
be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of
concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain
management regulations adopted by a community.
EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR
SUBDIVISION — The preparation of additional sites by the construction of
§ 204-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-39
1:139
facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and
either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).
FLOOD — A temporary inundation of normally dry land areas.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM) — The official map on which the
Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas
of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the
community.
FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS) — The official report provided by the
Federal Emergency Management Agency that includes flood profiles, the
Flood Insurance Rate Map, the Flood Boundary and Floodway Map, and the
water surface elevation of the base flood.
FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR — A Borough appointed official whose
responsibility is to administer the provisions of this chapter.
FLOODPLAIN AREA — A relatively flat or low land area which is subject to
partial or complete inundation from an adjoining or nearby stream, river or
watercourse; and/or any area subject to the unusual and rapid accumulation
of surface waters from any source.
FLOODPROOFING — Any combination of structural and nonstructural
additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary
facilities, structures and their contents.
FLOODWAY — The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent
land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood
without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one
foot.
HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE — The highest natural elevation of the ground
surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.
HISTORIC STRUCTURES — Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing
maintained by the Department of the Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National Register;
A.
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior
as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify
as a registered historic district;
B.
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states which
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or
C.
Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places in communities
with historic preservation that have been certified either:
D.
§ 204-39 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-39
1:140
LOWEST FLOOR — The lowest floor of the lowest fully enclosed area
(including basement). An unfinished, flood-resistant partially enclosed area,
used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, and incidental storage,
in an area other than a basement area is not considered the lowest floor of
a building, provided that such space is not designed and built so that the
structure is in violation of the applicable nonelevation design requirements
of this chapter.
MANUFACTURED HOME — A structure, transportable in one or more
sections, which is built on a permanent chassis, and is designed for use
with or without a permanent foundation when attached to the required
utilities. The term includes park trailers, travel trailers, recreational and
other similar vehicles which are placed on a site for more than 180
consecutive days.
MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A parcel (or
contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home
lots for rent or sale.
MINOR REPAIR — The replacement of existing work with equivalent
materials for the purpose of its routine maintenance and upkeep, but not
including the cutting away of any wall, partition or portion thereof, the
removal or cutting of any structural beam or bearing support, or the
removal or change of any required means of egress, or rearrangement of
parts of a structure affecting the exitway requirements; nor shall minor
repairs include addition to, alteration of, replacement or relocation of any
standpipe, water supply, sewer, drainage, drain leader, gas, oil, waste, vent,
or similar piping, electric wiring or mechanical or other work affecting
public health or general safety.
NEW CONSTRUCTION — Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the effective start date of this floodplain
management regulation adopted by the community and includes any
subsequent improvements to such structures. Any construction started
after effective date of community's first floodplain management ordinance
adopted by the community and before effective start date of this floodplain
management ordinance is subject to the ordinance in effect at the time the
permit was issued, provided the start of construction was within 180 days
of permit issuance.
NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION — A manufactured
home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for
servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of
streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads)
is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management
regulations adopted by a community.
By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of
the Interior; or
(1)
Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved
programs.
(2)
§ 204-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-39
1:141
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, firm, trust, estate, municipality, governmental unit, public
utility or any other legal entity whatsoever, which is recognized by law as
the subject of rights and duties.
POST-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or
substantial improvement occurred after December 31, 1974, or on or after
the community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), September 5,
1979, whichever is later, and, as such, would be required to be compliant
with the regulations of the National Flood Insurance Program.
PRE-FIRM STRUCTURE — A structure for which construction or substantial
improvement occurred on or before December 31, 1974, or before the
community's initial Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), September 5, 1979,
and, as such, would not be required to be compliant with the regulations of
the National Flood Insurance Program.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE — A vehicle which is:
REGULATORY FLOOD ELEVATION — The base flood elevation (BFE) or
estimated flood height as determined using simplified methods plus a
freeboard safety factor of 1 1/2 feet.
REPETITIVE LOSS — Flood related damages sustained by a structure on
two separate occasions during a ten-year period for which the cost of
repairs at the time of each such flood event, on average, equals or exceeds
25% of the market value of the structure before the damages occurred.
SPECIAL PERMIT — A special approval which is required for hospitals,
nursing homes, jails, and new manufactured home parks and subdivisions
and substantial improvements to such existing parks, when such
development is located in all, or a designated portion of a floodplain.
SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA (SFHA) — An area in the floodplain
subject to a one-percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. It
is shown on the FIRM as Zone A, AO, A1-A30, AE, A99, or AH.
START OF CONSTRUCTION — Includes substantial improvement and other
proposed new development and means the date the permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180
days from the date of the permit and shall be completed within 12 months
after the date of issuance of the permit unless a time extension is granted,
in writing, by the Floodplain Administrator. The actual start means either
A. Built on a single chassis;
Not more than 400 square feet, measured at the largest horizontal
projections;
B.
Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty
truck;
C.
Not designed for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
D.
§ 204-39 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-39
1:142
the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such
as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction
of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement
of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does
not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading, and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and walkways; nor does it include
excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or foundations or the erection
of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property
of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the
actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling,
floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration
affects the external dimensions of the building.
STRUCTURE — A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid
storage tank that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to heirs,
or devisees, transfer of ownership or building or lot development; provided,
however, that the subdivision by lease of land for agricultural purposes into
parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street or easement of
access or any residential dwelling, shall be exempted.
SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE — Damage from any cause sustained by a
structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50% or more of the market value of the
structure before the damage occurred.
SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT — Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals
or exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. This term includes structures which have
incurred substantial damage or repetitive loss regardless of the actual
repair work performed. The term does not, however, include any project for
improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local
health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary
to assure safe living conditions.
UNIFORM CONSTRUCTION CODE (UCC) — The statewide building code
adopted by the Pennsylvania General Assembly in 1999, applicable to new
construction in all municipalities, whether administered by the municipality,
a third party or the Department of Labor and Industry. Applicable to
residential and commercial buildings, the code adopted the International
Residential Code (IRC) and the International Building Code (IBC), by
reference, as the construction standard applicable with the state floodplain
construction. For coordination purposes, references to the above are made
specifically to various sections of the IRC and the IBC.
§ 204-39 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-39
1:143
VIOLATION — The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A
structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other
certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in 44 CFR
60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in
violation until such time as that documentation is provided.
§ 204-39 HELLERTOWN CODE § 204-39
1:144
ARTICLE X
Enactment
§ 204-40. When effective.
This chapter shall be effective on April 2, 2014, and shall remain in force
until modified, amended or rescinded by Borough of Hellertown,
Northampton County Pennsylvania.
§ 204-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 204-40
1:145
Chapter 209
GARAGE AND YARD SALES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Temporary businesses — See Ch. 140, Art. I.
§ 209-1. Permit required.46
Hellertown Borough residents must apply two weeks in advance for garage
and yard sale permits at a cost established by Borough Council resolution
from time to time. The sales will be limited to two days each year at any
one location or address. For nonprofit organizations, such as churches,
firehouses, and other registered nonprofit organizations who conduct such
sales within permanent structures located on their premises for the
exclusive benefit of their organizations, those nonprofit organizations shall
be limited to six days each year at any one location or address.
§ 209-2. Bond required for signage.
An extra bond of $50 must be posted with the Borough if the seller wishes
to post directional signs or advertising. The $50 is a surety that the signs
will be taken down by the permit holders within 48 hours after the sale.
§ 209-3. Applicability.
This chapter applies to all locations in a residential area, including
churches, firehouses and other charitable organizations, which must apply
for permits, but are exempt from the fees. Anyone posting signs, however,
would have to post the fifty-dollar surety.
§ 209-4. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who or which shall violate or fail to comply
with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction for every
such violation, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $100 for every
such offense and, in default of payment of such fine and costs, be
imprisoned in the County Jail for not more than 30 days.
46.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 204-40 HELLERTOWN CODE § 209-4
1:146
Chapter 216
GRAFFITI
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310. Tampering with public property — See Ch.
314.
§ 216-1. Purpose and intent.
§ 216-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ABATE — The removal, painting over or otherwise obscuring of graffiti from
view.
A. Graffiti is detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of the
community in that it leads to urban blight; encourages gang activity; is
detrimental to property values, business opportunities, and the
enjoyment of life; is inconsistent with the Borough's property
maintenance goals, aesthetic standards and desire for a clean and safe
Borough; and results in additional graffiti and in other properties
nearby becoming the target of graffiti unless it is quickly removed from
public and private property. Graffiti results in visual pollution and is a
public nuisance. Graffiti must be abated as quickly as possible to avoid
detrimental impacts on the Borough and its residents and to prevent
the further spread of graffiti.
B. It is the purpose of this chapter to:
(1) Prohibit and restrict the possession of graffiti implements;
(2) Prohibit the application of graffiti on any public or private property;
(3) Require prompt removal of graffiti on all public or private property;
and
(4) Mandate the Hellertown Borough Police Department and/or the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall have full jurisdiction over
the administration and enforcement of the Hellertown Graffiti
Ordinance.
C. It is the intention of the Borough of Hellertown through the adoption of
this chapter to provide additional enforcement tools to protect public
and private property from acts of graffiti vandalism and defacement.
The chapter is not intended to conflict with any existing graffiti state
law.
§ 209-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 216-2
1:147
AEROSOL CONTAINER — Any aerosol-based container which is capable of
spraying paint, ink, dye or similar substance and leaving a visible mark on
any natural or man-made surface.
ETCHING MATERIALS — Any etching tool, chemical, paste or similar
material which is capable of being used to etch glass.
GRAFFITI — Any unauthorized inscription, work, figure, mark, adhesive,
label, patch or design that is written, marked, etched, scratched, drawn,
painted or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or
private property, including but not limited to buildings, structures or places.
GRAFFITI IMPLEMENT — Etching material, including but not limited to
paint sticks and markers, or any aerosol container which contains paint,
ink, dye or any similar substance and which is capable of resulting in
the placement of graffiti upon any surface or substance, including but not
limited to glass, metal, concrete, wood and plastic.47
OWNER — The owner of record of the property as set forth in the tax
records.
PROPERTY — A legal or equitable interest in real or personal property,
including but not limited to the interest of the tenant or lessee.
RESPONSIBLE PARTY — An owner or an entity or person acting as an
agent for owner by agreement who has authority over the property or is
responsible for the property's maintenance or management, irrespective of
any arrangement to the contrary with any other party. Each owner shall be
deemed a responsible party for the purpose of this chapter. There may be
more than one responsible party for a particular property.
§ 216-3. Prohibitions.
A. It is unlawful for any person to apply or endeavor to apply graffiti on
public or privately owned buildings, permanent structures or places
located on public or privately owned property within the Borough. It is
unlawful for any person to solicit or command another person to apply
graffiti. It is unlawful for any person to aid or abet or agree to aid or
abet another person to plan to apply or apply graffiti. A violation of this
provision shall constitute a summary offense.48
B. It is unlawful for any person to have in his or her possession for the
purpose of defacing property any graffiti implement while in any public
park, school grounds, playground, swimming pool, public recreational
facility, any public right-of-way, or other public grounds in the Borough
of Hellertown or while on private property not open to the public
without the owner's or agency's permission. All persons directly or
indirectly involved in the acts of graffiti may be found to be equally
responsible and guilty of this act, in addition to the individual who may
personally deface the object or area, such as others in a group who
47.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
48.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 216-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 216-3
1:148
§ 216-4. Standards for graffiti removal.
Graffiti shall be removed completely in a manner that renders it
inconspicuous. When graffiti is painted out, the color used to paint it out
shall match the original color of the surface or the surface shall be
completely repainted with a new color that is aesthetically compatible
with existing colors and architecture. The removal shall not leave shadows
and shall not follow the pattern of the graffiti markings which have been
removed. If the area is heavily covered with graffiti, the entire surface shall
be repainted.
§ 216-5. Violations and penalties.
Any person found to be in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be fined not more than $300 and, in default of payment of fine and costs, be
imprisoned not more than 90 days.
Chapter 225
HANDBILLS AND ADVERTISING MATTER
§ 225-1. Unlawful means of distribution.
It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any handbill or advertising
matter whatever in the Borough of Hellertown by casting or scattering
knowingly made available the tools, writing material, ladders, look outs,
materials or assistance or knowingly supplied funds to acquire such
materials for such purposes. A violation of this provision shall constitute
a summary offense.
C. It is unlawful for any owner or responsible party to maintain, permit or
allow graffiti to remain on any property or item within the Borough that
is visible to any person of normal eyesight utilizing any public road,
alley, sidewalk or other facility open to the general public. Any owner or
responsible party found in violation of this Subsection C shall be
required to remove or cause to be removed the graffiti from the surface
on which it was placed. Inasmuch as it is often not possible to
determine the identity of the person who applied the graffiti, it shall be
the duty of the owner or responsible party of the location on which the
graffiti was applied to remove the graffiti within 20 days, weather
conditions permitting, after receiving notice from the Borough. If after
20 days' notification of the violation the property owner has failed to
remove the graffiti as required by this chapter, the Borough may take
such steps as are necessary to remove the graffiti. Any cost or expense
incurred by the Borough for removal and cleanup of private property
may be billed to the owner within 14 days of removal. Upon failure to
repay the Borough in a timely fashion, the Borough may file a municipal
lien against the property. Failure to remove the graffiti within 20 days
shall constitute a summary offense.
§ 216-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 225-1
1:149
the same upon any of the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places in the
Borough, provided that nothing herein shall prohibit any person upon any of
the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public places in the Borough from handing
any handbill or advertisement to any person willing to receive the same.
§ 225-2. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found
to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 266
MOVING PERMITS
§ 266-1. Permit required before moving household goods or other
goods, wares or merchandise in bulk. [Amended 8-6-1973 by Ord.
No. 421]
No person or persons, firm or corporation shall move or cause to be moved
from any place outside the Borough of Hellertown to any place within the
Borough, or from any place within the Borough of Hellertown to another
place therein or place beyond the limits of the said Borough, any household
goods or other goods, wares or merchandise in bulk without first securing
from the Secretary of the Borough of Hellertown a permit for such moving
or transportation.
§ 266-2. Application for permit.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation desiring such a permit for
the removal or transportation of household goods in the manner above
described shall make application to the Secretary of the Borough of
Hellertown setting forth his, its or their name and address and also setting
forth the names of the owners or reputed owners of the property to be
moved, the address and location from which the property is to be removed,
and the new address or location of the place to which the property is to be
moved.
§ 266-3. Issuance of permit; fee. [Amended 12-30-1985 by Ord. No.
53549]
The Secretary of the Borough of Hellertown or the Secretary's designee
shall, upon application being made as provided for in § 266-2 of this chapter,
issue a permit, for which a charge in an amount to be established from time
to time by resolution of Borough Council shall be made, setting forth the
49.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 225-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 266-3
1:150
name of the permittee as well as the name or names of the owners of the
goods to be moved and the address from which the goods are to be moved
and the address to which the goods are to be delivered.
§ 266-4. Issuance charge. [Added 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 535]
The amount of the charge for the issuance of a permit, as required pursuant
to this chapter, and as established in § 266-3 above, shall be established by a
motion approved by a majority of the Council of the Borough of Hellertown
and shall remain in effect until changed by a similar motion.
§ 266-5. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No.
315; 8-6-1973 by Ord. No. 421; 12-30-1985 by Ord. No. 53550]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provisions of this
chapter or who furnishes false information to the Secretary or uses a false
name or address in connection with the requirements of this chapter shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term
of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this
chapter continues or each section of this chapter which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 270
MUNICIPAL CLAIMS AND LIENS
§ 270-1. Attorneys' fees to be charged.
The attorneys' fees to be charged for the collection of any delinquent
account shall be as follows:
§ 270-2. Filing of claims.51
A. For preparation and filing of the municipal lien: $350.
B. For the collection of any delinquent account after the filing and service
of a copy of the lien upon the owner by first class mail: Attorneys' fees
will be charged at the hourly rate of $150.
A. The Borough of Hellertown hereby adopts the Pennsylvania Municipal
Claims and Tax Liens Act, 53 P.S. § 7101 et seq., with regard to the filing
of municipal claims.
B. For any municipal lien claim filed by the Borough, costs shall include
interest at a rate of 10% per annum, which shall be collectable on all
municipal claims from the date of the completion of the work or service
after it is filed as a lien.
50.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
51.Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 266-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 270-2
1:151
Chapter 278
NUISANCES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Firearms and other weapons — See Ch. 197.
Handbills and advertising matter — see Ch.
225.
Obscenity — See Ch. 282.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 385.
Abandoned and junked vehicles — See Ch.
430.
§ 278-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Health and Nuisance
Ordinance of the Borough of Hellertown."
§ 278-2. Declaration of purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the purposes of promoting public health, life,
safety, morals, welfare, peace, decency, dignity, reasonable and comfortable
use of property and the tranquility of the community of the Borough of
Hellertown, County of Northampton, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, and
to further the following related and more specific objectives:
A. To prohibit the creation or maintenance of impure, unwholesome or
offensive conditions relating to streets, sidewalks, air, soil, structures,
premises, food or drink.
B. To prohibit the sale, lease or distribution of impure, offensive or
unwholesome products.
C. To prohibit the existence of unsanitary conditions.
D. To prohibit blocking or obstructing of streets or sidewalks.
E. To prohibit unguarded open excavations, piles of dirt or debris and
collection of stagnant water.
F. To prohibit the unauthorized posting of handbills, signs and posters.
G. To prohibit the accumulations of brush, debris, litter and any such other
materials which may create an unwholesome and unhealthy condition
in the Borough.
H. To prohibit the insightly growth and accumulation of weeds and grass in
excess of eight inches. [Amended 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 808]
§ 270-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 278-3
1:152
§ 278-3. Definitions.
Certain words and terms are used in this chapter for the purposes hereof
and are defined as follows. Unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary, words used in the present tense include the future; the singular
numbers include the plural, and the plural the singular; the masculine
includes the feminine and neuter and the neuter includes the masculine and
feminine and the feminine includes the masculine and neuter.
NUISANCE — Such activity, existence of a condition or state of being which,
based upon actual conditions in the Borough, shall be offensive to public
life, health, safety, morals, welfare, peace, decency, dignity, reasonable and
comfortable use of property and the tranquility of the community.
PERSON — An individual, organization, corporation, partnership,
government or governmental subdivision or agency, business trust, estate,
trust, association and any other legal or commercial entity.
STRUCTURE — Any building, permanent or temporary, fully erected or not,
intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property
of any kind.
VEHICLE — A machine, ordinarily propelled by power and designed to
travel by use of wheels, treads, runners or slides and to transport person or
property and shall include, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers,
motorcycles, bicycles and tractors.
§ 278-4. Violations.
It shall be unlawful for any person to create a nuisance as herein defined.
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalties hereinafter provided.
§ 278-5. Activities and conditions which constitute a nuisance.
[Amended 5-7-2001 by Ord. No. 637]
The following activities shall be deemed to be a nuisance when, based upon
actual conditions in the Borough, they constitute a nuisance in fact:
A. The accumulation of garbage and rubbish and the storage of abandoned
or junked vehicles, on private and public property, and the carrying on
of any offensive manufacture or business.
B. The ownership, maintenance, inhabitation, use or offering for use of any
structure on public or private grounds which may be dangerous,
unwholesome or offensive to the public.
C. The willful making or causing to be made of any loud, boisterous or
unseemly noise or disturbances so as to disturb or annoy the peaceable
public near to or upon any street, lane, alley, park, square, common or
in any public building, public place or business place, or private
building or private place within the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 278-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 278-5
1:153
D. Any act or conduct such as might tend to cause riot, panic, violence or
general disturbance.
E. Any wanton discharge, without legal rights, except in authorized
celebrations, of any gun, pistol, firearm, fireworks or other explosive.
F. The obstruction of any sidewalk, pavement, highway, street, lane, alley,
thoroughfare, passageway in any public building or public place or
business place.
G. The sale or offering for sale, the lease or offering for lease, gift or
offering for gift, or distributing any unwholesome, impure or offensive
food or drink, or any other material intended for human or animal
consumption.
H. The participation in an unlawful gathering, or the vexing, hindering,
annoying or delaying any person, whereby the public peace or comfort
is broken, or the public annoyed.
I. The lounging, loitering upon any street, road, highway, street corner,
curb, sidewalk, lane, alley, park, square, common or any public
building, public place or business place, or private residence, store,
shop, church, entrance, or exit or passageway.
J. The traveling about the Borough, soliciting or begging, from door to
door or upon the streets, sidewalks, curbs, lanes, alleys, parks, square,
commons or in any public building or public place or business place,
school or private dwelling for the purpose of acquiring money or a
living, and who shall have no fixed place of residence, lawful occupation
or permit from the said Borough.
K. The use of indecent, vile and profane language audibly upon the public
streets, lanes, alley, parks, squares, commons, public building, public
places, business places, churches, schools or any public place within
the Borough.
L. The congregating or assembling at, near or about a place where a fire is
in progress or where the fire or police apparatus have been summoned
by an alarm or necessity, and thereby hindering, delaying or
obstructing any such apparatus, its men and equipment or rendering
dangers by such assembly to the management or handling of such
apparatus.
M. The neglect or refusal to promptly regard and obey the order of any
police officer or fireman in respect to the discharge of their duties in the
enforcement of the laws and ordinances of the Borough and at any
place where a fire is in progress.
N. Any person owning, occupying or controlling any property, sidewalk,
off-street parking area and the like which adjoins upon any public way,
which term shall include all streets, roads and alleys of the Borough,
who plows, blows, directs, shovels or otherwise places, causes to be
§ 278-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 278-5
1:154
§ 278-6. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
Chapter 282
OBSCENITY
placed or allows to be placed any snow, mud, sand, gravel, leaves,
grass, yard wastes or rubbish or materials of any sort upon the
cartways of said public ways, shall be deemed to have created a
nuisance in fact, which is prohibited hereby. This prohibition shall not
be applicable regarding the placement of leaves along curblines during
the autumnal leaf collection efforts as scheduled by the Borough Public
Works Department.
O. The allowing or causing of any dog to bark or make unseemly noise or
disturbances so as to disturb or annoy the peaceable public near or
upon any street, lane, alley, park, square, common or in any public
building, public place or business place, or private building or private
place within the Borough of Hellertown. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 775]
P. The allowing of weeds, grass and plant growth in excess of eight inches.
[Added 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 808]
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 but not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each
section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
B. Upon notice to the person violating said chapter, by posting said notice
to the door at the entrance of the premises in violation; by making
personal delivery of the notice to the owners; by handing a copy of the
notice to the owner or an adult person in charge of the residence or
business, whichever the case may be, or by certified mail, return
receipt requested and regular mail to abate the nuisance, and upon
failure of such person to do so within a period of five days from the date
of the receipt of said notice, the Borough shall take such steps as are
necessary to abate the nuisance and charge said person violating the
chapter with all costs thereof, together with a collection fee of 10%, or
file a municipal claim against said person, together with a collection fee
of 10%, or by an action of assumpsit without the filing of a claim.
[Amended 6-20-2016 by Ord. No. 808]
C. Institute proceedings in any court of equity having jurisdiction to abate
the nuisance.
§ 278-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-1
1:155
§ 282-1. Offenses defined.
No person, knowing the obscene character of the materials or performance
involved, shall:
§ 282-2. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given to them in this section:
COMMUNITY — For the purpose of applying the "contemporary community
standards" in this chapter, "community" means the state.
HARMFUL TO MINORS — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, that quality of any
description or representation in whatever form of nudity, sexual conduct,
sexual excitement or sadomasochistic abuse when it:
A. Display or cause or permit the display of any obscene material in or on
any window, showcase, newsstand, display rack, billboard, display
board, viewing screen, motion-picture screen marquee or similar place
in such manner that the display is visible from any public street,
highway, sidewalk, transportation facility or other public thoroughfare.
B. Sell, lend, distribute, exhibit, give away or show any obscene material
to any person 17 years of age or younger, or offer to sell, lend,
distribute, exhibit or give away or show, or have in his possession with
intent to sell, lend, distribute, exhibit or give away or show any obscene
material to any person 17 years of age or younger, or knowingly
advertise any obscene material in any manner.
C. Design, copy, draw, photograph, print, utter, publish or in any manner
manufacture or prepare any obscene material.
D. Write, print, publish, utter or cause to be written, printed, published or
uttered any advertisement or notice of any kind giving information,
directly or indirectly, stating or purporting to state where, how, from
whom or by what means any obscene material may be purchased,
obtained or had.
E. Produce, present or direct any obscene performance or participate in a
portion thereof that is obscene or that contributes to its obscenity.
F. Hire, employ, use or permit any minor child to do or assist in doing any
act or thing mentioned in this section.
Predominately appeals to the prurient, shameful or morbid interest of
minors.
A.
Is patently offensive to prevailing standards in the adult community as
a whole with respect to what is suitable material for minors.
B.
C. Is utterly without redeeming social importance for minors.
§ 282-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 282-2
1:156
KNOWING — As used in § 282-1, "knowing" means having general
knowledge of or reason to know or a belief or ground for a belief which
warrants further inspection or inquiry of the character and content of
the performance or any material described in § 282-1 which is reasonably
susceptible of examination by the defendant.
KNOWINGLY — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, having general knowledge
of or reason to know or a belief or ground for belief which warrants further
inspection or inquiry of both:
MATERIALS — Any literature, including any book, magazine, pamphlet,
newspaper, story paper, comic book and any figure, visual representation or
image, including any drawing, photograph, picture or motion picture.
MINOR — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, any person under the age of 17
years.
NUDITY — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, the showing of the human male
or female genitals, pubic area or buttock with less than a fully opaque
covering, or the showing of the female breast with less than a fully opaque
covering of any portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or the depiction
of covered male genitals in a discernibly turgid state.
OBSCENE — Any material, materials or performance is obscene if:
PERFORMANCE — Any play, dance or other live exhibition performed
before an audience.
SADOMASOCHISTIC ABUSE — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, flagellation
or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre
costume, or the condition of being fettered bound or otherwise physically
restrained on the part of one so clothed.
SEXUAL CONDUCT — As used in § 282-2, patently offensive
representations or descriptions of ultimate sexual acts, normal or
perverted, actual or simulated and patently offensive representations or
descriptions of masturbation, excretory functions and lewd exhibitions or
scientific value. As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, acts of masturbation,
The character and content of any material described herein which is
reasonably susceptible of examination by the defendant.
A.
The age of the minor; provided, however, that an honest mistake shall
constitute an excuse from liability hereunder if the defendant made a
reasonable bona fide attempt to ascertain the true age of such minor.
B.
The average person applying contemporary community standards
would find that the subject matter taken as a whole appeals to the
prurient interest.
A.
The subject matter depicts or describes in a patently offensive way
sexual conduct of a type described in this section.
B.
The subject matter, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic,
political, educational or scientific value.
C.
§ 282-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 282-2
1:157
homosexuality, sexual intercourse or physical contact with a person's
clothed genitals, pubic area, buttocks or, if such person be a female, breast.
SEXUAL EXCITEMENT — As used in §§ 282-3 and 282-4, the condition of
human male or female genitals when in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal.
TRANSPORTATION FACILITY — Any conveyance, premises or place used
for or in connection with public passenger transportation, whether by air,
rail, motor vehicle or any other method, including aircraft, watercraft,
railroad, cars, buses and air, boat, railroad and bus terminals and stations.
§ 282-3. Dissemination to minors.
No person shall knowingly disseminate by sale, loan or otherwise, explicit
sexual materials to a minor. "Explicit sexual materials," as used in this
section, means materials which are obscene or:
§ 282-4. Admitting minor to show.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to exhibit for monetary
consideration to a minor or knowingly to sell to a minor an admission
ticket or pass or knowingly to admit a minor for a monetary consideration
to premises whereon there is exhibited a motion-picture show or other
presentation which, in whole or in part, depicts nudity, sexual conduct or
sadomasochistic abuse and which is harmful to minors, except that the
foregoing shall not apply to any minor accompanied by his parent.
§ 282-5. Requiring sale as condition of doing business.
No person shall knowingly require any distributor or retail seller as a
condition to sale or delivery for resale or consignment of any literature,
book, magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book,
writing, drawing, photograph, figure or image, or any written or printed
matter, or any article or instrument, to purchase or take by consignment
for purposes of sale, resale or distribution any obscene literature, book,
magazine, pamphlet, newspaper, story paper, paper, comic book, writing,
drawing, photograph, figure or image or any written or printed matter of an
obscene nature or any article or instrument of an obscene nature.
A. Any picture, photograph, drawing, sculpture, motion-picture film or
similar visual representation or image of a person or portion of the
human body which depicts nudity, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic
abuse and which is harmful to minors.
B. Any book, pamphlet, magazine, printed matter, however reproduced, or
sound recording which contains any matter enumerated in Subsection
A, or explicit and detailed verbal descriptions or narrative accounts of
sexual excitement, sexual conduct or sadomasochistic abuse and which,
taken as a whole, is harmful to minors.
§ 282-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 282-6
1:158
§ 282-6. Exemptions.
Nothing in this chapter shall apply to any recognized historical society or
museum accorded charitable status by the federal government, any county,
city, borough, township or town library, any public library, any library of any
school, college or university or any archive or library under the supervision
and control of the commonwealth or a political subdivision.
§ 282-7. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
than $300 but no more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of
said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
Chapter 291
PARKS AND RECREATION
GENERAL REFERENCES
Dogs — See Ch. 112, Art. III.
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 119.
Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 168.
Firearms and other weapons — See Ch. 197.
Handbills and advertising matter — See Ch.
225.
Tampering with public property — See Ch.
314.
Transient business — See Ch. 411.
§ 291-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known as the "Borough of Hellertown Real Estate
Rules and Regulations."
§ 291-2. Definitions. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord. No. 576;
10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 613]
Except where the context clearly indicates otherwise, the following terms,
as used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE or ATV — A motorized off-highway vehicle which
travels on three or more inflatable tires.[Added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No.
714]
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Pennsylvania.
ELECTRICAL PERSONAL-ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICE or EP-AMD — A
self-balancing, two-nontandem-wheeled device designed to transport only
§ 282-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-2
1:159
one person with an electric propulsion system.[Added 9-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 714]
FIXTURE — Natural features and/or property of the Borough's which is
attached to real property.[Added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 714]
HIGHWAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every way
publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the public
for purposes of vehicular travel. The term includes a roadway open to use
of the public for vehicular travel on grounds of a college or university or
public or private school or public or historical park.[Added 9-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 714]
PARK EMPLOYEE — All employees of the Borough of Hellertown's Public
Works, Park and Pool Departments.[Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
PARK SYSTEM — Any lands or facilities owned or leased by the Borough of
Hellertown and designated or used by the Borough of Hellertown for park
purposes. The Thomas Iron Works land area shall be considered to be a part
of the park system.
PEDALCYCLE — A vehicle propelled solely by human-powered pedals. The
term does not mean a three-wheeled human-powered pedal-driven vehicle
with a main driving wheel 20 inches in diameter or under and primarily
designated for children six years of age younger.[Amended 9-17-2007 by
Ord. No. 714]
PERSONALTY — Any property which is owned by the Borough which is
not designated by law as real property and which is not attached to real
property.[Added 9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 714]
REAL ESTATE — Any lands or facilities owned or leased by the Borough
of Hellertown and shall include, but not be limited to, the real estate
comprising the park system.
SKATEBOARD — A vehicular device consisting of a platform constructed of
wood, fiberglass or other similar material, to which are affixed a number of
paired wheel assemblies ("trucks"), which is ridden by standing upon said
platform and propelled by the rider in the manner of a scooter by pushing
one foot against the ground.
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on or under the ground or
upon another structure or building.[Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 795]
TRICK RIDING — The practice of operating or riding a vehicle or vehicular
device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller-skates and any other recreational
type of device in such a manner that requires 'jumping' the vehicle or
vehicular device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and any other
recreational type of device intentionally operating the vehicle or vehicular
device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and any other recreational
type of device upon Borough fixtures and/or personalty not designed in
its customary usage for use by a pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and
any other recreational type of device or, otherwise operating the vehicle
or vehicular device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and any other
§ 291-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 291-2
1:160
recreational type of device in a hazardous manner.[Amended 9-17-2007
by Ord. No. 714]
VEHICLE — Every device in, upon or by which any person or property
is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, except devices used
exclusively upon rails or tracks. The term does not include a self-propelled
wheelchair or an electrical mobility device operated by and designed for
the exclusive use of a person with a mobility-related disability.[Amended
9-17-2007 by Ord. No. 714]
WILDLIFE — Animals (fauna), to include fish and fowl, living in a natural
undomesticated state.
§ 291-3. Park permits.
§ 291-4. Special park permits.
No person shall install equipment or make any alterations or adjustments to
existing equipment or facilities within the park system without the specific
approval in writing of the Borough.
§ 291-5. Hours. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
No person shall be permitted within the park system between sunset of any
day and sunrise of the following day except upon the issuance of a permit by
the Borough pursuant to the procedure set forth in § 291-3 hereof, or except
where allowed by special park regulations.
A. Any gathering or group of people consisting of 10 or more persons must
first obtain a park permit to use the park system.
B. Application for a park permit shall be made upon the official forms of
the Borough and shall be accompanied by the required fee, except
where a free park permit may be issued.
C. Application for a park permit may be made at the Borough office, other
designated locations, or a request may be made by telephone for an
application. Applications and the fee must be in the Borough office well
in advance of the requested park permit or as specified.
D. In the event more applications for reservations are received than space
is available, such applications shall be considered in the order received
by the Borough.
E. No person under the age of 18 years shall be issued a permit to use the
park system.
F. The holder of a special facility use or group permit issued by the
Borough shall be held responsible for the actions and conduct of the
other persons in his party.
G. All visitors to the parks must comply with all rules of the Borough while
within the park system.
§ 291-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-6
1:161
§ 291-6. Prohibited acts in park system. [Amended 12-16-1991 by
Ord. No. 576; 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 613]
No person shall commit any of the following acts within any of the said park
system:
A. Commit any disorderly or immoral act or violate the Pennsylvania
Crimes Code or Motor Vehicle Code.
B. Possess or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage while in or
upon any property administrated by or under the jurisdiction of the
Borough.
C. Possess or be under the influence of any illegal drug or narcotic while in
or upon any property administrated by or under the jurisdiction of the
Borough.
D. Peddle or solicit business of any nature whatever or collect any funds
for any service of charity, or to distribute handbills or other advertising
matter, to post unauthorized signs on any property administrated by or
under control of the Borough without first obtaining a permit from the
Borough.
E. Throw stones or missiles.
F. Hit or drive a golf ball.
G. Allow any animal on the athletic field during any athletic event. Animals
shall be permitted in Borough parks in the absence of an athletic event.
Any animal in any Borough recreation area shall be leashed at all times
and be licensed pursuant to 3 P.S. § 459-201, and as amended.
[Amended 8-20-2018 by Ord. No. 825]
H. Discard, deposit, dump, litter or allow to blow away any refuse of any
kind or nature except by placing said refuse in containers provided for
such purposes.
I. Bring or dispose of any type of trash, refuse or debris in any park,
whether disposing of it in receptacles or not, if such refuse did not
result from park usage within the park system.
J. Fire or discharge any firearms, air rifles, air pistols, slingshots,
fireworks or any substance of an explosive nature unless the Borough
issues a permit. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No. 786]
K. Engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton,
obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of
the peace, or to disturb or annoy others, while in or on any property
administrated by or under the jurisdiction of the Borough.
L. Camp, except in such areas as may be provided and designated for such
purposes by the Borough. No person or group shall camp without a
permit issued by the Borough.
§ 291-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 291-6
1:162
M. Cut, remove or destroy any trees, sapling, seedling, bush, or shrub,
whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise
deface or injure any tree or shrub, or pick, gather, uproot, remove or
destroy any flower, plant or grass, except with a permit issued by the
Borough.
N. Remove or cause to be removed or to dig any sod, earth, humus, peat,
boulder, rock, gravel or sand, except with a permit issued by the
Borough.
O. Cut, break, mark upon or otherwise injure any buildings, equipment,
foundation, or other structure or installation.
P. Build any fire except within the fireplaces, grills, receptacles, or open
spaces approved and designated by the Borough for such purpose.
Q. Park a vehicle or allow the same to remain parked in the swimming pool
parking area at Dimmick Park or in any other location in any recreation
area at any time between the sunset of any day and sunrise of the
following day, except upon the issuance of a permit by the Borough.
R. Injure or unnecessarily destroy any wildlife.
S. Obstruct in any way any roadway or path.
T. No vehicle shall enter or leave any recreation place except at the
established ways of entrance and exit.
U. Make any ascent in any glider, balloon, airplane or helicopter, or any
other navigational instrumentality, or any descent in or from any glider,
balloon, airplane, helicopter or parachute, or any other navigational
instrumentality, unless authorized by the Borough.
V. Drive, operate or park any motor vehicle (including, but not limited to,
recreation vehicle, snowmobile, dirt bike, and unlicensed vehicles with
motors) in or on any real estate.
W. Drive, operate or use a vehicle or vehicular device, pedalcycle,
skateboard, roller skates and any other recreational type of device to
engage in trick riding on any Borough fixture and/or personalty within
any area of the park system which was not designed for use by a vehicle
or vehicular device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and any other
recreational type of device or otherwise operate the vehicle or
vehicular device, pedalcycle, skateboard, roller skates and any other
recreational type of device in a hazardous manner. All-terrain vehicles
or ATVs are strictly prohibited from being operated in Borough parks.
Excluded from this prohibition is the operation of vehicles and vehicular
devices relative to the maintenance of the park system and those used
in conjunction with approved events for which a park permit has been
issued.
§ 291-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-6
1:163
§ 291-7. Rail Trail use rules. [Added 4-18-2011]
No person shall commit any of the following acts within the Rail Trail
System:
X. Drive, operate or use a vehicle or vehicular device in such a manner as
to constitute "trick riding," as defined heretofore, or in an unsafe or
hazardous manner.
Y. Feed or cause to feed in any manner any and all wildlife as may be
found in or upon the Borough park system. However, this provision shall
not apply to any wildlife feeding program as may be undertaken by or
prosecuted under the sponsorship of any agency of the federal
government, the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or the Borough of
Hellertown.
A. Engage in any violent, abusive, loud, boisterous, vulgar, lewd, wanton,
obscene or otherwise disorderly conduct tending to create a breach of
the peace or to disturb or annoy others while in or on any property
administered by or under the jurisdiction of the Borough.
B. Possess or be under the influence of any alcoholic beverage while in or
upon any property administered by or under the jurisdiction of the
Borough.
C. Possess or be under the influence of any illegal drug or narcotic while in
or upon any property administered by or under the jurisdiction of the
Borough.
D. Throw or propel stones or missiles of any kind.
E. Hit or drive golf balls.
F. All pets brought to the park must be controlled on a leash. All fecal
matter shall be bagged and removed by the owner.
G. Horses are prohibited on the Trail.
H. Littering is prohibited. All rubbish must be placed in park receptacles.
I. Peddle or solicit business of any nature or collect any funds for any
service or charity, or distribute handbills or other advertising matter,
post unauthorized signs on any property administered by or under the
control of the Borough, without first obtaining a permit from the
Borough.
J. Set off, or discharge any firearms, air rifles, air pistols, slingshots or
fireworks, including sparklers. [Amended 11-18-2013 by Ord. No.
786]
K. Drive, operate or park any motor vehicle, including but not limited to
recreation vehicle, ATV, snowmobile, dirt bike, and unlicensed vehicles
with motors, in or on any real estate.
§ 291-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 291-7
1:164
§ 291-8. Removal of structures encroaching on Borough
recreational lands. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 79552]
Prior to any property abutting the Borough's Rail Trail changing ownership
by transfer from grantor to grantee by legal deed, it shall be the
responsibility of the owner or owners of the property to remove any
structure presently encroaching on Borough property along the Borough's
Rail Trail. The legal owner or owners of the property shall, prior to the
transfer of ownership of the property, notify the Borough of the pending
sale and/or transfer of ownership in the property. The Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, or his or her designee, shall inspect the owner's
property to determine compliance with this section. In the event that it shall
be determined that any structure is encroaching on Borough property, it
L. Drive, operate or use a vehicle or vehicular device in such a manner as
to constitute "trick riding" or in an unsafe or hazardous manner.
M. Unless authorized by Hellertown Borough, operating off-road vehicles
is prohibited.
N. Obstruct, in any way, either totally or partially, any of the paths or
roadways in said recreation places.
O. Enter or leave any recreation place by motor vehicle except at the
established and designated ways of entrance and exit.
P. Cut, remove or destroy any tree, sapling, seedling, bush or shrub,
whether alive or dead, or chip, blaze, box, girdle, trim or otherwise
deface or injure any tree or shrub, or pick, gather, uproot, remove or
destroy any flower, plant or grass, except with a permit issued by the
Borough.
Q. Remove or cause to be removed or dig any sod, earth, humus, peat,
boulder, rock, gravel or sand, except with a permit issued by the
Borough.
R. Post or display any sign, banner or advertisement of a political or
commercial nature.
S. Build, start or light any fires except at those places or structures
provided therefor.
T. Injure or destroy any wildlife.
U. Deface, write upon, or mutilate any notice posted within the recreation
places by order of Hellertown Borough officials.
V. Camp, except in such areas as may be provided and designated for such
purposes by the Borough. No person or group shall camp without a
permit issued by the Borough.
52.Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 291-8 through 291-10 as
§§ 291-9 through 291-11, respectively.
§ 291-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-8
1:165
shall be the responsibility of the owner to remove any structure so that
said structure is no longer encroaching on Borough property. The structure
shall be relocated on the property as permitted by the Borough Zoning
Ordinance. The owner or owners shall obtain written verification from the
Borough that the placement of the structure is in compliance with the
requirements of this section and the Borough Zoning Ordinance prior to
the sale and/or transfer of the property to any third party. Locations where
existing conditions limit the ability to comply with this section may be
exempted from relocation at the sole and absolute discretion of Borough
Council. In the event that an exemption is granted, the owner or owners
shall, as part of the exemption approval process, execute a statement
acknowledging that the continued placement of the structure is with the
Borough's consent and that there is no ownership rights nor adverse
possession rights being obtained by the continued encroachment of a
structure into or onto Borough property. The owner or owners must waive
any right to adverse possession. Any structure found to be encroaching on
Borough-owned or -leased property shall be removed in each and every case
by the owner of the property affected at the owner's or owners' sole cost
and expense.
§ 291-9. Fees, charges and permits.
§ 291-10. Emergency powers of Borough.
Nothing in these rules shall:
§ 291-11. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-16-1991 by Ord.
No. 576; 10-21-1996 by Ord. No. 613]
A. The Borough shall have the authority, by resolution, to issue a fee
schedule for permits, set the amount of deposits, and prescribe
conditions for use.
B. No person shall use any facility, land or area for which a fee or charge
has been established by the Borough without payment of such fee or
charge.
A. Prohibit or hinder duly authorized agents of the Borough or any police
officers from performing their official duties.
B. Prohibit the Borough from establishing rules and regulations required
to protect the health, welfare and safety of park visitors on Boroughowned
or -leased real estate.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
§ 291-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 291-11
1:166
Chapter 303
POLICE SERVICES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Police Department — See Ch. 66. Disorderly conduct — See Ch. 168.
B. Where such violator has removed, destroyed, damaged, defaced or
befouled the Borough-owned real estate, the contents and/or fixtures
thereof, the cost of maintenance, repair or replacement shall be
charged to such violator in addition to other penalties as may be
assessed against violator. Further use of the Borough park system and
its facilities may be denied to violators.
C. Upon notice to the person violating said chapter, by certified mail,
return receipt requested, to abate the encroachment, and upon failure
of such person to do so within a period of 10 days from the date of the
receipt of said notice, the Borough shall take such steps as are
necessary to abate the encroachment and charge said person violating
this chapter with all cost thereof, together with a collection fee of 10%,
or file a municipal claim against said person, together with a collection
fee of 10%, or an action of assumpsit without the filing of the claim.
[Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 795]
D. Institute proceedings in any court of equity having jurisdiction to abate
the encroachment. [Added 10-6-2014 by Ord. No. 795]
§ 291-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 291-11
1:167

ARTICLE I
Reimbursement for Costs
[Adopted 5-19-2003 by Ord. No. 655]
§ 303-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article and the policy of the Borough of Hellertown
shall be to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of
its citizens and to attempt to prevent the Hellertown Borough Police from
having to make a second and/or subsequent response to disorderly parties
on private property and to prevent its police officers from having to make
several return trips to a location of the party, gathering or event in response
to complaints to disperse uncooperative participants. The Borough has
found that repeated occurrence of these events constitutes a drain on
the Hellertown Borough Police personnel and resources which, at times,
causes other areas of the Borough to be left with minimum levels of police
protection. The Borough finds that there is a rational relationship between
imposition of a fine and/or other penalties upon responsible persons who
permit uncooperative participants to threaten the health, safety and general
welfare of the general public and cessation of that activity.
§ 303-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
LARGE EVENT — A large event shall include, but not be limited to, large
parties or gatherings of five or more persons who have assembled or are
assembling for a special occasion and/or for a social activity.
POLICE SERVICES — Police services shall include the salaries of the
responding officers at the salary then in effect for each classification of each
individual officer for the amount of time actually spent in responding to or
remaining at the party, gathering or event, the actual costs of any medical
treatment to an injured officer not covered by insurance and the cost of
repairing any damage to Borough equipment or property and any other
costs that arise out of the Borough of Hellertown performing its function in
dispersing uncooperative participants pursuant to this article.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON — A responsible person for the event and/or social
gathering is the individual or individuals who own the property where the
party, gathering or event takes place, the individual in of the premises and/
or the individual who organized the event. If the individual responsible for
the event is a minor, then the parent or guardian of the minor will be jointly
and severally liable for the costs incurred for police services up to the
amount permitted by law.
SECOND POLICE RESPONSE — Services provided by a Borough police
officer during a second and/or further additional call to a location after the
distribution of oral or written warning that the party, gathering or event
is in violation of a Borough ordinance and/or violation of the laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 303-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-3
1:169
§ 303-3. Second response for police services at large events.
When a large party, gathering or event, as defined under this article, occurs
on private property and a police officer or officers at the scene determine
that there is a threat to the public peace, health, safety or general welfare,
the person responsible, as defined under this article, for the event shall be
held liable for the costs of providing police services for the second police
response by the Hellertown Borough Police if the Borough police officer or
another Borough police officer is required to return to the location a second
time after providing an oral or written warning on the initial response to the
scene, to control the threat to the public peace, health, safety and general
welfare. The failure by the responsible person to control the threat to the
public peace, health, safety or general welfare after receiving an oral or
written warning from the police officer to control the threat to the public
peace, health, safety or general welfare shall be subject to the police service
fees, as defined under this article. Nothing herein shall be construed to
prevent the Hellertown Borough Police on the second and/or return call in
arresting and/or citing the violators of the Borough ordinances and/or the
state Crimes Code.
§ 303-4. Police service fees.
The police service fees shall include the costs of personnel and equipment
but shall not exceed the cost of $500 for a single incident. The Borough
does not waive its right to seek reimbursement for actual costs exceeding
$500 through any and all other applicable remedies and/or procedures
at the disposal of the Borough of Hellertown. The amount of such police
service fees d against the responsible person shall be deemed a debt to
the Borough, and the debtor shall be the responsible person or persons
receiving said services and, if minors, their parents or guardians, as
permitted by law.
§ 303-5. Billing.
A. The Borough Chief of Police shall notify the Borough Manager upon the
rendering of such police services of the name, address and telephone
number of the responsible person and/or persons, the date and time of
the incident and the services performed and costs thereof, and such
other information as deemed required to indicate to the Borough the
costs of the police services. The Borough Manager shall take the
appropriate steps to cause the appropriate billings to be prepared and
submitted to the responsible person or persons.
B. The responsible person or persons shall have 30 days to remit payment
to the Borough of Hellertown. In the event that payment is not received
by the Borough of Hellertown within this time frame, the Borough
Solicitor may commence an action for appropriate relief at the
Magisterial District Judge or other court of competent jurisdiction to
seek payment of police service fees. In addition to paying the police
service fee, the responsible person shall also be liable for costs of suit
§ 303-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 303-5
1:170
§ 303-6. Prosecution.
and reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough in the
proceedings to collect the police service fees.
A. Nothing in this article shall be construed as affecting the ability of the
Borough to initiate and/or continue concurrent or subsequent criminal
prosecutions for any violation of the provision of this article, any other
Borough ordinance or any state law arising out of the same
circumstances necessitating the application of this article. Any person
who shall violate the provisions of this article in addition to the police
service fee shall be subject, upon conviction before the Magisterial
District Judge in and for the Borough, to pay a fine of not less than $100
per violation.
B. A separate offense shall be deemed committed for each day in which a
violation of this article occurs. Persons violating this article shall be
liable for any fines imposed, plus court costs and reasonable attorneys'
fees incurred by the Borough in the proceedings to enforce the
provisions of this article.
§ 303-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 303-6
1:171
Chapter 310
PROPERTY MAINTENANCE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Numbering of buildings — See Ch. 134.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Nuisances — See Ch. 278.
§ 310-1. Adoption of standards.
A certain document, three copies of which are on file in the office of the
Borough Secretary of Hellertown Borough, being marked and designated as
"the International Property Maintenance Code, 2009 edition," as published
by the International Code Council, be and is hereby adopted as the Property
Maintenance Code of the Borough of Hellertown in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania for regulating and governing the conditions and maintenance
of all property, buildings and structures; by providing the standards for
supplied utilities and facilities and other physical things and conditions
essential to ensure that structures are safe, sanitary and fit for occupancy
and use; and the condemnation of buildings and structures unfit for human
occupancy and use, and the demolition of such existing structures as herein
provided; providing for the issuance of permits and collection of fees
therefor; and each and all of the regulations, provisions, penalties,
conditions and terms of said Property Maintenance Code on file in the office
of the Borough of Hellertown are hereby referred to, adopted, and made a
part hereof as if fully set out in this chapter, with the additions, insertions,
deletions and changes, if any, prescribed in § 310-2 of this chapter.
§ 310-2. Revisions and insertions.
The following sections are hereby revised:
A. Section 101.1, Title, insert "Borough of Hellertown, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania" in place of the bracketed phrase [Name of
Jurisdiction].
B. Section 103.5, Fees, insert "Borough of Hellertown Fee Schedule" in
place of the bracketed phrase [Jurisdiction to Insert Appropriate
Schedule].
C. Section 112.4, Failure to comply, insert "$100 or more than $500" in
place of the bracketed phrase [Amount] in two places.
D. Section 302.4, Weeds, insert "eight inches" in place of the bracketed
phrase [Jurisdiction to Insert Height in Inches].
E. Section 304.14, Insect Screens, insert "April 1 and October 31,"
respectively, in place of the two bracketed terms [Date].
§ 303-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 310-2
1:172
§ 310-3. Grass, weeds and other vegetation. [Added 6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 80853]
F. Section 602.3, Heat Supply, insert "October 1 and April 30,"
respectively, in place of the two bracketed terms [Date].
G. Section 602.4, Occupiable Work Spaces, insert "October 1 and April
30," respectively, in place of the two bracketed terms [Date].
A. Vegetative growth a nuisance under certain conditions. No person, firm
or corporation, owning or occupying any property within the Borough
of Hellertown shall permit any grass or weeds or any vegetation
whatsoever, not edible or planted for some useful or ornamental
purpose, to grow or remain upon such premises so as to be in excess of
a height of eight inches, or to throw off any unpleasant or noxious odor,
or to conceal any filthy deposit, or to create or produce pollen. Any
grass, weeds or other vegetation growing upon any premises in the
Borough of Hellertown in violation of any of the provisions of this
section is hereby declared to be detrimental to the health, safety,
cleanliness and comfort of the inhabitants of the Borough of
Hellertown.
B. Responsibility for removing, cutting or trimming. The owner of any
premises, as to vacant premises, multiple residential or multiple
commercial premises or premises occupied by the owner, and the
occupant thereof, in case of premises occupied by other than the owner
thereof, shall remove, trim or cut all grass, weeds or other vegetation
growing or remaining upon such premises in violation of the provisions
of Subsection A.
C. Notice to remove, trim or cut; municipality may do work; costs. The
Borough Council, or any officer or employee of the Borough of
Hellertown designated thereby for the purpose, is hereby authorized to
give notice, by personal service or by United States Mail, to the owner
or occupant, as the case may be, of any premises whereon grass, weeds
or other vegetation is growing or remaining in violation of the
provisions of Subsection A of this section, directing and requiring such
occupant to remove, trim or cut such grass, weeds or vegetation so as
to conform to the requirements of this chapter, within five days after
issuance of such notice. Whenever, in the judgment of the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer of the Borough of Hellertown, it shall appear
to be impracticable to give notice as above provided, either because the
owner or occupant cannot readily be found or because a search for the
owner or occupant would entail unreasonable delay, the Borough
Council or any officer or employee of the Borough of Hellertown
designated thereby for that purpose, may give notice by posting
conspicuously on the property where such grass and weed violation
exists, a notice or order directing and requiring that such violation of
Subsection A be abated within five days. In case any person, firm or
53.Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed former § 310-3, Repealer.
§ 310-2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 310-3
1:173
§ 310-4. Effect on other related ordinances. [Amended 6-20-2016 by
Ord. No. 808]
Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the Borough from enforcing a violation
of grass and other vegetation through the Property Maintenance Code and/
or the Nuisance Ordinance.54
Chapter 314
PUBLIC PROPERTY, TAMPERING WITH
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 278. Street and sidewalk excavations — See Ch.
385, Art. II.
corporation shall neglect, fail or refuse to comply with such notice
within the period of time stated therein, the Borough Council may order
the removal, trimming or cutting of such grass, weeds or vegetation,
and the cost thereof, together with a penalty of 10% of the cost thereof
shall be collected by the Borough of Hellertown from such person, firm
or corporation, in the manner provided by law.
D. Violations and penalties. Any person who violates or permits a violation
of this section shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought
before a Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of
Criminal Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be
punishable by fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus cost
of prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense and each subsection of this
section that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
(1) Notice of violation. Whenever a condition constituting a violation of
this section occurs, the Borough shall cause written notice to be
served upon the owner in one of the following manners:
(a) By making personal delivery of the notice to owners;
(b) By handing a copy of the notice to the owner or an adult person
in charge of the residence or business, whichever the case may
be;
(c) By fixing a copy of the notice to the door at the entrance of the
premises in violation; or
(d) By mailing a copy of the notice to the last known address of the
owner by certified mail and regular mail.
54.Editor's Note: See Ch. 278, Nuisances.
§ 310-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 310-4
1:174
§ 314-1. Definitions; word usage.
§ 314-2. Tampering with public property on streets, alleys or public
grounds.
No person shall destroy, injure, tamper with or deface any public property
of the Borough of Hellertown, or any grass, walk, lamp, ornamental work,
building or streetlight on or in any of the streets, alleys or public grounds in
the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 314-3. Tampering with stakes, posts and monuments.
No person shall in any manner interfere or meddle with, or pull, drive,
change, alter or destroy any stake, post, monument or other marking made,
placed or set, or hereafter made, placed or set, or caused to be done by the
authorities of the Borough of Hellertown to evidence the location, elevation,
line, grade, corner or angle of any public street, alley, sidewalk, curb, gutter,
drain or other public work or thing.
§ 314-4. Tampering with warning lamps, signs or barricades.
No person shall destroy, remove, deface, obliterate or cover up any lamp,
sign or barricade erected as a warning of danger by the authorities of the
Borough of Hellertown or by any person doing work by permission of the
authorities of the Borough on any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or bridges
in the Borough or on any public grounds of the Borough within or without
the Borough.
§ 314-5. Removal of material from streets, alleys or public grounds.
No person shall take any earth, stone or other material from any street,
alley or public grounds in the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 314-6. Deposit of harmful substances.
No person shall pour, throw or deposit any harmful or destructive substance
or matter on any street, alley, sidewalk or public grounds in the Borough of
Hellertown.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERSON — Any individual, corporation, partnership, association, firm
or other legal entity.
B. The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and neuter.
§ 310-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 314-7
1:175
§ 314-7. Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to normal activities in connection with
construction, maintenance and repair of streets, alleys, sidewalks and
public grounds and the structures and fixtures located thereon or therein or
to incidental results of work done thereon or therein upon permit from or
by authority of the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 314-8. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $100 but not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30
days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each section of
this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a
separate offense.
Chapter 326
RENTAL PROPERTY
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Moving permits — See Ch. 266.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
§ 314-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 314-8
1:176
ARTICLE I
Licensing of Rental Premises
[Adopted 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 654]
§ 326-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this article and the policy of the Borough of Hellertown
shall be to protect and promote the public health, safety and welfare of its
citizens to establish rights and obligations of owners and occupants relating
to residential rental units in the Borough and to encourage owners and
occupants to maintain and improve the quality of rental housing within the
community. As a means to these ends, this article provides for a systematic
inspection program, registration and licensing of residential rental units,
and penalties.
§ 326-2. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH PUBLIC OFFICIAL — The Borough Code Enforcement Officer,
Assistant Code Enforcement Officer or other representatives hired by the
Borough to inspect rental premises under this article. Any inspector
conducting such inspections shall be a certified UCC inspector and/or any
state Uniform Construction Code certified inspector.55
CODES — Any state or local code or ordinance enacted or in effect for the
Borough of Hellertown, including, but not limited to, Uniform Construction
Code and the international codes adopted thereunder, the Property
Rehabilitation and Maintenance Code, any state uniform construction code,
zoning ordinance, solid waste ordinance, residential recycling ordinance,
and general nuisance ordinances.56
MANAGER — Any person who controls, cares for or manages a structure or
premises which is let or offered for occupancy.
NEWLY CREATED RESIDENTIAL UNITS — Any residential unit which
began construction after the date of the enactment of this article. The date
of construction shall be the date the Borough issues a building permit.
A newly created residential unit shall also include a unit that has been
substantially rehabilitated after the date of enactment of this article. The
date of substantial rehabilitation begins on the date the Borough issues a
building permit.
OCCUPANT — Any person, including an owner or operator, living and
sleeping in a dwelling unit or rooming unit.
OPERATOR — Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or
premises which are let or offered for occupancy.
55.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
56.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 326-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-2
1:177
OWNER — The owner or owners of the freehold of the premises or lesser
estate therein, a mortgage or vendee in possessions, assignee of rents,
receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in
control of a building or of premises, or their duly authorized agents.
RESIDENCE — A building in which living accommodations or sleeping
accommodations and cooking facilities as a unit are provided, except when
classified as an institution under the basic building code or excepted per
this section.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL LICENSE — The document issued annually for a fee
by the Borough of Hellertown to the owner, operator, responsible agent or
manager of a residential unit evidencing the existence of said residential
rental unit. This license does not warrant the proper zoning, habitability,
safety or condition of the residential rental unit in any way. Such license
is required for lawful rental and occupancy of residential rental unless
the residential rental unit is exempt from the licensing provisions of this
section.
RESIDENTIAL RENTAL UNIT — A rooming unit or dwelling unit which
consists of a group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single
habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used for
living, sleeping, cooking and eating for the exclusive use of the occupants
let for rent or a rental unit contained within an owner-occupied residential
or commercial unit, or an other-than-owner-occupied residential unit. The
registration and licensing provisions of this article shall not apply to
hospitals, nursing homes, group homes, assisted living houses or other
rental units used for human habitation which offer or provide medical or
nursing services, and wherein all operations of such facilities are subject
to county, state or federal licensing or regulations concerning the health
and safety of the users, patients or tenants. The registration and licensing
provisions of this article also shall not apply to hotel or motel units. A
residential rental unit includes a dwelling unit under a lease purchase
agreement or long-term (greater than six months) agreement of sale.
RESPONSIBLE AGENT — Any person residing or working within the County
of Northampton designated to accept service on behalf of a legal owner or
operator of a rental dwelling unit.
SUBSTANTIAL REHABILITATION — Repairs to a residential property that,
in its present condition, would not qualify for a certificate of occupancy
pursuant to Borough ordinance.
§ 326-3. Owner and occupant duties.
A. Owner's duties:
(1) It shall be the duty of every owner, operator, responsible agent or
manager to keep and maintain all residential units in compliance
with all applicable codes and provisions of all applicable state and
federal laws and regulations and local ordinances and to keep such
property in good and safe condition.
§ 326-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-3
1:178
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct or operate or cause to
be rented, either as owner, operator, responsible agent or manager
of any residential rental unit within the Borough of Hellertown,
without having a residential rental license as required by this
section.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of every owner, operator, responsible
agent or manager to permanently display the residential rental
license in the residential rental unit.
B. Information provided to Borough. The residential rental license shall
include the following information, which shall be provided by the
owner, operator, responsible agent or manager to the Borough:
(1) The name, address and telephone number of the property owner;
(2) Name, address and telephone number of the designated local
property manager, if the property owner lives outside the Borough
and has a property manager;
(3) The telephone number to call to register complaints regarding the
physical condition of the residential rental unit;
(4) The street address of the rental property;
(5) The name of the tenants and all other occupants over age 18; and
(6) The year of issue for a residential rental license.
C. Tenant occupancy and/or vacation. It shall be the responsibility of the
owner, operator, responsible agent or manager to notify the Borough of
Hellertown when a new tenant will be moving into or occupying the
rental property. The owner shall notify the Borough of Hellertown five
days prior to the tenant taking possession of the residential rental unit.
The owner shall advise a tenant that the tenant must obtain a moving
permit from the Borough of Hellertown prior to entry into the rental
unit. At the time the tenant vacates the premises, the landlord shall
notify the Borough of Hellertown within five days from the date of
vacation that a tenant is vacating the premises. In the event that a
tenant vacates the premises landlord shall not be assessed a fee to
revise the residential rental license nor the residential rental unit
license questionnaire. Landlord shall, however, provide information
about the new tenant to the Borough as requested by the Borough so
the residential rental license and/or the questionnaire can be properly
amended.
D. Premises condition. It shall be the responsibility of every owner,
operator, responsible agent or manager to employ policies and to
manage the residential rental unit(s) under his/her control in
compliance with the provisions of this article, Borough codes and
applicable state and federal laws.
§ 326-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-3
1:179
§ 326-4. Residential rental license.
§ 326-5. Applicability; revocation; reinstatement; change in
ownership of premises.
E. Occupant's duties. The occupant(s) shall comply with all obligations
imposed by this article and all applicable codes and ordinances of the
Borough of Hellertown as well as all state and federal laws and
regulations. Included among Borough ordinances is the requirement
that all occupants moving into and out of a residential rental unit obtain
a moving permit from the Borough of Hellertown before they take or
relinquish occupancy. Tenants shall provide said notice to the Borough
five days prior to entering and vacating the leasehold premises.
A. License registration required for rental units. By January 31, 2004, the
owner, operator, responsible agent or manager of each residential
rental unit shall apply for a residential rental license for each
residential rental unit within the Borough of Hellertown by providing
the Borough with a completed license questionnaire for each residential
rental unit and by paying the annual license registration fee as set forth
in the section entitled "Fees and penalties." The Borough shall review
the license questionnaire. If the license questionnaire has been
properly completed and the appropriate fee has been paid, the Borough
shall issue to the owner, operator, responsible agent or manager, a
residential rental license. Receipt of a license from the Borough of
Hellertown shall signify that the leasehold premises has been
registered with the Borough of Hellertown pursuant to this article.
B. Annual renewal of license of rental units. The owner, operator,
responsible agent or manager shall apply for a residential rental license
for each residential unit on an annual basis. A new license
questionnaire for each residential rental unit and a yearly renewal fee
as set forth in the section entitled "Fees and penalties" shall be filed
with the Borough by January 31 of each calendar year as set forth in the
section entitled "Residential rental license." If the license questionnaire
has been completed and the appropriate fee has been paid, the Borough
shall issue to the owner, operator, responsible agent or manager, a
residential rental license.
A. Residential rental license required for residential rental units. A
residential rental license shall be required for each residential unit as
follows:
(1) Newly created residential units. Prior to initial occupancy of newly
constructed residential rental units, newly created residential
rental units, or substantially rehabilitated residential rental units
(as documented by a certificate of occupancy), the owner, operator,
responsible agent or manager of each residential rental unit shall
make a written application to the Borough of Hellertown for a
residential rental license as herein provided. Such newly created
§ 326-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-5
1:180
units shall be exempt from further inspection, unless a complaint
has been made about the premises or the Borough public official
has probable cause to believe that a violation has occurred
pursuant to this article, for a period of five years and will then be
inspected again when the designated area in which the premises
are located is next scheduled for inspection after the five-year
exemption has expired.
(2) Existing rental properties. The Borough of Hellertown shall fully
inspect each residential rental unit no more frequently than once
within a five-year period unless a complaint of violation has
occurred or the Borough public official has probable cause to
believe that a violation is occurring pursuant to this article or the
property has been sold pursuant to the section of this article below.
Unless sooner revoked for cause, the residential rental license shall
remain valid until such time as the next regularly scheduled
inspection occurs; provided, however, that the owner, operator,
responsible agent or manager complies with the requirements of
this article and annually provides the Borough with a properly
completed license questionnaire and pays the annual license
renewal fee to the Borough as the article requires.
B. Revocation of residential rental license. A residential rental license
shall be revoked if the owner or operator of a residential rental unit
does not provide the name of a responsible agent when said property is
managed by someone other than the owner, does not correct code and/
or ordinance violations found in response to a complaint or phased-in
inspection within the time frame cited by the Borough public official
and/or does not pay the annual license fee. If the premises is presently
occupied, upon revocation of the residential license the Borough public
official is authorized to cause such a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, building structure or other part of the premises to be vacated or
closed until compliance with the article is obtained. The Borough public
official shall prescribe a reasonable time for compliance. If the
residential rental license is revoked and the residential rental unit is
vacant, it shall remain vacant. Notices issued pursuant to this section
shall be served in the same manner as set forth in the section entitled
"Notice of violations."
C. Reinstatement of residential rental license. A residential rental license
shall be reinstated if the owner or operator of a residential rental unit
corrects the reasons for the revocation of the residential rental license
and has paid the license reinstatement fee.
D. Sale or transfer of residential rental units. Upon the sale or transfer of a
residential rental unit, the new owner shall obtain a new residential
rental license as set forth in the section entitled "Residential rental
license." The new owner shall purchase a residential rental license per
the fees set forth in the section entitled "Fees and penalties." A
residential rental license issued hereunder is not automatically
transferable to any person or entity who has acquired ownership of a
§ 326-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-5
1:181
§ 326-6. Inspections.
residential rental unit. A residential rental license shall be revoked
upon failure to apply to the Borough for its transfer within 60 days
of the date of sale or transfer of ownership of the residential rental
unit. The new owner shall obtain a residential rental license for each
residential rental unit and have each residential rental unit inspected.
The new owner shall also complete a new license questionnaire to
be submitted prior to obtaining the residential rental license. Failure
to seek a residential rental license and have the property inspected
pursuant to this article for each residential rental unit within 60 days of
the date of sale or transfer of ownership shall result in the revocation
of the residential rental license. If a property is sold and subject to
reinspection pursuant to this section, the property shall thereafter be
inspected every five years pursuant to the section entitled "Phased-in
inspections."
A. The Borough public official shall make or cause to be made inspections
to determine the conditions of all structures and premises in order to
safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public under the
provisions of this article. The Borough public official, after reasonable
notice, is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of performing his duties under this
article. The owner, occupant or operator of every structure or premises,
or the person in charge thereof, shall give the public officer free access
thereto and to all parts thereof and to the premises on which it is
located at all reasonable times for the purpose of such inspection,
examination and survey. To ensure that the five-year phased-in year
inspections are conducted in a fair and uniform manner and to provide
landlords with notice of those areas to be inspected, the Borough public
official shall inspect the items set forth in Exhibit "1" attached to this
article.57 This list shall not be construed to be and is not an all-inclusive
list and may be amended from time to time by the Borough public
official.
B. Administrative search warrant/inspection requirement. If any owner,
occupant or other person in charge of a structure subject to the
provisions of this article refuses, impedes, inhibits, interferes with,
restricts or obstructs entry and free access to every part of the
structure or premises where inspection authorized by this article is
sought, the Borough public official shall promptly apply for an
administrative search/inspection warrant to a court of competent
jurisdiction and shall supply all necessary affidavits and testimony to
indicate that there is reasonable or probable cause to conduct an
inspection. For the purposes of this section, a reasonable or probable
cause to gain access and inspect shall include, without being limited to,
the following:
57.Editor's Note: The list of items to be inspected is on file in the Borough offices.
§ 326-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-6
1:182
(1) That the inspection of the area is part of a planned routine
inspection being conducted pursuant to a systematic or
concentrated ordinance enforcement program in that portion of the
Borough;
(2) That the Borough public official, after investigation, has
knowledge, information or a reasonable belief that a violation of
this article or other codes and ordinances of the Borough and/or
commonwealth exist;
(3) That such entry is for the purpose of reinspecting a previous notice
of violations;
(4) That the Borough public official has received a complaint
concerning a violation on or within the premises; and
(5) That such entry is necessary to determine if the building, structure,
premises, dwelling or dwelling units meet ordinance standards.
C. Landlord right to cure prior to Borough inspection. If the Borough
public officer, after investigation, has knowledge, information or a
reasonable belief that a violation of this article or other codes and
ordinances of the Borough and/or Commonwealth of Pennsylvania exist
and/or upon receipt of a complaint concerning a violation on or within
the premises is occurring, the Borough shall contact the owner and
inform the owner of the ordinance and/or code violation and/or tenant
complaint and provide the landlord with a forty-eight-hour period in
which to investigate and correct any violation found within the rental
premises prior to the Borough conducting a search of the rental
premises. Landlord shall provide the Borough public officer with proof,
to the satisfaction of the Borough public official, of the repairs made to
the rental premises to cause the premises to come into compliance with
the applicable Borough and/or laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania. If the Borough public officer, at his sole discretion, is
satisfied with the landlord's response, no search pursuant to this
section shall occur. If the Borough public officer determines no effort
has been made by the landlord to address the concerns of the Borough
public officer or if the Borough public officer is not satisfied with the
landlord's attempted repairs, the Borough public officer may proceed to
conduct an inspection pursuant to the requirements of this article.
Nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Borough public officer,
upon good cause shown, from providing the landlord with additional
time beyond the forty-eight-hour time period to cure any defect within
the premises, at the Borough public officer's sole and absolute
discretion, before proceeding to inspect the property pursuant to the
requirements of this article.
D. Access by owner. Every occupant of a dwelling unit, building, structure
or premises shall give the owner thereof or his agent or employee
access to any part of such dwelling, dwelling unit, building, structure or
premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of conducting
§ 326-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-6
1:183
§ 326-7. Phased-in inspections.
inspections to determine whether or not violations of this article may
exist or for the purpose of making such repairs or alterations as are
necessary to effect compliance with the provisions of this article or
with any lawful rule or regulation adopted or any lawful order issued
pursuant to the provisions of this article.
E. Phased-in inspection program. The initial inspection of residential
rental units will occur in accordance with a phased-in systematic
inspection program to be prepared and made available to the public
upon request by the Borough of Hellertown pursuant to the Borough's
open records policy.58 A minimum 15 days' prior notice to each property
owner shall be given by the Borough for all inspections. The Borough
shall contact the landlord to schedule a date and time that the phasedin
inspection will occur. If the landlord agrees to the inspection, no
written notification shall be required to be submitted to the landlord. If
the landlord refuses the Borough's request for the phased-in inspection
or does not make the rental premises available to the Borough as
agreed, the Borough shall provide a minimum of 15 days' prior written
notice to each property owner. The property owner shall be provided
with the date and time of the inspection. The notice shall also state that
the property owner has the right to refuse the inspection and that, upon
said refusal, the Borough shall be required to obtain an administrative
search/inspection warrant.
A. As for any residential unit unoccupied or occupied by someone other
than owner on or after the effective date hereof, a residential rental
license shall be issued and displayed prior to occupancy of such
residential unit by anyone other than the owner, and subsequent
inspections shall occur as set forth in Subsection B.
B. As for any residential unit occupied by other than the owner as of the
effective date hereof and for all subsequent inspections, inspections
required by this article shall be completed and the residential rental
license issued and displayed not later than January 31 of each year for
which inspection is required. The Borough shall be divided into sections
as follows:
(1) Northern — Section I: bounded by Bethlehem and/or Lower Saucon
Township on the west, north, or east, and West and East High
Street, extended, on the south;
(2) North Central — Section II: bounded by Bethlehem and/or Lower
Saucon Township on the west and east, West and East High Street,
extended, on the north, and East and West Thomas Street,
extended, on the south;
58.Editor's Note: See Ch. 72, Art. I, Open Records.
§ 326-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-7
1:184
§ 326-8. Notice.
(3) Central — Section III: bounded by Bethlehem and/or Lower Saucon
Township on the west and east, East and West Thomas Street,
extended, on the north, and West and East Water Street, extending
northeastwardly along New Jersey Avenue, on the south;
(4) Southwest — Section IV: bounded by West Water Street on the
north, Lower Saucon Township on the west and south, and Main
Street on the east, comprising properties west of Main Street; and
(5) Southeast — Section V: bounded by East Water Street and New
Jersey Avenue on the north, Lower Saucon Township on the east
and south, and Main Street on the west, comprising properties east
of Main Street.
C. Residential units subject to the inspection requirements of this article
and located in Section I shall be inspected during the calendar year in
which the article shall become effective and every fifth year thereafter.
Residential units subject to the inspection requirements of this article
and located in Section II shall be inspected during the first calendar
year subsequent to the year in which this article becomes effective and
every fifth year thereafter. Residential units subject to the inspection
requirements of this article and located in Section III shall be inspected
during the second calendar year subsequent to the year in which this
article becomes effective and every fifth year thereafter. Residential
units subject to the inspection requirements of this article and located
in Section IV shall be inspected during the third calendar year
subsequent to the year in which this article becomes effective and every
fifth year thereafter. Residential units subject to the inspection
requirements of this article and located in Section V shall be inspected
during the fourth calendar year subsequent to the year in which this
article becomes effective and every fifth year thereafter.
A. If the Borough public official, upon completion of the inspection, finds
that the applicable Borough, state and/or federal laws and/or codes
and/or requirements have not been met, a written notice of violation
shall be issued.
B. Whenever the Borough public official determines that there exists a
violation of any provision of this article, he shall issue a notice which
shall:
(1) Be in writing;
(2) Include a brief description of the real estate sufficient for
identification;
(3) Specify the violation which exists with reference to the applicable
article or ordinance provisions, together with a brief statement of
the remedial action required;
§ 326-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-8
1:185
§ 326-9. Services of notices.
§ 326-10. Compliance.
If the Borough public official, upon completion of the inspection, finds that
the applicable Borough, state and/or federal codes and/or requirements
have not been met, a written notice of violation shall be issued.
(4) Provide a reasonable time, not to exceed 30 days, for letting of a
contract for the correction of any violation alleged; and
(5) Include a statement regarding the right of appeal.
A. A notice of violation shall be served upon the owner or occupant in the
following manner:
(1) By handing it to the person to be served;
(2) By handing the notice, at the residence of the person to be served,
to an adult member of the family with which he resides; but if no
adult member of the family is found, then to an adult person in
charge of such residence;
(3) By handing the notice at any office or usual place of business of the
person to be served, to his agent or to the person for the time being
in charge thereof; or
(4) By mailing the notice to the last known address of the person to be
served, by certified mail, unrestricted delivery, return receipt
requested, and if returned as unclaimed, to be sent first class mail.
B. If any person to whom the notice of violation is addressed cannot be
served in the above manner, the Borough public official shall briefly
note the appropriate facts in the file and shall make service upon such
person by posting the notice of violation in a conspicuous place on the
premises described in the notice.
C. Service upon any executive officer of a corporation shall be a sufficient,
but not exclusive, method of service upon the corporation. Service upon
any partner of a partnership shall be sufficient, but not exclusive,
method of service upon the partnership.
A. Ten-day notice of violation.
(1) If the Borough public official finds one or more violations in the
following categories, the Borough public official may issue a notice
of violation pursuant to this section of the article:
(a) Multiple-dwelling-unit fire exits.
(b) Separation of common walls and floors.
(c) Automatic fire alarm systems.
§ 326-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-10
1:186
(d) Multiple-dwelling-unit fire protection.
(e) Heating.
(f) Hot and cold water supplies.
(g) Water closet and basin.
(h) Plumbing connections.
(i) Electrical hazards.
(j) Structural hazards.
(k) Serious roof leak.
(l) Any other conditions regarding the residential rental unit that,
in the sole discretion of the Borough public official, would
create a hazardous and/or dangerous condition or render the
residential rental unit(s) uninhabitable.
(2) A ten-day notice of violation shall be issued and corrective action
shall be taken by owner, operator, responsible agent or manager
within 10 days of receipt of said notice.
(3) If after 10 days from the owner's receipt of the ten-day notice of
violation a reinspection reveals that the violations have not been
corrected and arrangements satisfactory to the Borough public
official have not been made, the Borough public official is
authorized to cause such a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit,
building structure or other part of the premises to be repaired,
altered, demolished, improved, vacated or closed. Notices and
orders issued pursuant to this section shall be served in the same
manner as set forth in the section entitled "Notice." In that event,
the residential rental license for the residential rental unit shall be
revoked, and if the residential rental unit is vacant, it shall remain
vacant.
(4) The Borough public official, in the official's sole and absolute
discretion, may provide an extension of time to correct said
violations if the Borough public official finds the owner, operator,
responsible agent or manager is taking the appropriate steps to
properly correct the violations.
B. Thirty-day notice of violation. If the Borough public official finds
violations other than those listed in § 326-10A above, a thirty-day notice
of violation shall be issued. If after 30 days from the date of receipt of
the thirty-day notice of violation the reinspection reveals that all
violations have not been corrected, the owner or operator of the
residential unit shall receive a written thirty-day warning which shall
set forth the violations still in need of correction and that a failure to
correct those violations within 30 days will result in the residential
rental license being revoked. If after the second reinspection the
§ 326-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-10
1:187
§ 326-11. Fees; violations and penalties.
violations have not been properly corrected, the license for the
residential rental unit shall be revoked. The Borough public official is
authorized to cause such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building
or structure or other part of the premises to be vacated or closed
and shall prescribe a reasonable time for compliance. If the residential
rental unit is vacant, it shall remain vacant. Notices, warnings and
orders issued pursuant to this section shall be served in the same
manner as notices of violation.
C. Emergency situation. Whenever upon initial inspection or reinspection
the Borough public official finds that any dwelling, dwelling unit,
rooming unit, building, structure or premises constitutes a serious
hazard to the health or safety of the occupants or to the public because
it is dilapidated, unsafe, unsanitary, unhealthful, vermin-infested or
lacking in facilities required by any Borough ordinance, the Borough
public official shall designate such dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming
unit, building, structure or premises as unfit for human habitation or
use and shall cause to be posted on the main entrance area of the
dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building, structure or premises so
closed a placard with the following words: "This premises is unsafe for
use or human habitation; the use and occupancy of this premises for
human habitation is prohibited and unlawful."
(1) If the premises so designated are occupied, the Borough public
official shall order such premises vacated and shall prescribe a
reasonable time for compliance. A vacant premises which has been
designated as unsafe for human habitation and which has been
placarded as such shall not be used again for human habitation or
use until written approval is secured from the Borough public
official and the placard is removed by the Borough public official.
The Borough public official shall rescind the designation as unsafe
for human habitation or use and shall remove the placard when the
Borough public official finds that the defect or condition has been
removed or eliminated and that the dwelling, dwelling unit, or
rooming unit is a fit place or unit for human habitation. No person
shall remove or deface the placard from any premises which has
been designated as unsafe for human habitation and has been
placarded as such.
(2) In the event that an emergency situation as defined in this section
requires that the Borough order that the premises be immediately
vacated or to remain vacant, whichever the case may be, the owner,
operator, manager or responsible agent shall be entitled to a
prompt post-deprivation hearing as set forth in the section entitled
"Appeals." Notice and orders issued pursuant to this paragraph
shall be served in the same manner as set forth in the section
entitled "Notice."
A. Fees.
§ 326-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-11
1:188
§ 326-12. Appeals.
(1) Annual license fee. The fee for a residential rental license shall be
$75 per residential rental unit per year, due and payable on or
before January 31 of each year to register for the current year. A
ten-percent penalty shall be added to the annual license fee for any
fee paid after January 31. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
(2) Reinspection: There shall be no fee for the Borough to complete a
first reinspection. The fee for a second inspection shall be $30.
Subsequent reinspections shall be double the cost of the previous
reinspection per residential rental unit. The fee for said second
reinspection and all subsequent inspections shall be paid at the
time of said reinspection. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 779]
(3) Reinstatement. The fee to reinstate a revoked residential rental
license shall be $30 per residential rental unit.
(4) Transfer. The fee to transfer a residential rental license shall be
$30.
(5) Late fee. In the event that any person, firm or corporation should
pay the annual license fee after the January 31 deadline, a late fee
of $25 per annum shall be paid as part of the annual license fee.
[Added 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 779]
(6) The schedule of fees may be amended from time to time, at the sole
discretion of Borough Council, by resolution or by ordinance.
[Added 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 779]
B. Penalties. [Amended 2-4-2013 by Ord. No. 779]
(1) Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this
article shall be fined not less than $25 nor more than $100 for each
offense, and a separate offense shall be committed for each day
during or on which a violation occurs or continues to exist. In
addition to any criminal prosecution for violation of this article, the
Borough public official or any duly authorized agent of the Borough
may take such civil or equitable remedies in any court of record of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, against any person or
property, real or person, to enforce the provisions of this article.
(2) The schedule of penalties may be amended from time to time by
Borough Council, at the sole discretion of Borough Council, by
resolution or by ordinance.
A. Any party in interest aggrieved by any decision of the Borough public
official may appeal to the Hellertown Rental Property Maintenance
Appeals Board. Any appeal shall be in writing to the Hellertown Rental
Property Maintenance Appeals Board for a review of the action of the
Borough public official in accordance with the appeal procedures set
§ 326-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-12
1:189
forth in this section; provided, however, that such person delivers a
copy of such written appeal to the Borough public official within 10
days after being served with notice of violation or order. Except for
an emergency as set forth in § 326-12B(5), an appeal by the aggrieved
person shall stay the enforcement provisions of this article. Except as
provided herein for an emergency situation, compliance with the notice
of violation shall not be required during the time an appeal is pending
before the Hellertown Rental Property Maintenance Appeals Board or
the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County.
B. The Rental Property Maintenance Appeals Board shall be a body of five
members, who shall be appointed by the Borough, one of whom shall be
a citizen of the Borough who has specific knowledge and expertise in
the field of construction and maintenance of property and may also
have specific knowledge regarding the requirements of the state
Uniform Construction Code; another shall be a landlord and resident of
the Borough; two shall be residents of the Borough; and one member of
the Board shall be an elected official serving on Borough Council. A
member shall serve for a term of two years from the time of
appointment or reappointment by Borough Council or until his
successor shall take office. The Board shall have legal counsel attend
the hearings and report to the Board. The Board shall have the
following powers:
(1) To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by the
Borough public official in the enforcement of the provisions of this
article or any other Borough ordinance that has applicability to the
establishment and maintenance of proper standards, including, but
not limited to, fire prevention, health or buildings;
(2) To modify any notice of violation or order and to authorize a
variance from the terms of this article when, because of special
circumstances, undue hardship would result from literal
enforcement, and where such variance substantially complies with
the spirit and intent of the article;
(3) To grant a reasonable extension of time for the compliance of any
order where there is a demonstrated case of hardship and evidence
of an actual undertaking to correct the violation together with a
bona fide intent to comply within a reasonable time period;
(4) In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board shall act with
reasonable promptness and seek to prevent unwarranted delays
prejudicial to the party involved and to the public interest;
provided, however, that the Board shall file its written decision
within 10 days after the appeal hearing. The Board may reverse or
affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement,
decision or determination appealed from and may make such order,
requirement, decision or determination as justice would require
and, to that end, shall have all the powers of the Borough public
§ 326-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-12
1:190
official; provided, however, that the Board shall be bound by this
article and shall not ignore the clear provisions and intent of this
article.
(5) Whenever the public official finds that there exists any violation of
this article which creates an emergency requiring immediate
correction to protect the health or safety of any occupant of a
dwelling or the public, the Borough public official may issue a
notice of violation stating the facts which constitute the emergency
and requiring necessary action to be taken immediately. Any
person to whom such notice is directed shall comply immediately,
even though an appeal is taken to the Board or the Northampton
County Court of Common Pleas. Any person aggrieved by such
notice of violation may appeal to the Board, as provided in this
article, and the Borough shall give priority to such appeal, which
shall be held within five business days from the date action was
taken by the Borough public official ordering the property vacated
or to remain vacant.
C. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board may appeal to the
Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County within 30 days from the
date of the Board's decision. Such appeal shall be made by a duly
verified petition which shall set forth the factual and legal basis upon
which the decision of the Board is alleged to be illegal, in whole or in
part. Such petition shall be presented to the Court of Common Pleas,
and a notice thereof must be given to the Board within 30 days after the
filing of the Board's decision.
D. If no appeal is filed within the appropriate time frame, within five days
after the expiration of the time for compliance as stated on the notice of
violation or within five days after any appeal period has expired for any
decision by the Board or the Court of Common Pleas, the Borough
public official shall reinspect the premises to determine compliance. If
the violation has not been corrected, the Borough public official shall
institute prosecution for the violation.
E. Every notice of violation and all records of all proceedings occurring
subsequent to the notice of violation and until the final disposition of
the matter outlined in the notice of violation shall be public and
available for inspection; provided, however, that the Borough public
official may prescribe reasonable regulations regarding the time and
manner of inspection consistent with the Borough's open records policy.
§ 326-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 326-12
1:191
Chapter 338
SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Borough Authority — See Ch. 7, Art. I.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 378.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 326-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 326-12
1:192
ARTICLE I
Connection to Sewer System
[Adopted 8-6-1957 by Ord. No. 247]
§ 338-1. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
AUTHORITY — Hellertown Borough Authority, as presently or hereafter
constituted, which has been created by said Council and to which has been
referred by said Council the specific project of sewers.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania, or the duly constituted and elected Council thereof.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Any solid, liquid or gaseous substance or form
of energy rejected or escaping from any industrial, manufacturing, trade
or business process or from the development, recovery or processing of
natural resources, as distinct from sanitary sewage.
LATERAL — That part of the sewer system extending from a public main or
street sewer to curbline or property line if there is no curb and where the
main or street sewer line is laid under a sidewalk; the word "lateral" shall
include the Y connection from the main or street sewer line.59
OCCUPIED BUILDING — Any structure erected and intended for
continuous or periodic habitation, occupancy or use by human beings or
animals and from which structure sewage and industrial waste, or either
thereof, is or may be discharged.
PERSON — Shall include individuals or natural persons, artificial persons
existing only in contemplation of law, and shall be construed to include
associations, partnerships, limited partnerships, joint-stock companies and
corporations.
PROPERTY ACCESSIBLE TO THE SEWER SYSTEM — Real estate which
adjoins, abuts on, or is adjacent to, the sewer system.
SEWAGE — The normal water-carried household and toilet wastes from the
residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments.
SEWER SYSTEM — The sanitary sewer collection system, together with
appurtenant facilities constructed in and for the Borough of Hellertown
and any improvements, additions or extensions that hereafter may be made
thereto by the Authority or to any part or parts of any or all thereof.60
§ 338-2. Notice of completion of sewer system or portion thereof.
Whenever the sewer system or any reasonable portion thereof is completed
and ready for public use, it shall be the duty of the Authority, from time
59.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
60.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-2
1:193
to time, to cause notice of the fact to be given by advertisement published
once in one newspaper of general circulation in the Borough, and such
advertisement shall state that said sewer may be used by all persons owning
occupied buildings on property accessible to the sewer system, subject to
the payment of any connection charges and of annual sewer rentals in
amounts as may from time to time be fixed by the Authority.
§ 338-3. Sewer connections required.
§ 338-4. Unlawful means of sewage disposal. [Amended 12-30-1964
by Ord. No. 317]
It shall be unlawful for any person owning any property accessible to the
sewer system to erect, construct, or use or maintain or cause to be erected,
constructed, used or maintained any privy, cesspool, sinkhole, septic tank or
other receptacle on such premises for receiving sewage after the expiration
of the particular period specified in § 338-3 hereof or otherwise at any time
to erect, construct, use or maintain any pipe, conduit, drain or other facility
for the discharge of sewage except into the sewer system.
§ 338-5. Abatement of nuisances.
Any person who erects, constructs, uses or maintains a privy, cesspool,
sinkhole or septic tank on any property accessible to the sewer system,
in violation of this article, shall be deemed and shall be declared to be
erecting, constructing and maintaining a nuisance, which nuisance the
Borough is hereby authorized and directed to abate in the manner provided
by law.
§ 338-6. Manner of making connections; discharge of industrial
waste.61
No connection shall be made to, nor shall any industrial waste be
discharged into the sewer system, except in compliance with the ordinances
A. All persons owning any occupied building now erected upon property
accessible to the sewer system shall at their own expense connect such
building with the sewer system within 60 days after the date of
publication specified in § 338-2.
B. All persons owning any property accessible to the sewer system upon
which an occupied building is hereafter erected shall, at the time of the
erection of such building and at their own expense, connect the same
with the sewer system.
C. All persons owning any occupied building upon property which
hereafter becomes accessible to the sewer system shall, at their own
expense, connect such building with the sewer system within 60 days
after notice to do so from the Borough.
61.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-6
1:194
and resolutions as well as such rules and regulations as may, from time to
time, be enacted, adopted, approved or promulgated by the Authority.
§ 338-7. Notice to connect; time limit.
After the expiration of the particular periods specified in § 338-3 of this
article, if any owner of an occupied building on property accessible to the
sewer system shall have failed to connect such property with the sewer
system as required by said § 338-3, the Borough shall cause to be served on
the owner of such property so failing to connect to said sewer system and
also upon the occupants of the building in question a copy of this article and
a written or printed notice requiring such connection to be made, and such
notice shall further state that its requirements shall be complied with within
60 days from the date thereof.
§ 338-8. Violations and penalties. [Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No.
31762]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more
than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to
a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of
this article continues or each section of this article which shall be found to
have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 338-9. Grant of rights and easements to authority.
The Borough hereby grants to the Authority all and every easement, rightof-
way and any and all other rights necessary or desirable on, over or
under the streets, sidewalks and alleys in the Borough for the purpose of
constructing the sewer system therein.
62.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-9
1:195

ARTICLE II
Borough Authority Rules and Regulations63
[Adopted 9-8-1987 by Ord. No. 549]
§ 338-10. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Sewer System Rules and
Regulations Ordinance of the Borough of Hellertown."
§ 338-11. Adoption of sewer system rules and regulations.64
There hereby is adopted, by and under the authority of the Council of the
Borough of Hellertown, for the purpose of providing rules and regulations
governing the use of the Hellertown Sewer System, as owned, operated and
controlled by the Hellertown Borough Authority, the "Rules and Regulations
of the Hellertown Borough Authority for Use of Sewer System," on May 13,
1987, as amended from time to time. The aforesaid rules and regulations
hereby are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein,
and from the date on which this article shall take effect, the provisions
thereof shall be controlling upon all users of the Hellertown sewer system.
§ 338-12. Responsibility for payment of fees, etc.
The legal and/or equitable owner(s) of the real estate to which the sewer
service is being provided shall be responsible to pay and shall pay the fees,
fines and penalties as may be imposed properly pursuant to the terms of
this article.
§ 338-13. Violations and penalties.65
Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this article or any
resolutions or rules and regulations made by the Council of the Borough of
Hellertown or by the Hellertown Borough Authority in pursuance thereof,
or aiding or assisting therein, shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
§ 338-14. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalties, the Borough of Hellertown, either
itself or acting through the Hellertown Borough Authority as its agency,
63.Editor's Note: The Council of the Borough of Hellertown, by Res. No. 09-27, adopted
10-5-2009, approved a Final Draft Act 537 Plan for submittal to the Department of
Environmental Protection for its approval as a revision to the Borough's Official Sewage
Facilities Plan, as required by the Pennsylvania Sewage Facilities Act (Section 5 of the Act
of January 24, 1966, P.L. 1535, No. 537).
64.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
65.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 338-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-14
1:197
shall require the owner of any property to which sewer service is being
provided to correct any illegal, improper or unauthorized connections to
or uses of the sewer system, and should said owner(s) fail or refuse to
make such required corrections no later than 10 days following the receipt
of a written notice to do so, the Borough or the Authority may cause
the connections to be made, with the costs thereof being charged to the
owner(s) of the property in a manner provided by law.
§ 338-15. Abatement.
The imposition of penalties and/or remedies herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough of Hellertown or the Hellertown Borough Authority
from instituting appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent the violation
of this article, to restrain or correct to abate any such violation or to prevent
any act, conduct or activity constituting a violation of the provisions hereof.
§ 338-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-15
1:198
ARTICLE III
Industrial Waste Disposal
[Adopted 11-2-2009 by Ord. No. 739]
§ 338-16. Enactment.
The Borough of Hellertown enacts these regulations for disposal and
discharge of industrial waste. The purpose of this article is the protection
of the public health, safety and welfare, and the regulation of the discharge
of industrial wastes and other applicable materials into the sewage system.
The Borough intends that the City of Bethlehem supervise and enforce
within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Borough the discharge of
industrial wastes and other applicable wastes into the sewage system
served by the City's publicly owned treatment works, applicable codified
ordinances of the City of Bethlehem and the agreement between the
Borough and City dated November 4, 1985. The Borough intends that the
provisions of this article be interpreted liberally in order to achieve the
purposes of this article.
§ 338-17. Definitions (923.01).
A. The following abbreviations, acronyms, words, terms and phrases when
used in this article shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this
section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
Additional definitions that apply to this article are set forth in Section
921.01 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, which the
Borough of Hellertown adopts and incorporates into this article as if set
forth at length herein.
B. Abbreviations. The following abbreviations shall have the designated
meanings:
BOD5 Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five-day)
CBOD5 Carbonaceous Biochemical Oxygen Demand (five-day)
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
COD Chemical Oxygen Demand
EPA United States Environmental Protection Agency
IWDP Industrial Waste Discharge Permit
mg/l milligrams per liter
NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
NH3-N ammonia-nitrogen
POTW Publicly Owned Treatment Works
RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
SIC Standard Industrial Classification
SWDA Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 U.S.C. § 6901 et seq.
U.S.C. United States Code
§ 338-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-17
1:199
TSS Total Suspended Solids
C. Definitions. As used in this article, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
ACT or THE ACT — The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also
known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.
ADMINISTRATOR or THE ADMINISTRATOR — The Administrator of
the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
APPROVAL AUTHORITY — The Regional Administrator of EPA Region
III, as defined in 40 CFR 403.3(c).
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF A USER — An authorized
representative of a user may be:
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other
management practices to implement the prohibitions listed in 40 CFR
403.5(a)(1) and (b). BMPs also include treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to contract plant site runoff,
spillage or leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage. (City of Bethlehem Ord. 2009-1, passed 1-6-2009,
incorporated into this article by reference.)
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD5) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard
laboratory procedures, five days at 20° C. expressed as a concentration
(mg/l — milligrams per liter), and determined in accordance with EPA
test methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Pennsylvania, or its
authorized representatives or Borough Council
BOROUGH AUTHORITY — The Borough of Hellertown Water and
Sewer Authority or its authorized representative or Authority Board.
A president, secretary, treasurer, or vice president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function or any other
person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking functions for
the corporation;
(1)
A general partner or proprietor, if the user is a partnership or
proprietorship, respectively;
(2)
A director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee
operations and performance, if the user is a federal, state or local
governmental facility.
(3)
A duly authorized representative of the individual identified in (1)
through (3) above, if such representative is responsible for the
overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge
originates and a written request for designation of an alternate
representative is approved by the City.
(4)
§ 338-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-17
1:200
BUILDING SEWER — A sewer conveying wastewater from the premises
of a user to the POTW.
CARBONACEOUS BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (CBOD5) — The
quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of
carbonaceous organic matter expressed as a concentration (mg/l —
milligrams per liter), and determined in accordance with EPA test
methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
CATEGORICAL STANDARD or CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT
STANDARD — See "national categorical standard."
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (COD) — The quantity of oxygen
utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter which is susceptible
to conversion to carbon dioxide and water and expressed as a
concentration (mg/l — milligrams per liter), and determined in
accordance with EPA test methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
CITY — The City of Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, or the City Council of
Bethlehem.
COOLING WATER — The water discharged from any use such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration or to which the only pollutant
added is heat.
CONTROL AUTHORITY — The City of Bethlehem.
DIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge of treated or untreated
wastewater directly to the waters of the State of Pennsylvania.
DIRECTOR OF WATER AND SEWER RESOURCES — The person
designated by the City to implement, administer and enforce the
provisions of this article or the Director's duly authorized
representative.
DOMESTIC SEWAGE — Liquid or water-carried waste generated from
sanitary conveniences of campers, trailers, dwellings, office buildings,
factories or institutions and from household laundry operations,
washing and cooking foods and dish washing, but does not contain
industrial waste.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY or EPA — The U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may
also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly
authorized official of said agency.
EXISTING SOURCE — Any source of discharge, the construction or
operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of
proposed categorical standards which will be applicable to such source
if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section
307 of the Act.
GRAB SAMPLE — A sample which is taken from a waste stream on a
one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and taken
over a period of time which does not exceed 15 minutes.
§ 338-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-17
1:201
HEARING BOARD — The Board appointed according to provisions of
the City of Bethlehem Section 923.05, incorporated into this article by
reference.
HOLDING TANK WASTE — Any waste from holding tanks, such as,
but not limited to, treatment units, vessels, chemical toilets, campers,
trailers, septic tanks, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE — The discharge or the introduction of
pollutants from any nondomestic source regulated under Section
307(b) or (c) or (d) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) into the POTW
(including holding tank waste discharged into the system).
INDUSTRIAL PRETREATMENT COORDINATOR — The person
designated by the City to supervise the operation of its industrial
pretreatment program, who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative as
delegated by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator.
INDUSTRIAL USER — A source of indirect discharge.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE — Solid, liquid or gaseous wastes from any
industrial, manufacturing or commercial process or from the
development, recovery or processing of natural resources, but not
domestic sewage.
INDUSTRIAL WASTE DISCHARGE PERMIT (IWDP) — A Permit as set
forth in Section 923.04 of this article.
INTERFERENCE — A discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, both:
MONTHLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of the values for users'
samples collected over a calendar month.
NATIONAL CATEGORICAL STANDARD or CATEGORICAL STANDARD
— Standard specifying quantities or concentrations of pollutants or
pollutant properties which may be discharged to the POTW by existing
or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories as
Inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or
operations, or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and
(1)
Therefore, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or
duration of a violation) or of the prevention of sewage sludge use
or disposal in compliance with the following statutory provisions
and regulations or permits issued thereunder (or more stringent
state or local regulations): Section 405 of the Clean Water Act,
the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA) [including Title II, more
commonly referred to as "Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
(RCRA)," and including state regulations contained in any state
sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the
SWDA], the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substance Control Act, and the
Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
(2)
§ 338-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-17
1:202
established as separate regulations under 40 CFR Chapter 1,
Subchapter N.
NATIONAL POLLUTANT DISCHARGE ELIMINATION SYSTEM OR
NPDES PERMIT — A permit issued to the City pursuant to Section 402
of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1342).
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD or NATIONAL STANDARD —
Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by
EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, which applies
to industrial users. This term includes categorical standards and the
prohibitive discharge standards or local limits established pursuant to
40 CFR 403.5.
NEW SOURCE — Any building, structure, facility or installation from
which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction
of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment
standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
PASS-THROUGH — A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of
the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in
conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a
cause of a violation of any requirement of the City's NPDES permit
(including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation).
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint-stock company, trust, estate,
governmental entity, or any other legal entity, or their legal
representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include
the feminine, the singular shall include the plural, where indicated by
the context.
pH — A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in
standard units, and determined in accordance with EPA test methods
referenced in 40 CFR 136.
The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a
site at which no other source is located;
(1)
The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaced the
process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source; or
(2)
The production or wastewater-generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining
whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the
extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant
and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same
general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
(3)
§ 338-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-17
1:203
POLLUTANT — Any dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue,
sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemicals, biological
materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged
equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, and industrial, municipal and
agricultural waste discharged into the environment.
POLLUTION — The man-made or man-induced alteration of the
chemical, physical, biological and radiological integrity of the
environment.
POTW TREATMENT PLANT — That portion of the POTW designated to
provide treatment to wastewater.
PRETREATMENT or TREATMENT — The reduction of the amount of
pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature
of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior
to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants
into a POTW. The reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical,
chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means,
except as prohibited by 40 CFR 403.6(d).
PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS — Any substantive or procedural
requirement related to pretreatment, other than a national
pretreatment standard imposed on an industrial user.
PRETREATMENT STANDARD — See "national pretreatment standard."
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW) — A treatment
works, as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1292), which is
owned in this instance by the City. This definition includes any devices
or systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation
of municipal sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any
manholes, sewers, pumping stations, force mains, siphons or other
facilities or appurtenances which are part of the system utilized to
convey wastewater to a POTW treatment plant. The POTW shall also
include any collection and conveyance systems which convey
wastewaters to the City's POTW from persons outside the City who are,
by contract or agreement with the City, users of the City's POTW.
SEPTAGE — A type of holding tank waste originating from the
discharge of strictly domestic sewage to holding tanks, chemical toilets,
camper waste tanks, trailer waste tanks, cesspools and septic tanks.
SEWAGE — See "wastewater."
SHALL — Is mandatory; "may" is permissive.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER — Any industrial user of the City's
POTW who:
Is subject to categorical standards under 40 CFR 403.6 and 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N; or
(1)
Discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process
wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling
(2)
§ 338-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-17
1:204
SLUG LOAD or SLUG — Any pollutant released in a discharge at a
flow rate or concentration which will cause a violation of the specific
discharge prohibitions in 40 CFR 403.5 (b) and/or any discharge of
nonroutine nature, episodic nature, including but not limited to,
accidental spills or noncustomary batch discharges, or which could
cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards of Section
923.02 of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, adopted
and incorporated into this article by reference.
SPECIFIC POLLUTANT DISCHARGE LIMITATIONS or LOCAL LIMITS
— Numeric quantities or concentrations of pollutants which may be
discharged to the POTW by existing or new industrial users developed
by the City in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c) and defined in Section
923.02(d) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem, adopted
herein by reference.
STANDARD INDUSTRIAL CLASSIFICATION (SIC) — A classification
pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the
Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget,
1972, as amended.
STATE — State of Pennsylvania.
STORMWATER — Any flow occurring during or following any form of
natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
SUPERINTENDENT — The person designated by the City to supervise
the operation of the publicly owned treatment works and who is
charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article or the
Superintendent's duly authorized representative.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS (TSS) or SUSPENDED SOLIDS — The
total suspended matter that floats on the surface of or is suspended
in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable by
laboratory filtering and determined in accordance with EPA test
methods referenced in 40 CFR 136.
USER — Any person who utilizes the services of the City's POTW.
WASTEWATER — The liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and/
or domestic sewage from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial
facilities, or institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed into or permitted to enter the POTW.
WATER QUALITY MANAGER — The person designated by the City to
supervise the operation of the Water Quality Bureau.
and boiler blowdown wastewater); or contributes a process waste
stream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is
designated as such by the City on the basis that the industrial
user has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or
requirement.
§ 338-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-17
1:205
§ 338-18. General discharge regulations (923.02).
WATERS OF THE STATE — All streams, lakes, ponds, marshes,
watercourses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation
systems, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of
water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private,
which are contained within, flow through, or border upon the state or
any portion thereof.
WEEKLY AVERAGE — The arithmetic mean of the values for the users'
samples collected over a seven-day calendar week.
A. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will cause pass-through or
interference with the operation or performance of the POTW. These
general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW whether or not
the user is subject to national categorical standards or any other
national, state or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
(1) A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
(a) Quantities of liquids, solids or gases (including, but not limited
to, gasoline, kerosene, naptha, benzene, toluene, xylene,
ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, peroxides, chlorates,
perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides) which
by reason of their nature or quantity are or may be sufficient,
either alone or by interaction with other substances, to cause
fire or explosion or be injurious in any way to the POTW or to
the operation of the POTW, including, but not limited to, any
discharge with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F. (60°
C.) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no
time shall any wastewater cause two successive readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the
system (or at any point in the system) to be more than 5% nor
any single reading to be over 10% of the lower explosive limit
(LEL) of the meter.
(b) Solid or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause
obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference,
including, but not limited to, grease, garbage, solids greater
than three inches in any dimension, animal guts or tissues,
paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, entrails, whole
blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or
marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings,
rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas,
tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil, mud, or glass grinding or polishing
wastes.
§ 338-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-18
1:206
(c) Pollutants which will cause any damage to the POTW; but in no
case may pollutants being discharged have a pH lower than 5.0
nor greater than 11.5.
(d) Pollutants in sufficient quantity which, either alone or by
interaction with other pollutants, would result in the presence
of toxic gases, vapors or fumes, cause worker injury or
disruption of any wastewater treatment process, including the
disposal of sludge, or would be in noncompliance with any
categorical or pretreatment standards established in accord
with 40 CFR 403.6.
(e) Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases or solids which, either
alone or by interaction with other wastes, cause a public
nuisance or hazard to life or prevent entry into the POTW for
maintenance and repair.
(f) Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants, released in
a discharge at a flow rate and/or concentration which will
cause interference with the POTW.
(g) Substances which will cause pass-through and cause the
POTW to violate its NPDES and/or state solid waste disposal
system permit(s) or the air quality and/or receiving water
quality standards.
(h) Wastewater with excessive discoloration not removed in the
POTW treatment process, including, but not limited to, dye
wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which causes or
contributes to interference, pass-through, or any violations at
the POTW treatment plant.
(i) Heat in amounts producing interference, but in no case heat in
such quantities that the temperature at the POTW treatment
plant exceeds 40° C. (104° F.). At no time shall a discharge to
the POTW have a temperature higher than 150° F. or less than
32° F.
(j) Slug loads, as defined in Section 923.01 of the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
(k) Wastewater containing any radioactive material or isotopes of
such half-life or concentration as may cause pass-through or
interference in the POTW or exceed limits established by the
Superintendent in compliance with applicable Delaware River
Basin Commission, state or federal regulations.
(l) Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or
pass-through.
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:207
(m) Discharge of mineral/petroleum oil and grease in
concentrations greater than 100 mg/l and animal/vegetable oil
and grease in concentrations greater than 300 mg/l.
(n) Discharge of holding tank waste or septage, except as provided
for in Section 923.08 of the City of Bethlehem Codified
Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
(o) Discharge which, if otherwise disposed of, would be considered
a hazardous waste as defined in 40 CFR Part 261 without prior
notification by the user in writing to the POTW, the state and
EPA in accordance with 40 CFR 403.12(p)(I) and written
approval by the Superintendent.
(p) New or increased discharges or changes in the nature of
discharges without prior notification to the POTW and written
approval by the Superintendent.
(q) Stormwater, surface water, groundwater, artesian well water,
roof runoff, subsurface drainage, unpolluted industrial process
water, unpolluted cooling water (also refer to Article 915 of the
City of Bethlehem, incorporated herein by reference), or
swimming pool drainage (also refer to Article 921 of the City of
Bethlehem, incorporated into this article by reference), unless
specifically authorized by the Superintendent.
(r) Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment
of industrial wastes, unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent.
(s) Wastes generated in the diagnosis, treatment, immunization,
or autopsy of human beings or animals, in research pertaining
thereto, or in the preparation of human or animal remains for
burial or cremation, unless specifically authorized by the
Superintendent.
(t) Wastewater, alone or in conjunction with other sources,
causing the POTW treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity
test.
(u) Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which
may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
(2) When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator determines that a
user is contributing to the POTW any of the above-enumerated
substances in such amounts as to cause pass-through or
interference with the operation of the POTW and/or POTW
treatment plant, the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator shall:
(a) Notify the user of the impact of the contribution on the POTW
and/or POTW treatment plant;
§ 338-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-18
1:208
(b) Develop effluent limitation(s), as needed, for the user to
correct the pass-through or interference with the POTW and/or
POTW treatment plant; and
(c) Proceed with enforcement pursuant to the provisions of
Section 923.05 of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference.
(3) Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section
shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they have a
reasonable potential to be discharged to the POTW.
B. National pretreatment standards and national categorical standards.
All industrial users are subject to the National Pretreatment Standards.
The National Categorical Standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I,
Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated into this article
by reference as though set forth in full. Industrial users must comply
with all applicable categorical standards and other requirements
promulgated by EPA. Any categorical standard, if more stringent than
the limitations imposed under this article, shall immediately supersede
the limitations imposed under this article.
(1) Where a categorical standard is expressed only in terms of either
the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may impose equivalent
concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c).
(2) When wastewater subject to a categorical standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator shall impose an alternate limit using the
combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e).
(3) An industrial user may obtain a variance from a categorical
standard from the EPA if the industrial user can prove, pursuant to
the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that
factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from
the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical
standard. If a variance is obtained, the City reserves the right to
modify the industrial user's permit to incorporate the revised
standards and requirements.
(4) An industrial user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a
categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15.
C. Modification of national categorical standards. Where the City's POTW
treatment plant achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by
national categorical standards, the City may apply to the approval
authority for modification of specific limits in the national categorical
standards. "Consistent removal" is defined by the EPA in 40 CFR
403.7(b). The City may then modify pollutant discharge limits in the
national categorical standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR,
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:209
Part 403, Section 403.7 are fulfilled and prior approval from the
approval authority is obtained.
D. Specific pollutant discharge limitations; local limits.
(1) In accordance with 40 CFR 403.5(c), the City imposes the following
specific pollutant discharge limitations for all industrial users:
Pollutant (total)
Local Limit
(mg/l)
Arsenic 0.11
Cadmium 0.05
Chromium 0.91
Copper 1.35
Lead 0.39
Mercury 0.007
Molybdenum 0.22
Nickel 1.36
Selenium 0.23
Silver 0.21
Zinc 2.58
Cyanide 0.38
(2) The specific pollutant discharge limitations listed above are the
highest allowable concentration in any type of sample, either a
grab or composite, collected over any time interval, unless
otherwise specified in an IWDP.
(3) The specific pollutant discharge limitations listed above apply at
the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW or at
the point designated by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator.
(4) In addition to industrial users, the City reserves the right to apply
the specific pollutant discharge limitations listed above to any
user's wastewater discharge which is not composed of strictly
domestic sewage.
(5) The City reserves the right to establish alternate specific pollutant
discharge limitations in individual industrial waste discharge
permits, but only in accordance with regulatory requirements. In
no event shall any alternate limit allow the total loading allocated
to all industrial users for any pollutant to exceed the maximum
allowable industrial headwork's loading as determined in the City's
most recent local limits evaluation approved by the approval
authority. The specific pollutant discharge limitations, if more
stringent than the national categorical standards, shall
immediately supersede the national categorical standards.
§ 338-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-18
1:210
E. State requirements. State requirements and limitations on discharges
shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal
requirements and limitations or those in this article.
F. City's right of revision. The City reserves the right to establish by
ordinance more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to
the POTW if deemed necessary.
G. Excessive discharge. No user shall increase the use of process water
solely for the purpose of complying with this article or in any way
attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for
adequate treatment to achieve compliance with the limitations
contained in the national categorical standards or in any other
pollutant-specific limitation developed by the City or state. The
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may impose mass limitations on
users who are using dilution to meet applicable national categorical
standards or in any other pollutant-specific limitations or requirements
or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate.
H. Accidental discharges/slug loads. Each industrial user shall provide
protection from accidental discharges/slug loads of prohibited
materials or other substances regulated by this article. Where facilities
are provided to prevent accidental discharges/slug loads of prohibited
materials, these facilities shall be provided and maintained at the
industrial user's own cost and expense. In the case of an accidental
discharge/slug loads, it shall be the responsibility of the industrial user,
upon discovery and after assessing the situation and taking initial
corrective action, to immediately telephone and notify the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator of the incident. The notification shall include
location of discharge, type of waste, estimated concentration and
volume if known, and initial corrective actions taken by the industrial
user.
(1) Written notice. Within five days following a accidental discharge/
slug loads; the industrial user shall submit to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator a detailed written report including the
date, time, duration of the discharge as well as describing the
cause of the discharge, all corrective measures implemented or
attempted, and measures to be taken by the industrial user to
prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not
relieve the industrial user of any expenses, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW,
fish kills, or any other damage to person or property, nor shall such
notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties,
or other liability which may be imposed by this article or other
applicable articles or laws.
(2) Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the
industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising
employees whom to call in the event of an accidental discharge/
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-18
1:211
slug load. Employers shall ensure that all employees are advised of
the emergency notification procedures.
I. New or updated accidental discharge/slug control plans. An accidental
discharge or slug control plan, as prescribed under 40 CFR
403.8(f)(2)(v), shall be required:
(1) For new source industrial users. Detailed plans showing facilities
and operating procedures to provide protection from accidental
discharges or slugs shall be submitted to the City for review as part
of the IWDP application, and shall be approved by the City before
construction of the facility.
(2) For existing industrial users. The Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator shall evaluate whether each industrial user needs a
new or updated accidental discharge/slug control plan.
J. Contents of accidental discharge/slug control plans.
(1) Should the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator require the
industrial user to develop, submit for approval, and implement a
new or updated accidental discharge/slug control plan, the
accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum,
the following:
(a) Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch
discharges;
(b) Description of stored chemicals;
(c) Procedures for immediately notifying the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator of any accidental or slug discharge,
as required by Section 923.02(h) of the City of Bethlehem
Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
(d) Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or
slug discharge. Such procedures shall include, but are not
limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training,
building of containment structures or equipment, measures for
containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or
measures and equipment for emergency response.
(2) When an existing industrial user is required by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator to provide and/or modify an accidental
discharge/slug control plan, the industrial user shall provide the
plan within 60 days of notification. Should the plan require
construction or implementation of measures to meet compliance,
the plan shall provide a schedule for those actions. After initial
review, should additional information be required to provide a
complete plan, it shall be furnished to the Industrial Pretreatment
§ 338-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-18
1:212
§ 338-19. Fees (923.03).
It is the purpose of this section to provide for the recovery of costs from
users of the City's POTW for the implementation of the industrial
pretreatment program established herein. The applicable charges or fees
are set forth below.
Coordinator within 30 days of the date of notification. Failure to
submit a revised plan and/or failure to provide a complete plan
after the thirty-day submission period may render the industrial
waste discharge permit void.
(3) The City's review and approval of accidental discharge/slug control
plans shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to
modify the industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the
requirements of this article.
(4) If not specifically required by the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator, the information, requirements, etc., called for in a
plan are not waived by the City, and the industrial user shall
provide all necessary items, procedures, etc., to prevent any
accidental discharge and/or slug discharge to the POTW.
(5) An approved state pollution prevention plan may substitute for all
or a portion of the contents of an accidental discharge/slug control
plan to the extent that it satisfies the requirements described
herein.
(6) All users are required to notify the POTW immediately of any
changes at its facility affecting potential for a slug discharge.
A. Service charges and fees. The charges and fees include:
(1) Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures
completed by the City or the City's contract laboratory to be billed
at 1.15 times the actual cost.
(2) Fees for IWD permit applications: $250.
(3) Fees for filing appeals: $200.
B. Program fee.
(1) The City reserves the right to develop and institute a program fee
to recover operating costs associated with implementation of the
industrial pretreatment program which are separate from or in lieu
of those costs identified in Sections 923.03 (a) or 923.03 (c) of the
City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by
reference. The program fee will be chargeable to all users included
in the industrial pretreatment program and will be billed and
updated at a frequency determined by the City.
§ 338-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-19
1:213
(2) The above fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article
and those fees set forth in the City ordinance, which are
incorporated into this article by reference, and are separate from
all other fees chargeable by the City and/or those fees chargeable
by the Borough to recover its costs incurred by implementation and
enforcement of the disposal and discharge of industrial waste and
other applicable waste generated within the Borough and
deposited into the City of Bethlehem's POTW.
C. Industrial waste surcharge.
(1) When approval is granted by the City to a user to discharge
industrial waste into the POTW, the user's sewer rental will be
based on the prevailing rate for normal domestic sewage plus a
quarterly surcharge based on the relative strength of said
industrial waste contribution and calculated as follows:
Surcharge = 0.00834 x Flow x {[(BOD5 — 300) x BOD5 Cost] +
[(TSS — 350) x TSS Cost] + [(NH3 - N — 50) x NH3-N Cost]}
Where:
Surcharge= Surcharge calculated quarterly;
0.00834 = constant to convert industrial waste strength from
mg/l to thousand pounds;
Flow = total quarterly discharge flow of the industrial
waste in million gallons;
BOD5 = biochemical oxygen demand (5-day) of the
industrial waste in mg/l;
300 = value expressing the BOD5 of normal domestic
sewage in mg/l;
BOD5
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of
BOD5;
TSS = total suspended solids of the industrial waste in mg/
l;
350 = value expressing the TSS of normal domestic
sewage in mg/l;
TSS
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of
TSS;
NH3-N = ammonia-nitrogen of the industrial waste in mg/l;
50 = value expressing the NH3-N of normal domestic
sewage in mg/l;
NH3-N
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds of
NH3-N;
(2) The City reserves the right to substitute the following formula for
the surcharge in the event that BOD5 is not the normal measure of
the strength of the industrial waste:
§ 338-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-19
1:214
Surcharge = 0.00834 x Flow x {[(COD — 600) x COD Cost] +
[(TSS — 350) x TSS Cost] + [(NH3-N — 50) x NH3-N Cost]}
Where:
Surcharge= Surcharge calculated quarterly;
0.00834 = constant to convert industrial waste strength from
mg/l to thousand pounds;
Flow = total quarterly discharge flow of the industrial
waste in million gallons;
COD = chemical oxygen demand of the industrial waste
in mg/l;
600 = value expressing the COD of normal domestic
sewage in mg/l;
COD
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds
of COD;
TSS = total suspended solids of the industrial waste in
mg/l;
350 = value expressing the TSS of normal domestic
sewage in mg/l;
TSS
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds
of TSS;
NH3-N = ammonia-nitrogen of the industrial waste in mg/l;
50 = value expressing the NH3-N of normal domestic
sewage in mg/I;
NH3-N
Cost
= annual City treatment cost per thousand pounds
of NH3-N;
(3) When actual industrial waste values of BOD5 and/or COD and/or
TSS and/or NH3-N are less than the normal domestic sewage
values, then the normal domestic sewage values of 300, 600, 350
and/or 50 mg/l, respectively, shall be used in the calculation of the
surcharge in place of the actual industrial waste values.
(4) The annual City treatment costs per thousand pounds of BOD5,
COD, TSS and NH3-N shall be determined at the beginning of each
calendar year, based upon the City Sewer Fund's actual operating
costs from the previous year.
(5) In no instance shall the sewer rental for industrial waste be less
than the prevailing rate for normal domestic sewage.
(6) In order to ascertain the strength of an industrial waste requiring a
surcharge, the City shall cause appropriate analysis (BOD5, COD,
TSS and NH3-N) to be made quarterly, the average of which shall
be used to establish the surcharge for the ensuing quarter. A more
extensive analysis may be required under Section 923.04 of the
City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by
§ 338-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-19
1:215
§ 338-20. Permits (923.04).
reference. All sampling and analysis shall be completed in
accordance with the provisions of this article. All expenses for
these analyses shall be borne by the user.
(7) The City reserves the right to recalculate and adjust the surcharge
of any user at any time during the year due to the introduction of
new wastewater constituents or any substantial increase in the
strength of the wastewater. A substantial increase shall mean 15%
or greater.
A. It shall be unlawful for any significant and/or categorical industrial user
to discharge to the POTW tributary to the City's POTW treatment plant
without having first obtained a City industrial waste discharge permit
(IWDP), except as authorized by the Director of Water and Sewer
Resources in accordance with the provisions of this article, subject to
state and federal laws and regulations. In addition to the IWDP, the
industrial user shall obtain such additional permits as required by
applicable sections of the Codified Ordinances of the City of Bethlehem
and/or such additional permits as may be required by the Borough of
Hellertown.
B. When requested by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, any user
must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its
wastewater within 30 days of the request unless additional time is
approved, in writing, by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. The
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator is authorized to prepare a form for
this purpose and may periodically require users to update this
information.
C. Industrial waste discharge permits.
(1) All significant and/or categorical industrial users proposing to
connect to or to contribute to the POTW shall obtain an IWDP
before connecting to or contributing to the POTW.
(2) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require other users
to obtain an IWDP as necessary to carry out the purposes of this
article.
(3) Any violation of the terms and conditions of an IWDP shall be
deemed a violation of this article and shall subject the user to the
enforcement under Section 923.05 of the City of Bethlehem
Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference. Obtaining an
IWDP does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with all
federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with
any other requirements of federal, state, and local law.
D. Permit application.
§ 338-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:216
(1) Users required to obtain an IWDP shall complete and file with the
City an application in the form prescribed by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator, and accompanied by a fee as listed in
Section 923.03(a) of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference. Existing users shall file a completed
application in accordance with Section 923.04(1) the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
Proposed new users shall file a completed application at least 90
days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW or within
60 days of receipt of the application from the City, whichever is
sooner. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units
and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
(a) Name, address, and location (if different from the address).
(b) SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification
Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
(c) Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but
not limited to, those referenced in Section 923.02 of the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference,
or any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by City,
state, or national pretreatment standards, as determined by a
City-approved analytical laboratory. Sampling and analysis
shall be performed in accordance with procedures established
by the EPA pursuant to Section 304(g) of the Act and contained
in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended.
(d) Time and duration of contribution.
(e) Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including
variations, if any.
(f) Plans to show all sewers, sewer connections, and
appurtenances by the size, location and elevation.
(g) Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises relating to all materials which are or could be
discharged.
(h) A certification statement regarding whether or not the national
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet
applicable national standards.
(i) Copies of all material safety data sheets.
(j) Products produced.
(k) Raw material processed.
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:217
(l) Normal hours of scheduled operation and operation of
pretreatment system.
(m) List of all environmental permits held.
(n) For all industrial users subject to categorical standards, any
other information required in a baseline monitoring report as
stated in 40 CFR 403.12(b).
(o) Accidental discharge/slug control plan.
(p) Any other information as may be deemed by the City to be
pertinent to evaluate the permit application.
(2) All IWDP applications and user reports must be signed by an
authorized representative of the user.
(3) Incomplete or inaccurate IWDP applications will not be processed
and will be returned to the user for revision. All site plans, floor
plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, all other types of
construction plans, and process diagrams which are subject to the
requirements of this article shall be signed by an authorized
representative of the user that is familiar with the information and
its accuracy. It is recommended that the above information be
signed and sealed by a professional engineer who is licensed in the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, to ensure compliance with sound
engineering and all applicable federal, state, and local codes and
statutes.
E. The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator will evaluate the data
furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 60
days of receipt of a complete IWDP application, the City will determine
whether or not to issue an IWDP. The City may deny any application for
an IWDP, if the application or discharge does not comply with the
requirements of this article or applicable federal and state laws and
regulations. In the event that a timely and complete IWDP renewal
application has been submitted and the IWDP cannot be reissued,
through no fault of the user, before the expiration date, the terms and
conditions of the existing IWDP will be automatically continued and will
remain fully effective and enforceable pending the granting or denial of
the application for IWDP renewal.
F. Modification of or changes in IWDP.
(1) The City may modify an IWDP for good cause, including, but not
limited to, the following reasons:
(a) To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local
pretreatment standards or requirements;
(b) To address significant alterations or additions to the user's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since
the time of IWDP issuance;
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:218
(c) To reflect a change in the POTW that requires either a
temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the
authorized discharge;
(d) Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a
threat to the City's POTW, City personnel, or the receiving
waters;
(e) Violation of any terms or conditions of the IWDP;
(f) Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the IWDP application or in any required reporting;
(g) Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13;
(h) To correct typographical or other errors in the IWDP; or
(i) To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a
new owner or operator.
(2) The user, the Borough, and the Borough Authority shall be
informed of any proposed changes in the IWDP at least 30 days
prior to the effective date to change. Any changes or new
conditions in the IWDP shall include a reasonable time schedule for
compliance.
G. Permit conditions. IWDPs shall be expressly subject to all provisions of
this article and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees
established by the City. IWDPs may contain the following:
(1) The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the
wastewater to be discharged to the POTW.
(2) Limits on the wastewater constituents and characteristics.
(3) Limits on rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow
regulations and equalization.
(4) Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities.
(5) Specifications for monitoring programs which may include
sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and
standards for tests and reporting schedule.
(6) Compliance schedules.
(7) Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge
reports. All baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, and periodic compliance reports must be certified by a
qualified professional and must be signed by an authorized
representative of the user and must contain the certification
statement in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii). The periodic compliance
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:219
reports will be required a minimum of twice a year, indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge as well as a
record of flows.
(8) Requirements for maintaining and retaining plant records relating
to wastewater discharge as specified by the City and affording City
access thereto. As required by 40 CFR 403.12(o), users must keep
records for a minimum of three years or longer in case of
unresolved litigation or when requested by the approval authority.
The user shall make such records available for inspection and
copying.
(9) Requirements for prior notification of the City of any new
introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change
in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being
introduced into the wastewater treatment system, including the
listed or characteristic hazardous wastes for which the user has
submitted initial notification under 40 CFR 403.12(p). Substantial
shall mean 15% plus or minus.
(10) Requirements for notification of accidental discharges/slug loads
as per Section 923.02(h) of the City of Bethlehem Codified
Ordinance, adopted herein by reference.
(11) Requirements that if sampling by a user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the City within 24 hours of becoming aware of the
violation. The user must also resample and submit results of this
resampling to the City within 30 days.
(12) Statements regarding permit duration or transfer as per Section
923.04(h) and (i) of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference.
(13) Statements associated with enforcement in accordance with
Section 923.05 of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference.
(14) Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology,
pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment
devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction
of pollutants into the POTW.
(15) Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to
reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW.
(16) Requirements to develop and implement slug control measures and
to provide notification of facility changes that affect the potential
for a slug discharge.
(17) Requirements associated with BMPs at the sole discretion of the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator.
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:220
(18) Other pertinent conditions required by the City to ensure
compliance with this article.
H. Permits' duration. IWDPs shall be issued for a specified time period, not
to exceed five years. An IWDP may be issued for a minimum period of a
year and shall be stated to expire on a specific date.
I. Permit transfer. IWDPs are issued to a specific user for a specific
operation. An IWDP shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a
new owner, new user, different premises, or a new or changed operation
without the approval of the City. Any succeeding owner or user shall
also comply with the terms and conditions of the existing IWDP.
J. Permit comments. The user may petition the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator to reconsider the terms of an IWDP within 30 days of
receipt of the IWDP. This petition must be made in writing and shall
indicate the IWDP provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection,
and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the IWDP. The
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator will review the comments and
make the final decision on the matter. If the user objects to the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator's final decision, the user may
appeal the matter in accordance with Section 923.05(m) of the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference. Failure
to submit written comments within 30 days shall indicate acceptance of
the IWDP.
K. Permit revocation.
(1) The City may, in accordance with this article, revoke an IWDP for
good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons:
(a) Failure to notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator of
significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed
discharge;
(b) Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts
in the IWDP application;
(c) Falsifying self-monitoring reports;
(d) Tampering with monitoring equipment;
(e) Refusing to allow the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
timely access to the facility premises and records;
(f) Failure to meet effluent limitations;
(g) Failure to pay fines;
(h) Failure to pay sewer charges;
(i) Failure to meet compliance schedules;
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:221
(j) Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the IWDP
application;
(k) Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business
ownership of a permitted facility; or
(l) Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement or any
terms of the IWDP or this article.
(2) IWDPs shall be voidable upon cessation of operations for a period
exceeding six months or transfer of business ownership, unless
approved by the City. All IWDPs issued to a particular user are void
upon the issuance of a new or modified IWDP to that user.
L. Permit reissuance. A user with an expiring IWDP shall apply for IWDP
reissuance by submitting a complete IWDP application, in accordance
with Section 923.04(d) of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference, a minimum of 120 days prior to the
expiration of the user's existing IWDP or within 60 days of receipt of the
application from the City, whichever is sooner. It is the responsibility of
the user to request an IWDP application form no less than 150 days
prior to the expiration of the existing IWDP.
M. Reporting requirements.
(1) Baseline monitoring reports.
(a) Within 180 days after either the effective date of a categorical
standard or the final administrative decision on a category
determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing industrial users currently discharging to or scheduled
to discharge to the POTW, subject to the new or revised
categorical standard, shall submit to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator a report which contains the
information listed in Subsection M(1)(c) below.
(b) At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge,
new sources, and sources that become industrial users
subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical
standard, shall submit to the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator a report which contains the information listed in
Subsection M(1)(c) below. A new source shall report the
method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable
standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its
anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged.
(c) Industrial users described above shall submit the information
set forth below:
[1] Identifying information. The name and address of the
facility, including the name of the operator and owner.
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:222
[2] Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control
permits held by or for the facility.
[3] Description of operations. A brief description of the
nature, average rate of production, and Standard
Industrial Classifications of the operation(s) carried out by
such industrial user. This description shall include a
schematic process diagram which indicates points of
discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes.
[4] Flow measurement. Accurate information from properly
designed, installed and maintained flow-metering devices
showing the measured average daily and maximum daily
flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated
process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow
use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40
CFR 403.6(e).
[5] Measurement of pollutants. The results of sampling and
analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or
mass, where required by the standard or by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator, of regulated pollutants in the
discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous,
daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or
mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be collected
and analyzed in accordance with 40 CFR Part 136, as
amended.
[6] Best management practices. Information identified by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator or the applicable
pretreatment standard regarding compliance with any
applicable BMPs.
[7] Certification. A statement, reviewed by the industrial
user's authorized representative and certified by a
qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not,
whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M)
and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the
pretreatment standards and requirements.
[8] Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or
O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards,
the shortest schedule by which the industrial user will
provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable
pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant
to this section must meet the requirements set out in
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:223
Section 923.04(m)(2) of the City of Bethlehem Codified
Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
[9] Signature. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed
by the industrial user's authorized representative.
(2) Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions
shall apply to the compliance schedule required by Section
923.04(m)(l)(c) of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference:
(a) The compliance schedule shall contain progress increments
(milestones) in the form of dates for the commencement and
completion of major events leading to the construction and
operation of additional pretreatment required for the industrial
user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such
events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer,
completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for
major components, commencing and completing construction,
and beginning and conducting routine operation);
(b) No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months;
(c) The industrial user shall submit a progress report to the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator no later than 14 days
following each date in the compliance schedule and the final
date of compliance, including, at a minimum, whether or not it
complied with the increment of process, including the overall
completion date, the reason for any delay and, if appropriate,
the steps being taken by the industrial user to return to the
established schedule; and
(d) In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such
progress reports to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator.
(3) Reports on compliance with pretreatment standard deadline.
Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with
applicable categorical standards or, in the case of a new source,
following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into
the POTW, any industrial user subject to such pretreatment
standards and requirements shall submit to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator a report on the status of compliance.
This report must contain all the information described in Section
923.04(m)(l)(c) of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference. For industrial users subject to
equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance
with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a
reasonable measure of the industrial user's long-term production
rate. For all other industrial users subject to pretreatment
standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per
unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall
include the industrial user's actual production during the
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:224
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be
signed by the industrial user's authorized representative.
(4) Periodic compliance reports for all permitted users.
(a) All permitted users shall, at a frequency determined by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator but in no case less than
semiannually, submit a report indicating the nature and
concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited
by pretreatment standards and/or contained in a valid IWDP
and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily
wastewater flows for the reporting period. Information
identified by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator or the
applicable pretreatment standard regarding compliance with
any applicable BMP shall also be included with the report. All
periodic compliance reports must be signed by the user's
authorized representative.
(b) As part of these reports, the user may be required to provide
manifests, certifications or any other information deemed
necessary by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator to
ensure compliance with this article.
(c) All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's
discharge.
(d) If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section
monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, using EPA-approved
procedures, the results of this monitoring shall be included in
the report.
(e) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may waive some or
all of the reporting requirements described in Subsection
M(4)(a) and (b) if it is determined that the City will complete
discharge monitoring on the user's behalf.
(5) Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator of any significant changes to the user's
operations or system which might alter the nature, quality or
volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change occurs.
(a) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require the user
to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to
evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of an
IWDP application.
(b) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may issue a new or
modified IWDP in response to changed conditions or
anticipated changed conditions.
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:225
(c) For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include
but are not limited to average flow increases of 15% or greater,
and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants at
levels that may cause pass-through or interference or
otherwise violate the provisions of this article.
(6) Reports of potential problems. In the case of any discharge,
including, but not limited to, accidental discharges; discharges that
violate the prohibitions of Section 923.02 of the City of Bethlehem
Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference; or any
discharge that could cause potential problems for the POTW, the
user upon discovery shall follow the reporting procedures
identified in Section 923.02(h) of the City of Bethlehem Codified
Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
(7) Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain an
IWDP may be required to provide appropriate reports,
certifications, laboratory analyses, manifests or any other
information to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator as the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator shall require to ensure
compliance with the requirements of this article.
(8) Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting.
(a) If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation, the
user must notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user
shall repeat the sampling within 96 hours and shall submit the
analytical results to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
within 30 days of becoming aware of the violation.
(b) Where the user believes the first reported result(s) indicating a
violation(s) may be in error, the user may submit additional
data to support its position with the repeat sampling results.
(c) Where the user believes its facility continues in violation of its
IWDP after repeat sampling, the user shall again repeat the
sampling within 96 hours and shall submit the analytical
results to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator within 30
days of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also
notify the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator to determine if
a schedule for additional monitoring is required.
(d) The user may not be required to resample if the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator notifies the user that the City will
initiate monitoring at the user's facility.
(9) All reports described in Subsection M(1) through (8) must include
the certification statement listed in 40 CFR 403.6(a)(2)(ii).
N. Sample collection. Wastewater samples collected to comply with any
provision of this article shall meet the following requirements.
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:226
(1) Samples should be collected using twenty-four-hour flowproportional
composite collection techniques. In the event that
flow-proportional sampling is infeasible or not warranted in the
opinion of the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may authorize the use of timeproportional
sampling, a minimum of four grab samples where the
user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of
the effluent being discharged or a frequency of grab samples
acceptable to the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. The
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may allow grab samples to be
composited prior to analysis.
(2) Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using
standard grab collection techniques.
(3) Sampling techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, as amended,
shall be followed.
(4) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator shall be notified a
minimum of 48 hours prior to the collection of a sample(s) by a user
and may observe the collection of any sample.
(5) If a user does not follow proper sample collection protocols and/or
techniques, all samples collected inappropriately shall be
discarded and recollected at the sole expense of the user.
(6) Sampling facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and
maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user
to keep its sampling location or facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are
unrepresentative of its discharge.
(7) All sampling locations utilized to meet the discharge monitoring
provisions of this article shall be approved by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator.
O. Analytical requirements. Wastewater pollutant analyses completed to
comply with any provision of this article shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) All pollutant analyses shall be performed in accordance with the
techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise
specified in an applicable categorical standard. If 40 CFR Part 136
does not contain analytical techniques for the pollutant in question,
analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures
approved by the Administrator.
(2) The user shall provide the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
with the name, address and telephone number of any contract
laboratory intended to be utilized for pollutant analyses at least 48
hours prior to the collection of any samples. The Industrial
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:227
Pretreatment Coordinator may recommend the use of an alternate
contract laboratory.
(3) Copies of laboratory analysis results shall be forwarded to the user
and the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator simultaneously.
(4) Laboratory analysis results obtained by a user following improper
protocols or deemed technically deficient by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator shall be discarded and samples shall be
reanalyzed at the sole expense of the user.
P. Flow measurement. All wastewater-flow-monitoring data obtained to
comply with any provision of this article shall meet the following
requirements:
(1) All new, required flow-measuring devices shall be approved by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator prior to installation. The flowmeasuring
device(s) shall be properly designed, compatible with
the process involved and accurate. The flow-measuring device(s)
shall be calibrated at least semiannually.
(2) If a discrepancy in reported flow data is identified, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may require that existing flowmeasuring
devices be serviced by a certified technician or replaced
at the sole expense of the user.
(3) Flow-monitoring facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean,
and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a
user to keep its flow-monitoring facility in good working order shall
not be grounds for the user to claim that the measurements are
unrepresentative of its volume of flow to the POTW.
(4) If a user does not properly calibrate or maintain its flow-monitoring
equipment or if flow measurements are deemed inaccurate by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator, the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator shall utilize the user's metered water usage records to
determine the volume of wastewater flow to the POTW. In this case,
all claims of product uptake, evaporation or other water losses shall
be precluded.
(5) If a user does not have a flow-measurement device, the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator may:
(a) Require installation of flow-monitoring facilities in accordance
with the provisions of this article; or
(b) Rely on the user's metered water usage records to determine
the volume of wastewater flow to the POTW. In this case,
metered water losses may be considered by the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator. Unmetered claims of product
uptake, evaporation or other losses shall be precluded unless
appropriate documentation can be provided by the user.
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:228
Q. Monitoring facilities.
(1) The City shall require to be provided and operated at the user's
own expense, sampling manholes or any other device or facility
suitable and appropriate to enable inspection, sampling, and flow
measurement of the building sewer and/or internal drainage
systems. Such manhole device or facility should normally be
situated on the user's premises in the user's possession, but the
City may, when a location would be impractical or cause undue
hardship on the user, allow the facility to be constructed in the
public street or sidewalk area and located so that it will not be
obstructed by landscaping or parked vehicles.
(2) There shall be ample room in or near such sampling manhole or
facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for
analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be
maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at
the expense of the user.
R. Inspection and sampling.
(1) The City shall inspect, at a minimum annually, the facilities of any
user to ascertain whether the purpose of this article is being met
and all requirements are being complied with. Persons or
occupants of premises connected to the sewage collection system
shall allow the City or its representative ready access at all
reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of
inspection, sampling or in the performance of any duties. The
user's records of monitoring activities and results shall be available
for inspection and copying. The City shall have the right to set up
on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct
sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering
operations without notification to the user.
(2) Where a user has security measures in force which would require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises,
the user shall make necessary arrangements with their security
guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification,
personnel from the City will be permitted to enter and to perform
their specific responsibilities within 10 minutes of their initial time
of arrival. Delaying City personnel for more than 10 minutes for any
reason or to complete process changes or to alter wastewater
constituency prior to sample collection shall be a violation of this
article and shall subject the user to the sanctions set forth in this
article.
(3) Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to
the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly
removed by the user at the written request of the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator and shall not be replaced without
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:229
approval of the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator. The costs of
clearing such access shall be borne by the user.
S. If the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator has been refused any
records or access to a building, structure or property, or any part
thereof, or if the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator believes that
there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine or specific
inspection and sampling program of the City designed to verify
compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder or
to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the
community, then the Director of Water and Sewer Resources may seek
issuance of a search warrant from the appropriate judicial authority.
T. Pretreatment.
(1) Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply
with this article and shall achieve compliance with all applicable
pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in
Sections 923.02 of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances,
adopted herein by reference, within the time limitations specified
by the agency issuing the standards. Any facilities necessary for
compliance shall be provided, operated and maintained at the
user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and
operating procedures shall be submitted to the Industrial
Pretreatment Coordinator for review and shall be acceptable to the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator before such facilities are
constructed. The City's review of such plans and operating
procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility
of additional or future modifications of such facilities as necessary
to produce a discharge acceptable to the City under the provisions
of this article.
(2) Whenever deemed necessary, the Industrial Pretreatment
Coordinator may require users to restrict their discharge during
peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be
discharged only at specific points of the POTW, relocate and/or
consolidate points of discharge, separate domestic sewage waste
streams from industrial waste streams, and/or such other
conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine
the user's compliance with the requirements of this article.
(3) The Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator may require any person
discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on its property
and at its expense, a suitable storage and flow-control facility to
ensure equalization of flow. A IWDP may be issued solely for flow
equalization.
(4) Grease, oil and sand interceptors shall be provided when they are
necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing
excessive amounts of grease and oil or sand; except that such
interceptors shall not be required for residential sources. All
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:230
interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator and shall be so located to be
easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors
shall be inspected, cleaned and repaired regularly, as needed, by
the user at its expense.
U. Publication of users in significant noncompliance. The City shall
annually publish, in a newspaper of general circulation that provides
meaningful public notice within the jurisdictions served by the POTW,
all users which at any time during the previous 12 months were in
significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements. For the purpose of this provision, a user is in significant
noncompliance if its violation meets one or more of the following
criteria:
(1) Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which 66% or more of all of the measurements taken
during a six-month period exceed (by any magnitude) a numeric
pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous
limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1);
(2) Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which 33% or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant
parameter taken during a six-month period equal or exceed the
product of a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement,
including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 CFR 403.3(1)
multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD5, CBOD5,
TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except
pH);
(3) Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum
or longer-term average) that the City determines has caused, alone
or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough
(including endangering the health of POTW personnel or
the general public);
(4) Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to human health, welfare or to the environment or
has resulted in the POTW's exercise of its emergency authority
under 40 CFR 403.8(f)(1)(vi)(B) to halt or prevent such a discharge;
(5) Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control
mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction,
completing construction, or attaining final compliance;
(6) Failure to provide, within 45 days after the schedule date, required
reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety-day compliance
reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
(7) Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-20
1:231
(8) Any other violation or group of violations which may include
violations of BMPs that the City determines will adversely affect the
operation or implementation of the City's pretreatment program.
V. Confidential information.
(1) Information and data on a user obtained from reports,
questionnaires, permit applications, permit and monitoring
programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or
other governmental agency without restriction unless the user
specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction
of the City that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to
protection as trade secrets or other confidential business
information of the user.
(2) When requested by the person furnishing a report, the portions of a
report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall
not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be
made available upon written request to governmental agencies for
uses related to this article, the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permit, State Disposal System permit
and/or the pretreatment programs; provided, however, that such
portions of a report shall be available for use by the EPA or the
state in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the
person furnishing the report. Effluent data, as defined in 40 CFR
2.302(a)(2), will not be recognized as confidential information.
W. Record retention.
(1) Users shall maintain records of all information resulting from any
discharge monitoring activities completed by the user. At a
minimum, such records must include:
(a) The date, exact place, method, time of sampling and the names
of the person(s) collecting the samples;
(b) Dates analyses were performed;
(c) Who performed the analyses;
(d) Analytical techniques/methods used; and
(e) The results of such analyses.
(2) Users shall retain and preserve for no less than three years any
records, reports, chemical analyses, etc., made by or on behalf of
the user in connection with its discharge, records associated with
implementation of BMPs and any other records required by the City
related to the MIPP. In addition, any records that pertain to matters
that are the subject of special orders or any other enforcement or
litigation activities brought by the City shall be retained and
preserved by the user until all enforcement activities have
§ 338-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-20
1:232
§ 338-21. Enforcement (923.05).
concluded and all periods of limitation with respect to any and all
appeals have expired. The user shall, upon request and within the
time frame specified by the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator,
furnish to the City copies of any records required to be kept by this
article.
A. Suspension. The City and/or the Borough and the Borough Authority
may suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or an IWDP without
prior notice when such suspension is necessary in order to stop an
actual or threatened discharge which presents or may present an
imminent and substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of
persons, to the environment, causes interference to the POTW or
causes the City and/or the Borough and Borough Authority to violate
any condition of their NPDES permit. In the event of a failure of the
person to comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the City shall
take steps as deemed necessary, including immediate termination of
water service and/or immediate severance of the sewer connection, to
prevent or minimize damage to the POTW system or endangerment to
any individuals. The service and/or IWDP shall be restored within five
working days after, in the opinion of the City, the actual or threatened
cause for the suspension has been removed. The above actions shall be
taken only as ordered by the Director of Water and Sewer Resources.
B. Notice of suspension.
(1) In the event that the City and/or the Borough and Borough
Authority decides it is necessary to suspend their wastewater
treatment service for reasons other than as described above, the
user shall be given a fifteen-day notice of such suspension. Any
person notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service
and/or IWDP shall stop or eliminate the contribution as required in
the suspension notice. Between the time of the notice of suspension
of services and the date services are terminated, the user shall
have the right to have a show cause hearing with the hearing board
regarding the cause of the suspension.
(2) The City shall reinstate the IWDP and/or wastewater treatment
service within five working days upon proof of the elimination of
the noncomplying discharge or in compliance with instruction of
the hearing board. A detailed written statement submitted by the
user describing the cause of the harmful contributions and the
measures taken to prevent any future occurrence shall be
submitted to the City within five days of the date of occurrence. In
the event of a failure of the user to comply with the suspension
notice, the City may take such steps as deemed necessary to
terminate the service.
C. Revocation of permit. Any user who violates the conditions of this
article, or applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having
§ 338-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-21
1:233
the user's permit revoked as described in Section 923.04(k) of the City
of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference.
D. Notification of violation. Whenever the City finds that any user has
violated or is violating this article, an industrial waste discharge permit
or any prohibition, limitation of requirements contained herein, the City
may serve upon such person a written notice of violation stating the
nature of the violation. Within 30 days of the date of the Notice, a plan
for the satisfactory correction thereof shall be submitted to the City by
the user.
E. Hearing board.
(1) A hearing board shall be appointed by the Mayor of the City of
Bethlehem, as needed, for the purpose of hearing and deciding
appeals between the City and users on matters concerning
interpretation and execution of the provisions of this article. Cost of
appeals shall be borne by the user requesting an appeal.
(2) The chairperson of the board shall be a member of City Council's
Public Works Committee; one member shall be a professional
engineer skilled in practice of sanitary engineering; one member
shall be a representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise;
one member shall be a representative of a local environmental
organization; and one member shall be selected at large for that
member's interest in accomplishing the objectives of this article.
(3) Terms on the board shall be for a period of five years. The Mayor
shall appoint representatives to fill vacancies on the board to
complete unexpired terms. Interim appointments may be permitted
to serve an additional full term on the board. Hearing boards may
be appointed as standing panels or on a case-by-case basis, as
determined from time to time, in the sole discretion of the Mayor.
F. Show cause hearing.
(1) The City, the Borough and Borough Authority may order any user
who causes or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW
to show cause before the hearing board why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. A notice shall be served on
the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the
hearing board regarding the violation, the reasons why the action
is to be taken, the proposed enforcement action, and directing the
user to show cause before the hearing board why the proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing
shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return
receipt requested) at least 10 days before the hearing. Service may
be made on any agent or officer of a corporation.
(2) The hearing board may itself conduct the hearing and take the
evidence, or may designate any one or more of its members, or any
officer or employee of the assigned department to:
§ 338-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-21
1:234
(a) Issue, in the name of the hearing board, notices of hearings
requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the
production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such
hearings.
(b) Receive evidence.
(c) Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including
transcripts and other evidence, together with
recommendations to the hearing board for action thereon.
(3) At any hearing pursuant to this article, testimony taken must be
under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so
recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any
party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof.
(4) After the hearing board has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an
order to the user responsible for the discharge, directing that,
following a specified time period, the sewer service be discontinued
unless adequate treatment facilities, devices or other related
appurtenances shall have been installed on existing treatment
facilities, devices or other related appurtenances and are properly
operated. Further and/or other orders and directives as are
necessary and appropriate may be issued.
G. Consent orders. The City may enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an
agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such
documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct
the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document.
H. Compliance orders. When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this article, an IWDP or order issued hereunder, or any other
pretreatment standard or requirement, the City may issue an order to
the user responsible for the discharge, directing that the user come into
compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into
compliance within the time provided, wastewater service may be
discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other
related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the
noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management
practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to
the POTW. A compliance schedule contained in any compliance order
shall not be construed as an extension of the deadline for compliance
established for any pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including
any continuing violation.
I. Cease and desist orders. When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator
finds that a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of
this article, an IWDP or order issued hereunder, or any other
§ 338-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-21
1:235
pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations
are likely to recur, the City and/or the Borough and Borough Authority
may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such
violations and directing the user to:
(1) Immediately comply with all requirements; and
(2) Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be
needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation,
including halting operations, terminating the discharge or hauling
noncompliant discharges off site for proper disposal.
J. Administrative fines.
(1) When the Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator finds that a user has
violated or continues to violate any provision of the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances adopted herein by reference, an
IWDP or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment
standard or requirement, the City may fine such user in an amount
not to exceed the amount set forth in Section 923.99 of the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinance, adopted herein by reference, for
each violation regardless of jurisdictional boundaries. Such fines
shall be assessed in accordance with the terms set forth in this
article and/or the City's Enforcement Response Plan. In the case of
weekly, monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines
shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
(2) A lien against the user's property will be sought and other
enforcement collection action may be taken for unpaid fines.
(3) Users desiring to dispute such fines shall file a written request for
the City to reconsider the fine along with the full payment of the
fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. The hearing
board may convene to deliberate on the matter. In the event the
appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest
accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The City may add
the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as
notices and orders, to the fine when the fine and or a portion of
same is substantiated.
(4) Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against or a
prerequisite for taking any other action against the user.
K. Legal action. The City and/or the Borough and Borough Authority shall
be able to seek injunctive relief for noncompliance by users with
pretreatment standards or requirements. Injunctive relief is available
for violations of any requirement stated in this article and/or the City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinance or industrial waste discharge permits,
including, but not limited to, wastewater discharge violations, failure to
allow access by the City to a user's facility, failure to submit reports by a
specified deadline, or any violation of any order of the City. The City
Solicitor and/or Borough Solicitor may commence an action for
§ 338-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-21
1:236
appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in the local Court of Common
Pleas.
L. Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are
not exclusive. The City and/or Borough and Borough Authority may take
any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant
user. Enforcement of industrial pretreatment program violations will be
in accordance with this article and/or the City's Enforcement Response
Plan. However, the City may take other action against any user when
the circumstances warrant. Further, the City is empowered to take
more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user.
Where the Enforcement Response Plan does not provide guidelines on
enforcement action for a specific instance of noncompliance, the City
may impose other appropriate enforcement action to address the
noncompliance.
M. Appeals. A user may appeal the terms of an IWDP administrative fine or
any administrative action within 30 days of notice of its issuance. The
written appeal request shall provide the name, address and telephone
number of the appellant as well the date that the City and/or Borough
and Borough Authority took the action which is the subject matter of
the appeal. In its petition, the appealing party shall also indicate the
provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any.
(1) Failure to submit a timely appeal for review shall be deemed to be a
waiver of the administrative appeal.
(2) The conditions of the current IWDP shall remain in effect pending
the appeal of the new IWDP.
(3) The City and/or Borough and Borough Authority shall respond with
its position within 60 days of filing of an appeal.
(4) The user must file its appeal with the hearing board described in
Section 923.05(e) of the Codified Ordinances of the City of
Bethlehem to conduct a hearing and decide an appeal on the
matter.
(5) Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
decision must do so by filing a complaint with the local Court of
Common Pleas within 30 days of the decision of the hearing board.
N. Conference option. At the time an appeal is requested, the user may
also request a conference with the City and/or Borough and Borough
Authority prior to the scheduling of a hearing board hearing. Said
conference will include appropriate members of the municipal and/or
authority staff and its agents. Violations and penalties will be explained
and discussed. Electing this option does not foreclose and/or affect the
user's right to a hearing, provided that the written request for the
hearing was filed within 30 days of service as noted above. The purpose
of this option is to provide the user with an informal forum within which
§ 338-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-21
1:237
§ 338-22. Repealer and ability to amend and repeal all of or parts of
this article without the consent of the City of Bethlehem (923.06).
§ 338-23. Holding tank waste (923.08).
to discuss the alleged violations and expedite conclusion and/or
resolution of outstanding enforcement actions. If resolution is not
reached within 90 days of the scheduled conference, the City shall
schedule the matter for hearing board hearing. In any event, either
party may request a hearing board hearing at any point during the
conference proceedings.
A. All ordinances and parts of ordinances inconsistent herewith be and the
same are hereby repealed.
B. The Borough of Hellertown has executed an agreement with the City of
Bethlehem dated November 4, 1985, and has adopted this article to
enforce the terms of that agreement. Notwithstanding anything herein
to the contrary, the Borough of Hellertown, in its sole and absolute
discretion, unilaterally reserves the right to amend, alter or repeal this
article and any part thereof; provided, however, the Borough of
Hellertown shall serve prior written notice, not less than 60 days prior
to the date of enactment of such amendment of repeal, upon the City of
Bethlehem. The Borough of Hellertown reserves the right to engage in
such activities on more than one occasion, provided notice thereof is
given to the City of Bethlehem and such action on the part of the City of
Bethlehem, with or without the consent of the City of Bethlehem and
also over the objection of the City of Bethlehem, shall constitute a pro
tonto modification of this agreement and, if applicable, a repeal of this
agreement, it being mutually agreed that the Borough of Hellertown for
itself, its successors and assigns has reserved the unilateral rights
stated above.
C. The Borough of Hellertown reserves all rights pursuant to the aforesaid
paragraph to alter, amend or repeal this article without the consent of
the City of Bethlehem, its successor or assigns.
A. Holding tank waste. The City may accept discharged, trucked or hauled
waste exclusively from holding tanks for treatment. The decision for
approval shall be based on, but not limited to, the source,
characteristics and volume of waste to be discharged. In no instance
shall holding tank waste be discharged to the POTW without prior
approval by the Superintendent. All holding tank waste discharges shall
be regulated through the City's industrial pretreatment program.
B. Septage. The City may accept for treatment trucked and hauled septage
which originated from chemical toilets, campers, trailers or residential,
commercial, or industrial septic tanks/cesspools containing domestic
sewage only. The decision for approval shall be based on, but not
limited to, the characteristics of the septage in conjunction with the
volume of septage to be discharged. In no instance shall septage be
§ 338-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-23
1:238
§ 338-24. Penalty (923.99).
discharged to the POTW without prior approval by the Superintendent.
All septage discharges shall be regulated in accordance with the City's
industrial pretreatment program and/or septage management plan.
C. Discharge points. The City shall designate the authorized discharge
point(s) for holding tank waste and septage. All such discharges must
be made at the designated point(s).
D. Application for discharge. The City may require that some or all of the
information listed in Section 923.04(d) of the City of Bethlehem
Codified Ordinances, adopted herein by reference, be submitted to the
Industrial Pretreatment Coordinator for review as part of the
decisionmaking process for approval to discharge holding tank waste or
septage.
E. Approval to discharge. The City may issue a letter of approval for
limited frequency discharges or may require that a permit be obtained
for the proposed discharge. Permits will be obtained in accordance with
Section 923.04 of the City of Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, adopted
herein by reference, and/or the City's septage management plan
incorporated into this article by reference.
F. Enforcement. Users will adhere to and obey all terms and conditions
stated in their individual approval letters or permits and the
requirements of this article. Any violation of the terms and conditions of
individual approval letters or permits or the requirements of this article
shall subject the user to the sanctions set out in this article. Obtaining
an approval to discharge holding tank waste or septage from the City
does not relieve a user of its obligation to comply with any other
requirements of federal, state and local law.
G. Fees. A fee based on the City's current fee schedule will be levied on all
holding tank waste or septage discharged to the City's POTW. Holding
tank waste and septage may also be subject to surcharge fees as
described in Section 923.03 (§ 338-19 of this article). (See City of
Bethlehem Codified Ordinances, Ord. 2009-1, passed 1-6-2009, adopted
herein by reference.)
A. Criminal penalties. A user who willfully or negligently violates any
provision of this article, an IWDP or order issued hereunder, or who
willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which
causes personal injury, property damage, pass-through, interference, or
any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations or
certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document
filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this article, an IWDP or
order issued under this article, or who falsifies, tampers with or
knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method
required under this article may be subject to criminal prosecution in
§ 338-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 338-24
1:239
accordance with the applicable provisions of the Pennsylvania Crimes
Code, 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
B. Civil penalties.
(1) In accordance with PA Act 9, any user who has violated or
continues to violate any provision of this article, an IWDP, or order
issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or
requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty
of $25,000 per violation per day.
(2) In determining the amount of civil liability, there shall be taken into
account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to,
the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and
duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the
user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance
history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. All
penalties shall be assessed in accordance with this article and the
City's Enforcement Response Plan.
(3) Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user.
(4) In the event any user's violation(s) results in the imposition of a fine
or other penalty on the City or the Borough and Borough Authority
by the EPA, the state or any other agency, such violation(s) shall be
punishable by a civil penalty at least equal to the dollar amount
imposed upon the City or the Borough and Borough Authority plus
their administrative, legal, engineering costs, and expenses, but
not more than $25,000 per day per violation.
C. Pursuant to 40 CFR 403.8(f)(l)(vi)(A), any penalties required under this
section will apply per violation per day. Each day on which a violation
shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense.
In the case of weekly, monthly or other long-term average discharge
limits, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the
violation. In addition to the penalties provided herein, the City and/or
Borough and Borough Authority may recover reasonable costs for any
loss, damage, cleaning, repair, or replacement work caused by the
violation, attorneys' fees, court costs, court reporters' fees and other
expenses of litigation by appropriate suit at law against the person
found to have violated this article or the orders, rules, regulations, and
permits issued hereunder.
§ 338-24 HELLERTOWN CODE § 338-24
1:240
Chapter 343
(RESERVED)
Chapter 349
SIGNS, POLITICAL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Zoning sign regulations — See § 450-22.
§ 349-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
BOROUGH PROPERTY — Real estate owned by the Borough of Hellertown,
but not including Borough street rights-of-way not directly abutting real
estate owned by the Borough of Hellertown.
OFFICIAL SIGN — A sign placed or erected by the United States, the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, the County of Northampton, the Borough
of Hellertown, or other legally constituted governmental body, or required
by law or order of court, or specifically authorized by a Borough ordinance
or resolution, for official governmental purposes.
POLLING PLACE ELECTION SIGN — A sign directly related to a candidate
for public elected office or an issue which is before the public electorate
at an election conducted under the authority of the Pennsylvania Election
Code on Borough property which has been designated as a polling place by
the Northampton County Board of Elections.
SIGN — Any device for visual communication that is used for the purpose of
bringing the subject thereof to the attention of the public.
§ 349-2. Prohibition on signs on Borough property.
§ 349-3. Exempt signs.
The provisions of § 349-2 shall not apply to:
A. Except as provided by § 349-3, no person shall place or erect any sign
on any Borough property.
B. No sign, including exempt signs pursuant to § 349-3, shall be placed or
erected within any planting bed or other landscaped area on any
Borough property.
A. An official sign;
§ 338-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 349-3
1:241
§ 349-4. Removal of signs from private property.
Any political sign placed on private property shall be removed by the
candidate within 21 days after the preceding election.
§ 349-5. Removal of signs by the Borough.
Any sign placed in violation of § 349-2 may be removed by the Police
Department or other Borough official. Any person or entity placing or
directing the placement of any sign in violation of § 349-2 shall be liable for
the cost incurred by the Borough in the removal thereof.
§ 349-6. Requirement to notify Borough and certify subsequent
removal.
Any individual or organization wishing to post political signs within the
Borough of Hellertown shall notify the Borough by filing a "Notification of
Placement of Political Signs" form and certifying that said signs shall be
removed within the time frame set forth in § 349-4.
§ 349-7. Violations and penalties.
B. Any person physically carrying a sign at any time as an expression of
such person's right of freedom of speech; or
C. A polling place election sign at the Borough-designated voter polling
place which is erected not earlier than 8:00 p.m. on the day prior to the
date of the election and removed not later than 8:00 p.m. on the date
following the date of the election.
A. Any person or entity who violates or permits a violation of this chapter
shall, upon conviction in a summary proceeding brought before a
Magisterial District Judge under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal
Procedure, be guilty of a summary offense and shall be punishable by a
fine of not less than $100 nor more than $1,000, plus costs of
prosecution. In default of payment thereof, the defendant may be
sentenced to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 90 days. Each day
or portion thereof that such violation continues or is permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate offense, and each section of this
chapter that is violated shall also constitute a separate offense.
B. In addition to the above remedies, the Borough may institute in the
name of the municipality any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate violations of the provisions of this
chapter.
§ 349-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 349-7
1:242
Chapter 360
SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND GRADING CONTROL
GENERAL REFERENCES
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 204.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 378.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Shade trees — See Ch. 416, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 360-1. Title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Soil Erosion,
Sedimentation and Grading Control Ordinance," implementing Title 25,
Rules and Regulations, Part 1, Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, Department
of Environmental Protection, Subpart C, Protection of Natural Resources,
Article II, Water Resources, Chapter 102 — Erosion Control.
§ 360-2. Purpose.
The purposes of this chapter are to regulate the modification of the natural
or existing terrain and the alteration of drainage and to provide for certain
erosion and sediment control measures within the Borough of Hellertown
to assure and safeguard health, safety, ecology and the general welfare in
Hellertown Borough.
§ 360-3. Scope.
From and after the effective date of this chapter, any subdivision and/or
land development approved under the Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance or Zoning Ordinance, any new construction, installation of a
new structure and/or activity qualified under §§ 360-6 and 360-7 herein
shall be in conformity with this chapter, subject to compliance with and
in conjunction with the Northampton County Conservation District (NCCD)
soil and erosion control regulations and the Department of Environmental
Protection (DEP) regulations, all of which are incorporated into this chapter.
In the event of a conflict between this chapter and floodplain regulations,
NCCD or DEP regulations, the after-mentioned regulations shall take
precedence over this chapter.
§ 360-4. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context.
ALLUVIAL SOILS — An azonal group of soils, developed from transported
and relatively recently deposited material (alluvium), characterized by a
§ 349-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-4
1:243
weak modification (or none) of the original material by soil-forming
processes.
CUT AND/OR FILL — The process of earthmoving by excavating part of an
area and/or using excavated material from embankment or fill areas.
EROSION —
GRADE — The slope of a road, channel or natural ground.
NEW STRUCTURE — Construction which requires the excavation of topsoil
and subsoil for the installation of a foundation which is either independent
or attached to an existing structure.
RUNOFF (HYDRAULICS) — That portion of the precipitation from a
drainage area or watershed that is discharged from the area in stream
channels or in sheet flow; types include surface runoff, groundwater runoff
or seepage.
SEDIMENT — Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
air, water, gravity or ice and has come to rest on the earth's surface, either
above or below sea level.
SLOPE — The degree of deviation of a surface from the horizontal, usually
expressed in percent or degrees.
SOIL DRAINAGE — A condition of the soil, referring to the frequency and
duration of periods when the soil is free of saturation.
SUBSOIL — Material immediately underlying topsoil, consisting of but
not limited to, either singly or in combination, clay, silt, sand, gravel or
crushed rock, but not including bedrock or other impervious surface, as
more fully defined and set forth in the most recently adopted and approved
Northampton County Soil Survey exclusive of the A Horizon.
TOPSOIL — The topmost layer of ground cover containing humus in some
concentration capable of supporting plant growth, as more fully defined and
set forth in the most recently adopted and approved Northampton County
Soil Survey under the designation of the A Horizon, but not including
subsoil, as heretofore defined.
WATERCOURSE — A natural drainage route or channel for the flow of
water.
§ 360-5. General requirements.
Within the Borough, whenever any subdivision or land development
proposes any new construction or installation of a new structure or other
activity which results in application to the Northampton County Soil
The wearing away of land surface by running water, wind, ice or
chemical or other geological agents.
A.
The detachment and movement of soil or rock fragments by water,
wind, ice or gravity.
B.
§ 360-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 360-5
1:244
Conservation District and submission of a soil and erosion control plan
is proposed, a copy of said plan and final approval and/or permits as
may be granted shall be submitted to the Borough before any activity,
construction, grading or relandscaping of the affected tract is undertaken.
The Borough and/or Borough's representative shall also be provided with
a copy of said application, final approval and/or permit, such as will allow
full and complete review of the proposal as completed. The Borough and/or
Borough's representative shall have full and complete authority to inspect
the activities undertaken at said site, including the full right of ingress and
egress to the property, and shall have the authority to terminate, stop or
suspend activities or conduct not in compliance with such approvals and/or
permits as may be issued.
§ 360-6. Plan required; contents.
Whenever any subdivision and/or land development approved under the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance or Zoning Ordinance
proposes any new construction and/or installation of a new structure and/or
any change in use which causes the landscape to be disturbed as to either
contours, soil or slope characteristics, or vegetation or any ground cover is
to be permanently removed, except as hereinafter excluded under § 360-7
and § 360-8 and except as otherwise subject to review and approval by the
Northampton County Soil Conservation District, as provided under § 360-5,
a plan shall include the following:
§ 360-7. Activities requiring grading permit.
Except for those activities exempted by § 360-8, the following activities
require a grading permit, which shall be prerequisite to issuance of a
building permit, when applicable:
A. The area of site alteration proposed.
B. The development schedule.
C. Erosion and sediment control practices, both temporary and
permanent, and the operation and maintenance arrangements.
A. Modifying, disturbing, blocking, diverting or otherwise adversely
affecting the natural overland or subsurface flow of stormwater.
B. Constructing, erecting or installing any drainage dam, ditch, culvert,
drainpipe or bridge or any other structure or obstruction affecting the
drainage of any premises.
C. Paving, filling, stockpiling, stripping, excavating, grading or regrading
any land, except those activities which specifically do not require a
permit in § 360-8.
D. Distributing the landscape, vegetation or any ground cover by any
proposal involving an area in excess of 1,000 square feet.
§ 360-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-8
1:245
§ 360-8. Activities not requiring grading permit.
The following activities require no grading permit:
§ 360-9. Application for permit.
§ 360-10. Data required on plan.
A. Improvements, such as driveway paving, minor regrading or activities
on a property which are under 1,000 square feet of total disturbed area
and do not:
(1) Adversely affect the natural overland or subsurface flow of
stormwater;
(2) Adversely affect the drainage onto any premises; or
(3) Adversely disturb the landscape of any premises.
B. Farming, gardening, lawn installation or lawn restoration.
C. Work within the ultimate right-of-way of a public street or alleyway to
be offered for dedication or previously ordained by the Borough, county,
commonwealth, or any park, playground, recreation area or open space
dedicated to and accepted by the Borough, county or commonwealth.
A. Any person, firm or corporation proposing to engage in an activity
requiring a grading permit hereunder shall apply by the submission of a
plan.
B. The applicant should, before submitting a preliminary plan for review,
consult the Zoning Ordinance and the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, which regulate the development of the land in
Hellertown Borough.
C. A separate plan shall be required for each grading permit.
D. Three copies of the proposed plan, including specifications and
development schedules, shall be submitted to the Borough for a grading
permit. The Borough shall forward one copy to the Hellertown Borough
Manager, one copy to the Code Enforcement Officer and one copy to the
Borough Engineer.
E. The plan for a grading permit shall be accompanied by a fee established
in the Borough's Schedule of Fees and Collection Procedures for all
applications and other matters pertaining to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance and this chapter.
A. The plan for a grading permit shall include:
(1) A map or maps describing the topography of the area, the proposed
alteration to the area and the erosion and sedimentation control
measures and facilities; and
§ 360-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 360-10
1:246
§ 360-11. Review of plan and issuance of permit.
Upon the review of the plan and a recommendation by the Borough
Engineer, the Borough shall issue the necessary grading permit.
§ 360-12. Standards for grading activities.
Except for those activities exempted by § 360-8, the following standards
shall apply to all activities permitted or allowed under §§ 360-5 and 360-7 of
this chapter:
(2) A narrative report describing the project and giving the purpose
and the engineering assumptions and calculations for control
measures and facilities.
B. The maps and narrative shall include but not be limited to a general
description of the project, noting stormwater handling, accelerated
erosion control, sedimentation control, anticipated beginning and
ending dates for the project and the training and experience of the
person preparing the plan, along with the method of calculation of
runoff, the factors considered in such calculations and provisions for
safe disposal. The map should describe and locate topographic
features, including boundary lines of the project area, acreage,
contours at appropriate intervals to adequately describe the
topography, the location of the project relative to the highways or other
identifiable landmarks and streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of
water within or in the vicinity of the project, the upstream drainage
area(s) of the project site and any other physical features, including
scale and North arrow. The map shall also specify soil types as would be
noted in a soil survey by name, depth and textural, along with proposed
changes to the land surface and vegetative cover, which will note
contours of finished areas, types of temporary and permanent control
measures and facilities and their location and dimensions. The
narrative shall include the description of the maintenance program for
the control facilities and appropriate design considerations and
calculations for both temporary and permanent control measures and
facilities.
A. Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter or any condition of the
grading permit, the permittee is responsible for the prevention of
damage to other property or personal injury which may be effected by
the activity requiring a grading permit.
B. No person, firm or corporation shall modify, fill, excavate, pave, grade
or regrade land in any manner so close to a property line as to endanger
or damage any adjoining street or alley or any other public or private
property without supporting and protecting such property from
settling, cracking, erosion, sediment, flooding or any other physical
damage or personal injury which might result.
§ 360-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-12
1:247
C. Notwithstanding any other item or provision of this chapter, no person,
firm or corporation shall cause or allow to be removed greater than
50% of the existing topsoil from any site, and in no event shall the
topsoil existing on any site be reduced to less than a depth of six inches
as measured from the underlying subsoil, except as may be modified by
the Borough by issuance of a conditional permit, which permit shall be
issued to modify the terms of this chapter only based upon sound
engineering practices.
D. No person, firm or corporation shall deposit or place any debris or any
other material whatsoever or cause such to be thrown or placed in any
drainage ditch or drainage structure in such a manner as to obstruct
free flow.
E. No person, firm or corporation shall fail to adequately maintain in good
operating order any drainage facility on his premises. All drainage
ditches, culverts, drainpipes and drainage structures shall be kept open
and free flowing at all times.
F. The owner of any property on which any work has been done pursuant
to a grading permit granted under this chapter shall continuously
maintain and repair all graded surfaces and erosion control devices,
retaining walls, drainage structures or means and other protective
devices, plantings, and ground cover installed or completed.
G. All graded surfaces shall be permanently seeded, sodded and/or
planted or otherwise protected from erosion within 30 days, weather
permitting, and shall be tended and/or maintained until growth is well
established. The disturbed area and duration of exposure shall be kept
to a minimum, using temporary erosion and sediment control measures
immediately as outlined in the PA DEP Erosion and Sediment Pollution
Control Manual.
H. All trees to remain and which are in or adjacent to an area of grade
change shall be protected with suitable fencing, unless the necessity for
removal is established. Precautions shall be taken to prevent the
unnecessary removal of trees.
I. When required, adequate provisions shall be made for dust-control
measures as are deemed acceptable by the Borough.
J. All plans and specifications submitted for a grading permit shall include
provisions for both interim (temporary) and ultimate permanent erosion
and sediment control. The design, installation and maintenance of
erosion and sediment control measures shall be accomplished in
accordance with standards and specifications established by the County
Soil Conservation District, as adopted from standards and
specifications of the United States Soil Conservation Services and as
outlined in the then-applicable and current handbook of administrative
regulations or guidelines, as may be amended adopted and enacted by
the County Soil Conservation District.
§ 360-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 360-12
1:248
(1) Technical standards for the design and installation of erosion and
sediment control measures are available from the County
Conservation District office or website
(http://www.northampton.pacd.org) and other government agency
offices.
(2) Standards and specifications adopted for the purposes of this
chapter and by the County Conservation District include, but are
not limited to, the following basic conservation measures:
(a) Temporary cover on critical areas.
(b) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
prepared seedbed.
(c) Permanent grass and legume cover for critical areas on
unprepared seedbed.
(d) Sodding.
(e) Mulching.
(f) Temporary diversion.
(g) Permanent diversion.
(h) Grassed waterway or outlet.
(i) Grade stabilization structure.
(j) Debris basin.
(k) Drain.
(l) Drainage, mains or laterals.
K. A quality-control program is critical for fills; therefore, whenever fill
material is to be used, the person, firm or corporation shall be
responsible for testing to determine its dry density as per ASTM D1556.
It is recommended that the density of any load-bearing layer supporting
or to be incorporated in a road surface, detention basin or erosion swale
shall be not less than 90% of the maximum density.
(1) The inspection procedure shall follow the general procedure as
stated in § 360-14.
(2) Compaction test reports shall be kept on file at the site and shall be
subject to review all times.
(3) The degree of compaction required shall be determined by the
Borough following the guidelines in this section.
§ 360-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-13
1:249
§ 360-13. Inspection procedures.
Except for those activities exempted by § 360-8, the following standards
shall apply:
§ 360-14. Inspection costs.
Permittees shall bear all costs of inspections required or permitted
hereunder and shall deposit with Hellertown Borough such sums as the
Borough Council shall determine to guarantee payment of the costs of
such inspections. The costs of inspections shall be in accordance with
the established schedule of fees and collection procedures for matters
pertaining to this chapter.
§ 360-15. Grading permit fee.
The fee for a grading permit shall be fixed by resolution of the Borough
Council from time to time.
§ 360-16. Violations and penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs of prosecution and, in default of payment
thereof, to undergo imprisonment for a term not exceeding 30 days. Each
day that a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. Inspections shall be the conducted by the Borough or a qualified person
acceptable to the Borough of Hellertown, including, but not limited to,
the County Conservation District staff.
B. Inspections will be carried out on a random basis, except as stated
below; however, a set of approved plans shall be on file at the site and
authenticated by a registered professional engineer.
C. Any and all approved plans shall be available on the site at all times and
shall be subject to inspection and inquiry.
D. Engineering design notes shall accompany all plans which involve
structural or mechanical measures and shall serve as supporting
evidence that structures meet design standards and specifications
specified herein.
E. A final inspection shall be conducted by the Borough and/or the
Borough's representative to certify compliance with this chapter.
Satisfactory compliance with this chapter shall be necessary before
issuance of an occupancy or use permit.
§ 360-13 HELLERTOWN CODE § 360-17
1:250
§ 360-17. Remedy of violations; restoration of premises.
In addition to the penalties as set forth in § 360-16, any movement of the
landscape, vegetation or any ground cover performed in violation of this
chapter shall be restored to its previous condition, including replacement
of excavated earth, removal of illegally placed fill and restoration of grades
and planting.
§ 360-18. Appeal of permit denial.
The denial of a permit under this chapter may be appealed by any party
in interest, including the applicant, the Borough or any other interested or
affected party filing an appeal to be heard by the Borough Council. The
Borough shall provide public notice and a public hearing on the applicant's
appeal. The decision of the Borough Council shall be communicated to the
applicant personally or mailed to applicant's last known address not later
than 15 days following the decision. Any aggrieved party has a right to
appeal the decision of the Borough Council to the Northampton County
Court of Common Pleas within 30 days of receipt of the written decision of
Borough Council.
Chapter 367
SOLID WASTE
GENERAL REFERENCES
Nuisances — See Ch. 278. Storage containers — See Ch. 372.
§ 360-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 360-18
1:251

ARTICLE I
Municipal Waste
[Adopted 3-3-1986 by Ord. No. 540]
§ 367-1. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Hellertown Borough Municipal
Solid Waste Ordinance."
§ 367-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise. Words used in the present tense include the future, the singular
includes the plural, masculine shall include the feminine gender. Use of
the term "shall" indicates a mandate and is not directory; "may" implies
permissiveness.
APPLICANT — A person desirous of being authorized as a collector.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
COLLECTOR — A person authorized to collect, transport and dispose of
municipal waste from the Borough of Hellertown.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any enterprise engaged in a
nonmanufacturing or nonprocessing business, including, but not limited to,
retail stores, markets, office buildings, restaurants, shopping centers and
theaters.
DISPOSAL — The incineration, deposition, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking or placing of municipal waste into or onto the land or water in a
manner that the waste or a constituent of the waste enters the environment,
is emitted into the air, or is discharged to the waters of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
DISPOSAL SITE — Any site, facility, location, area or premises to be used
for the disposal of municipal waste.
GARBAGE — All animal and vegetable wastes attending or resulting from
the handling, dealing, storing, preparing, cooking and consuming of foods.
INDUSTRIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any enterprise engaged in
manufacturing or processing, including, but not limited to, factories,
foundries, mills, processing plants, refineries and the like.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Any enterprise engaged in service
to persons, including, but not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes,
orphanages, schools and universities.
MANAGEMENT — The entire process, or any part thereof, of storage,
collection, transportation, processing, treatment and disposal of municipal
waste by any person engaging in such processes.
§ 367-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-2
1:253
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or office
waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained
gaseous material resulting from the operation of residential, municipal,
commercial or institutional establishments, and from community activities,
and any sludge not meeting the definition of residual or hazardous waste
from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply treatment plant,
wastewater treatment plant or air-pollution-control facility. (Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act, Act 97, § 103.66)
PERSON — Any individual, partnership, corporation, association,
institution, cooperative enterprise, municipal authority, federal government
or agency, state institution or agency, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of a
person.
PROCESSING — Any technology used for the purpose of reducing the
volume or bulk of municipal waste or any technology used to convert part
or all such waste materials for off-site reuse. Processing facilities include,
but are not limited to, transfer facilities, composting facilities, incinerators,
recycling facilities and resource-recovery facilities.
REFUSE — The collective term which applies to all garbage, rubbish, ashes,
leaves and grass trimmings from residential, municipal, commercial or
institutional premises.
REGULAR — Occurring with a frequency of not less than three times within
a calendar month.
SOLID WASTE — Any waste, including but not limited to municipal, residual
or hazardous wastes including solid, liquid, semisolid or contained gaseous
materials. (Pennsylvania Solid Waste Management Act 97, § 103.)
STORAGE — The containment of any municipal waste on a temporary basis
in such a manner as not to constitute "disposal" of such waste; it shall be
presumed that the containment of any municipal waste in excess of one-year
constitutes disposal.
TRANSPORTATION — The off-site removal of any municipal waste
generated or present at any time from the corporate limits of the Borough
of Hellertown.
§ 367-3. Municipal waste storage containers.
It shall be the duty of every owner of property and of every person
occupying any dwelling unit, premises or place of business within the
corporate limits of the Borough where municipal waste is produced and is
accumulated by his own expense and cost to provide and keep, at all times,
a sufficient number of containers to hold all municipal waste which may
accumulate during the intervals between the collection of such municipal
waste by an authorized collector.
66.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.103.
§ 367-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-4
1:254
§ 367-4. Storage on residential properties.
§ 367-5. Storage on commercial, institutional and industrial
premises.
§ 367-6. Use of street receptacles.
§ 367-7. Nonresidents' use of residents' containers prohibited.
A. Containers. All municipal waste accumulated by owners of each
residential property and/or the occupants of residential properties shall
be placed in containers for collection by an authorized collector. The
containers shall be durable, watertight and made of metal or plastic.
Securely tied plastic bags may be used in cases where such bags can be
used without being torn open by domestic or wild animals. The size of
each such container shall not exceed a capacity of 30 gallons. Larger
containers, designed for use with special hoisting equipment, may be
used, providing the collector serving the residence utilizes collection
vehicles with such necessary, special hoisting equipment.
B. Location of containers. Each waste container shall be located so as to
be accessible to the collector at ground level and at a point at the
curbline of the street or within no less than 10 feet of the public street
or alley right-of-way from which the collection from a vehicle can be
made. Failure to place containers at such prescribed locations may
result in the discontinuance of collection services.
A. Containers. Storage of municipal waste on commercial, institutional
and industrial properties shall be done in the same type of containers as
are required for residential properties, except that containers larger
than 30 gallons may be used where needed to accommodate larger
volumes of municipal wastes. Such containers shall be maintained in
good working order.
B. Location of containers. Containers for the collection of wastes at
commercial, institutional and industrial premises shall be located on
such premises at a place which shall not interfere with public or private
sidewalks, driveways, roads, streets, alleys, highways or entrances and
exits from public or private buildings.
A. Disposal prohibited. No person shall dispose or discard any waste upon
any of the streets, alleys and public ways and properties of the Borough
except by placing the same in the receptacles placed by the Borough
along the public streets, alleys and public ways and properties of the
Borough for the incidental use by and the convenience of the public.
B. Applicability. Nothing contained elsewhere in this article shall prohibit
the disposal of waste in the receptacles placed by the Borough along
the public streets, alleys and public ways and properties of the Borough
for the convenience of the public so long as that use is confined to
incidental use.
§ 367-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-7
1:255
§ 367-8. Violation for nonresident to use facilities for residents.
[Added 4-18-1988 by Ord. No. 555]
It shall be a violation of this article for any person who is not a resident of
the Borough of Hellertown to dispose of any garbage, refuse and/or solid
waste at any of the various facilities owned by said Borough and maintained
for the use and convenience of the residents of the Borough, unless such
garbage, refuse and/or solid waste originated from within the corporate
limits of the Borough and was generated by residents of the Borough.
§ 367-9. Unauthorized collection and transportation.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than such persons as are duly
authorized by the Borough of Hellertown, to collect and transport solid
waste of any nature as a regular hauling business within or from the
Borough of Hellertown. Authorization to engage in such a hauling business
shall be given by the Borough of Hellertown.
§ 367-10. Licensing of waste collectors.
Authorization to collect, transport and dispose of municipal waste for
persons other than oneself may be given only by the Borough of Hellertown
through the issuance of a license. All applications for licensing shall be
approved in accordance with the following:
A. It shall be a violation of this article for any person who is not a resident
of the Borough to dispose of any waste by placing it within the
container(s) used or provided by any resident of the Borough in
compliance with the various provisions of this article.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any resident of the Borough to
permit, knowingly, any nonresident to utilize any container used or
provided by such resident for the disposal of waste generated from
without the corporate limits of the Borough.
A. Eligible persons. Municipal solid waste collection licenses may be
issued only to those persons who can provide evidence, satisfactory to
the Borough, that they are capable of providing the necessary services
and can comply with the provisions and intent of this chapter. The
Borough of Hellertown reserves the right to disapprove any application
for such a license and to revoke any license issued upon the failure of
any licensee to maintain full compliance with the provisions of this
article.
B. Application procedure. Applicants for a municipal solid waste collection
license must furnish the following information:
(1) The make, model, vehicle registration number and the size of each
vehicle to be used for the collection and transportation of wastes.
(2) The location, address and telephone number of the business office
of the applicant.
§ 367-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-10
1:256
§ 367-11. Prevention of spilling during transportation.
Any person transporting solid waste within the Borough of Hellertown shall
prevent or remedy any spillage from vehicles or containers used in the
transport of such solid waste.
§ 367-12. Designated facilities; disposal of municipal waste.
All municipal waste produced, collected and transported from within the
jurisdictional limits of the Borough of Hellertown shall be, to the extent
permitted by law, disposed of at disposal facilities designated by the
Borough and in accordance with any currently effective solid waste
management plan of the Borough of Hellertown. In the absence of such
designated facilities and/or such currently effective solid waste
management plan, municipal waste from the Borough must be disposed of
at a state-permitted facility.
(3) The business name of the applicant, together with the name(s) and
address(es) of the principals, owners and/or officers of the
business/applicant.
(4) A certificate of insurance documenting the applicant's workers'
compensation insurance coverage as required by law.
(5) A certificate of insurance documenting that the applicant carries
complete third-party comprehensive, bodily injury and property
damage liability insurance, the limits of which shall not be less than
$100,000/$300,000 for bodily injury and $50,000 for property
damage.
(6) Any and all other information and documentation which the
Borough of Hellertown may request and deem necessary prior to
the issuance of a license.
C. Issuance. Licenses shall be issued on a calendar-year basis, but may be
revoked at any time by the Borough of Hellertown for the failure of the
licensee to maintain full compliance at all times with the provisions of
this article.
D. Fees. The fee for a hauler's license shall be set by the Council of the
Borough of Hellertown, and the amount thereof shall be disclosed to
any applicant or other person upon request. Said fee may be amended,
from time to time, at the discretion of the Council of the Borough of
Hellertown through the adoption of a resolution for that purpose.
E. License and capacity. Each vehicle so licensed pursuant to the terms of
this article at all times shall display the name, address and telephone
number of the licensee and the cubic yard capacity of the vehicle's body.
The licensee shall ensure that the license, or a copy thereof, is
maintained within each vehicle so licensed and to which said license
applies.
§ 367-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-13
1:257
§ 367-13. Notice to collectors.
Should the Borough of Hellertown designate the disposal facilities as
provided for in § 367-12 above, all authorized collectors and other
interested persons shall be informed of the location and other information
pertaining to the designated disposal facilities to be used for the disposal of
municipal waste collected, transported, removed and disposed.
§ 367-14. Individuals not engaged in collection business.
Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to prohibit any residential
property occupant not regularly engaged in the business of collecting
municipal waste from hauling his own municipal waste, on an irregular and
unscheduled basis, to a state-permitted disposal facility.
§ 367-15. Farming activities.
Nothing contained herein shall prohibit a farmer from carrying out the
normal activities of his farming, including composting and spreading of
manure or other farm-produced agricultural waste.
§ 367-16. Hazardous and residual waste.
The provisions of this article do not apply to anything but the storage,
collection, transportation and disposal of municipal waste and do not apply,
therefore, to hazardous or residual waste, as defined by the Pennsylvania
Solid Waste Management Act.67
§ 367-17. Schedule of service fees and penalties.
The Council of the Borough of Hellertown shall have the power to establish
a schedule of service fees and penalties for the provision of waste collection,
removal and transportation services and to establish a system for the
collection of those fees and penalties from service subscribers. Said Council
also shall have the power to amend the schedule of fees and penalties and/
or the fee collection system from time to time as may be deemed necessary.
Said schedules and amendments shall be accomplished by the adoption of a
resolution which shall be attached hereto as an appendix and made a part
hereof by this reference.
§ 367-18. Responsibility for payment of fees.
The legal and/or equitable owner(s) of the real estate from which the
municipal waste is collected, removed and transported shall be responsible
to pay, and shall pay, the fees, fines and penalties as may be imposed
properly pursuant to the various provisions of this article.
67.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 6018.101 et seq.
§ 367-13 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-19
1:258
§ 367-19. Violations and penalties. [Amended 4-18-1988 by Ord. No.
55568]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less
then $25 or more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said
fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
§ 367-20. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalties, the Borough of Hellertown may
require the owner or occupant of a property to remove any accumulation
of solid waste and, should said person fail to remove such solid waste after
10 days following his receipt of a written notice to do so, the Borough may
cause the solid waste to be collected and disposed of with the costs for such
actions to be charged to the owner or occupant of the property in a manner
provided by law.
§ 367-21. Abatement.
The imposition of the penalties and/or remedies herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough of Hellertown from instituting appropriate actions or
proceedings to prevent the violation of this article; to restrain, correct or
abate any such violation; or to prevent any act, conduct, business or activity
constituting a violation of the provisions hereof.
§ 367-22. Amendment.
This article shall be subject to all applicable federal, state and local laws,
ordinances, rules and regulations, including the rules and regulations as
set forth by the Department of Environmental Protection, Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
68.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 367-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-22
1:259

ARTICLE II
Recycling
[Adopted 5-20-1991 by Ord. No. 574]
§ 367-23. Title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Hellertown Borough Recycling
Ordinance of 1991."
§ 367-24. Authority.
§ 367-25. Definitions.
A. Pursuant to the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling and Waste
Reduction Act, Act of July 28, 1988, No. 101,69 each municipality of the
commonwealth shall have the power and duty to adopt and implement
programs for the collection and recycling of municipal waste or sourceseparated
recyclable materials.
B. Pursuant to paragraph (6), § 1202, Article XII, "Corporate Powers," of
the Borough Code, Act of February 1, 1966, No. 581, as amended,
among the specific powers granted to the Council is the authority to
make such regulations as may be necessary for the health, safety,
morals, general welfare and cleanliness and the beauty, convenience
and safety of the Borough.70
C. Also pursuant to paragraph (11) of the aforesaid § 1202,71 Council are
granted the authority to make regulations for the care and removal of
garbage and other refuse material, including the imposition and
collection of reasonable fees and charges therefor.
A. General. For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases
or words shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except
where the context in which the same may be used clearly indicates
otherwise. All references to the singular shall include the plural and
vice versa. The masculine shall include the feminine. The term "may" is
permissible; "shall" is mandatory.
B. Specific terms.
ALUMINUM CANS — Empty, all-aluminum beverage and food
containers.
BIMETALS/BIMETALLIC CONTAINERS — Empty beverage and food
containers of a combined aluminum and steel composition.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
69.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 4000.101 et seq.
70.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202(6).
71.Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 46202(11).
§ 367-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-25
1:261
CO-MINGLED RECYCLABLES — Those materials to be recycled that
are mixed together at the generation source for collection and
separated elsewhere in preparation for the market.
COMMERCIAL ACTIVITY — An event sponsored by public or private
agencies or individuals, that includes, but is not limited to, fairs,
carnivals, socials, picnics and organized sporting events at which the
attendance shall be, or is anticipated to be, 200 or more persons.
COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those nonresidential enterprises
engaged in trade, provision of services and/or industrial activities.
CONTRACTOR — The person, firm or corporation authorized by the
Borough to collect, convey and dispose of recyclable materials in
accordance with the terms of this article.
CORRUGATED/CORRUGATED PAPER — Structural paper material with
a rigid inner core shaped in parallel alternating ridges and grooves.
FERROUS CONTAINER — Empty food or beverage containers of a steel
or tin-plated steel composition.
GLASS CONTAINER — Bottles or jars made of clear (flint), green
or brown (amber) glass. Expressly excluded from this term are plate
glass, automotive glass, blue glass, porcelain and ceramic, and items
comprised of or containing the aforesaid excluded materials.
HAZARDOUS WASTE — Any garbage, refuse or sludge from an
industrial or other wastewater treatment plant, sludge from a water
supply treatment plant or air-pollution-control facility and other
discarded materials, including solid, semisolid, liquid or contained
gaseous material resulting from municipal, commercial, industrial,
institutional, mining or agriculture operations and from community
activities, or any combination thereof.
HDPE — An acronym for high-density polyethylene plastic, used
commonly for the manufacture of milk and water jugs and detergent
bottles. Society of the Plastic Industry (SPI) coded by the numeral "2"
surrounded by a three-sided arrow.
HIGH GRADE OFFICE PAPER — White paper, bond paper and
computer paper used in commercial, institutional, industrial
establishments.
INSTITUTIONAL ESTABLISHMENT — Those facilities that house or
serve groups of people such as hospitals, schools, day-care centers and
nursing homes.
LEAF WASTE — Leaves, garden residues, shrubbery and tree
trimmings, and similar material, but not including grass
clippings.[Added 11-2-2015 by Ord. No. 803]
MULTIFAMILY DWELLING — Any property having four or more
dwelling units per structure.
§ 367-25 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-25
1:262
§ 367-26. Recycling program.
MUNICIPALITY — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
MUNICIPAL WASTE — Any garbage, refuse, industrial lunchroom or
office waste and other material, including solid, liquid, semisolid or
contained gaseous material, resulting from the operation of residential,
municipal, commercial or institutional establishments and from
community activities, and any sludge not meeting the definition of
residual or hazardous waste in the Solid Waste Management Act (Act
97 of 1980) from a municipal, commercial or institutional water supply
treatment plant, wastewater treatment plant or air-pollution-control
facility.
NEWSPAPER — That type of paper commonly referred to as
"newsprint."
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation and, as
applied to associations, shall include the responsible members or
general partners thereof, and, as applied to corporations, the officers
thereof.
PET — An acronym for polyethylene terephthalene, more commonly
called polyester and used in the manufacture of plastic soft-drink (soda)
bottles. SPI coded by the number "1" surrounded by a three-sided
arrow.
RECYCLABLE MATERIAL — Those materials listed in § 1501 of Act
10172 and materials identified by the Borough to be recycled and listed
in Appendix A hereto.73
RECYCLING — The separation, collection and recovery of materials
which otherwise would be disposed of or processed as municipal waste
for reuse as a substitute for or supplement to raw materials.
RECYCLING CONTAINER — The receptacle to be utilized by residential
dwellers for the placement of recyclable materials for collection.
RESIDENCE/RESIDENTIAL DWELLING — Any property having less
than four dwelling units in the structure.
WASTE — Any material the original purpose of which has been fulfilled
and which is directed to a facility for disposal. The term does not
include recyclable material.
A. General. There hereby is established within the Borough a program that
mandates that certain, specified recyclable materials, as identified in
Appendix A hereto, shall be kept separate from other municipal wastes,
and the same shall be placed for collection in the manner designated by
the Borough and in accordance with the recycling regulations, affixed
72.Editor's Note: See the Municipal Waste Planning, Recycling, and Waste Reduction Act of
1988, 53 P.S. § 4000.1501.
73.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 367-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-26
1:263
§ 367-27. Municipal ownership of recyclables.
§ 367-28. Existing recycling operations.
§ 367-29. Recycling of materials; violations.
hereto as Appendix B.74 Failure or refusal of any person to comply with
these regulations shall be considered to be a violation of this article,
punishable as an offense as hereinafter provided.
B. Leaf waste. In addition to those recyclable materials identified in
Appendix A, all persons shall refrain from the disposal of leaf waste as
part of their normal wastes. Leaf waste is to be disposed of in
accordance with the leaf collection program provided by the Borough.
A. All residence-generated recyclable materials, once placed for collection
in accordance with the recycling regulations, shall become the property
of the Borough.
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to collect or pick up
any recyclable material absent of the written authorization of the
Borough to do so. Each such unauthorized collection in violation hereof
shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as
hereinafter provided.
A. Any person may donate or sell recyclable materials to individuals, firms
or organizations that were operating recycling programs on or before
July 28, 1988, the effective date of the Pennsylvania Municipal Waste
Recycling, Planning and Waste Reduction Act, Act 101 of 1988.
B. Persons so donating or selling recyclable materials to such program
operators shall transport those materials to the operator's collection
site.
C. Operators of pre-Act 101 recycling programs shall make application for
and obtain a permit from the Borough to collect recyclable materials
within the Borough. The procedures relative to the permit application
and issuance process are set forth in the recycling regulations,
Appendix B hereto.75
A. All persons residing or doing business within the limits of the Borough
shall conform to the terms of this article and those of the recycling
regulations, attached hereto as Appendix B, relative to the recycling of
specified materials.76
B. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to dispose of any
specified recyclable materials by placing them in the ordinary
municipal waste stream or otherwise disposing of them contrary to the
74.Editor's Note: Appendixes A and B are included at the end of this chapter.
75.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
76.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 367-26 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-29
1:264
§ 367-30. Franchise or license.
The Borough may enter into agreements with public or private agencies or
firms, granting authorization to them to collect all or part of the specified
recyclable materials from curbside or elsewhere, as designated by the
Borough.
§ 367-31. Enforcement and administration.
§ 367-32. Violations and penalties.
terms of this article or the recycling regulations hereto. Each such
violation hereof shall constitute a separate and distinct offense
punishable as hereinafter provided.
C. It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has been
authorized by the Borough to collect recyclable materials from within
the Borough to dispose of said materials in landfills or through
incineration unless it can be documented to the satisfaction of the
Borough that markets for said materials do not exist at the time of the
proposed alternative disposal. Each such violation hereof shall
constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable as hereinafter
provided.
A. The Borough hereby is authorized and directed to enforce this article
and the recycling regulations hereto.
B. The same hereby is authorized and directed to establish and
promulgate reasonable recycling regulations, which shall constitute
Appendix B hereto, and shall be given the same force and effect as
though the same were set forth at length herein.77 Said regulations
shall stipulate and control the manner, days and times for the collection
of recyclable materials in accordance with the terms hereof and any
other matters required to implement this article. The Borough may
change, modify, repeal or amend any portion of said regulations at any
time by motion of Borough Council, as seen fit to further the objectives
of this article and Act 101.
A. Any action by any person which violates or does not comply with any
provision of this article or the regulations as made a part hereof shall,
upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed $25,
and the costs of prosecution, upon a first conviction; a fine not to exceed
$100, and the costs of prosecution, upon a second conviction; and a fine
not to exceed $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine
and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day
that a violation of this article continues or each section of this article
which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.78
77.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
78.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 367-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 367-32
1:265
B. The foregoing fine schedule shall not be applicable to a conviction for a
violation of § 367-27B, of this article. Any person, upon conviction of a
violation of the provisions of said § 367-27B, shall be sentenced to pay a
fine not to exceed $600 and the costs of prosecution.
§ 367-32 HELLERTOWN CODE § 367-32
1:266
Chapter 372
STORAGE CONTAINERS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Solid waste — See Ch. 367.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 372-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PORTABLE STORAGE CONTAINER — Any assembly of materials
constructed to hold materials, goods and/or products for safekeeping
contained in any and all temporary storage containers not permanently
attached to the ground. Portable storage containers shall include any and
all containers that are referred to as "PODS®." Portable storage containers
shall also include all garbage disposal containers kept on public or private
property to collect nonresidential waste, including construction and
demolition waste and garbage to be removed by a private waste hauler.
Portable storage containers shall not include garbage disposal containers
which are kept on the property to collect residential and household waste
and garbage to be removed by the Borough or private waste hauler.
STORAGE — A function involving the collection or deposition of materials,
goods and/or products for safekeeping or disposal.
§ 372-2. Permit.
Any Borough property owner who desires to store a portable storage
container on public or private property in accordance with the terms and
conditions of this chapter must submit a permit application to the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer or the designee of the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer. A portable storage container permit shall be secured
from the Borough Code Enforcement Officer prior to placing the portable
storage container on public or private property. The Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall require that the permit application for a portable
storage container shall contain all information necessary to enable the Code
Enforcement Officer to ascertain whether the proposed portable storage
container complies with the provisions of this chapter and is located and
marked in a manner to preserve the public safety. The permit request shall
be granted or denied within five days' receipt of the written application. The
fee to be paid for the portable storage container permit shall be $75 for
each time a permit or a renewal thereof is applied for. If a permit is granted,
the portable storage container shall be stored on public or private property
for a period defined in the portable storage container permit at a location
acceptable to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer. In the event that the
§ 367-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-2
1:267
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall determine, in his or her sole and
absolute discretion, that said portable storage containers must be on public
property, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall require the property
owner to implement all necessary safety precautions that the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall, in his or her sole and absolute discretion, deem
necessary to protect the interests of the public.
§ 372-3. Storage containers restricted.
A. Failure to obtain a permit. A failure by any Borough property owner to
submit a permit application to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
and/or a failure to obtain an approved permit from the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or the designee of the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer is a violation of this chapter. In the event a portable storage
container is placed on private or public property without first obtaining
a permit, the property owner shall be cited and be subject to the penalty
provisions set forth in § 372-5. In addition, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer or the designee is hereby authorized to require the
property owner to immediately remove the portable storage container.
The Code Enforcement Officer is also authorized to immediately remove
the storage container pursuant to § 372-5 of the chapter.
B. Exceeding permit time limitation. It shall be deemed a violation of this
chapter for the owner of any property or premises to store in the open
any portable storage container for the purpose of depositing materials,
goods and/or products of the property owner for safekeeping for a
period in excess of the time limit set forth in the portable storage
container permit unless a permit extension is obtained from the Code
Enforcement Officer. Portable storage containers placed on public or
private property to collect nonresidential waste, including construction
and demolition waste and garbage to be removed by a private waste
hauler, shall be permitted for the duration described in the permit and
must be located and marked for safety in accordance with the permit
conditions.
C. Violation of permit and/or ordinance conditions. When a Code
Enforcement Officer or his or her designee shall determine that a
portable storage container, as defined in § 372-1, is being maintained on
public or private property in violation of the permit and/or any provision
set forth in this chapter, said Code Enforcement Officer or the
respective Code Enforcement Officer's designee shall notify the owner
of the subject property according to § 372-4 of this chapter, directing
the owner to correct the violation and come into full compliance with
the terms of the permit and/or any condition of the chapter within five
days of receipt of notification that the portable storage container has
remained on public or private property in excess of the duration in the
permit or in violation of any provision of the permit and/or chapter.
D. Dangerous condition. When a Code Enforcement Officer or his or her
designee shall determine that a portable storage container, as defined
in § 372-1, is being maintained in such a way as to endanger the health,
§ 372-2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 372-3
1:268
§ 372-4. Written notice to violators required.
Whenever a condition constituting a violation of this chapter occurs or is
maintained, the Borough shall cause written notice to be served upon the
owner in one of the following manners:
§ 372-5. Violations and penalties.
This chapter shall be enforced pursuant to 53 P.S. § 46202.
safety and welfare of the general public, the Code Enforcement Officer
or his or her designee is hereby authorized to notify the property
owner according to § 372-4 to immediately remove the portable storage
container from public or private property as set forth in the permit. The
Code Enforcement Officer or his or her designee shall also be permitted
to immediately remove the portable storage container, as set forth in
§ 372-5, and provide the property owner with a notice of removal, as
set forth in § 372-4, and to seek any remedies provided therein for a
violation of this chapter.
A. By making personal delivery of the notice to owners;
B. By handing a copy of the notice at the residence of the owner to an
adult member of the family with which he resides, but if no adult
member of the family is found, then to an adult person in charge of such
residence;
C. By fixing a copy of the notice to the door at the entrance of the premises
in violation; or
D. By mailing a copy of the notice to the last known address of the owner
by certified mail.
A. Enforcement thereof shall be by an action before a Magisterial District
Judge in the same manner provided for the enforcement of summary
offenses under the Pennsylvania Rules of Criminal Procedure. The
Borough Solicitor may assume charge of the prosecution without the
consent of the District Attorney as required under Pa.R.Crim.P. No.
83(c) (relating to trial and summary cases). The Borough Council
hereby sets a criminal fine in the amount not to exceed $300 per
violation and the costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs of prosecution, to undergo imprisonment of not more
than 10 days; provided, further, that each day's continuance of a
violation shall constitute a separate event.
B. The Borough Council may direct the removal of the portable storage
container, as the case may be, and to certify the costs thereof to the
Borough Solicitor. The Borough shall send notice of the cost to the
property owner, who shall pay said invoice within 10 days of receipt. In
the event of failure to pay, pursuit to 53 P.S. § 48401 the cost of such
removal, repair or alterations shall be a lien upon such premises from
the time of such removal, which date shall be determined by the
§ 372-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 372-5
1:269
Chapter 378
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 204.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading
control — See Ch. 360.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
certificate of the person doing such work filed with the Borough. The
Borough shall also have the right, pursuant to 53 P.S. § 48401, to pursue
any other civil and/or equitable remedies permitted by law to obtain
repayment of any and all costs incurred in enforcing the chapter.
§ 372-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 372-5
1:270
ARTICLE I
General Provisions
§ 378-1. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Act 167 Stormwater
Management Ordinance."
§ 378-2. Statement of findings.
The governing body of the Borough finds that:
§ 378-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health, safety and
welfare within the Saucon Creek Watershed by minimizing the damages and
maximizing the benefits described in § 378-2 of this chapter by provisions
designed to:
A. Inadequate management of accelerated runoff of stormwater resulting
from development throughout a watershed increases flood flows and
velocities, contributes to erosion and sedimentation, changes the
natural hydrologic patterns, destroys aquatic habitat, elevates aquatic
pollutant concentrations and loadings, overtaxes the carrying capacity
of streams and storm sewers, greatly increases the cost of public
facilities to carry and control stormwater, undermines floodplain
management and flood control efforts in downstream communities,
reduces groundwater recharge, and threatens public health and safety.
B. A comprehensive program of stormwater management, including
reasonable regulation of development and activities causing
accelerated erosion and loss of natural infiltration, is fundamental to
the public health, safety and welfare and the protection of the people of
the Borough and all of the people of the commonwealth, their resources
and the environment.
C. Stormwater can be an important resource by providing groundwater
recharge for water supplies and baseflow of streams, which also
protects and maintains surface water quality.*
D. Public education on the control of pollution from stormwater is an
essential component in successfully addressing stormwater.*
E. Federal and state regulations require certain boroughs to implement a
program of stormwater controls. These Boroughs are required to obtain
a permit for stormwater discharges from their separate storm sewer
systems under the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
(NPDES).*
F. Nonstormwater discharges to Borough separate storm sewer systems
can contribute to pollution of waters of the commonwealth by the
Borough.*
§ 378-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-3
1:271
§ 378-4. Statutory authority.
The Borough is empowered to regulate these activities by the authority of
the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864 (Act 167), 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq., as
amended, the "Stormwater Management Act," and the Borough Code.
§ 378-5. Applicability.
A. Manage stormwater runoff impacts at their source by regulating
activities which cause such problems.
B. Utilize and preserve the desirable existing natural drainage systems.
C. Encourage infiltration of stormwater, where appropriate, to maintain
groundwater recharge, to prevent degradation of surface water and
groundwater quality and to otherwise protect water resources.
D. Maintain the existing flows and quality of streams and watercourses in
the Borough and the commonwealth.
E. Preserve and restore the flood-carrying capacity of streams.
F. Provide for proper maintenance of all permanent stormwater
management BMPs that are implemented in the Borough.
G. Provide review procedures and performance standards for stormwater
planning, design and management.*
H. Manage stormwater impacts close to the runoff source which requires a
minimum of structures and relies on natural processes.*
I. Meet legal water quality requirements under state law, including
regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.4a to protect and maintain
"existing uses" and maintain the level of water quality to support those
uses in all streams and to protect and maintain water quality in "special
protection" streams.*
J. Prevent scour and erosion of stream banks and streambeds.*
K. Provide standards to meet the NPDES permit requirements.*
A. This chapter shall only apply to those areas of the Borough which are
located within the Saucon Creek Watershed, as delineated on an official
map available for inspection at the Borough office. A map of the Saucon
Creek Watershed at a reduced scale is included in Appendix A for
general reference.79
B. The following activities are defined as regulated activities and shall be
governed by this chapter.
(1) Land development.
79.Editor's Note: Appendix A is on file in the Borough office.
§ 378-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-5
1:272
§ 378-6. Exemptions.
(2) Subdivision.
(3) Construction of new or additional impervious surfaces (driveways,
parking lots, etc.).
(4) Construction of new buildings or additions to existing buildings.
(5) Diversion or piping of any natural or man-made stream channel.
(6) Installation of stormwater systems or appurtenances thereto.
(7) Regulated earth disturbance activities.*
A. Impervious cover. Any proposed regulated activity, except those defined
in § 378-5B(5) and (6), which would create 10,000 square feet or less of
additional impervious cover is exempt from the drainage plan
preparation provisions of this chapter. The date of the Borough
adoption of the Stormwater Management Ordinance shall be the
starting point from which to consider tracts as "parent tracts" in which
future subdivisions and respective impervious area computations shall
be cumulatively considered. For development taking place in stages,
the entire development plan must be used in determining conformance
with these criteria. Additional impervious cover shall include, but not
be limited to, additional indoor living spaces, decks, patios, garages,
driveways, storage sheds and similar structures, any roof, parking or
driveway areas and any new streets and sidewalks constructed as part
of or for the proposed regulated activity. Any additional areas proposed
to initially be gravel, crushed stone, porous pavement, etc., shall be
assumed to be impervious for the purposes of comparison to the
exemption criteria. Any existing gravel, crushed stone or hard-packed
soil areas on a site shall be considered as pervious cover for the
purpose of exemption evaluation. All of the impervious cover added
incrementally to a site above the initial 10,000 square feet shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter. If a site has previously received
an exemption and is proposing additional development such that the
total impervious cover on the site exceeds 10,000 square feet, the total
impervious cover on the site proposed since the original ordinance date
must meet the provisions of this chapter.
B. Prior drainage plan approval. Any regulated activity for which a
drainage plan was previously prepared as part of a subdivision or land
development proposal that received preliminary plan approval from the
Borough prior to the effective date of this chapter is exempt from the
drainage plan preparation provisions of this chapter, except as cited in
Subsection C, provided that the approved drainage plan included
design of stormwater facilities to control runoff from the site currently
proposed for regulated activities consistent with ordinance provisions
in effect at the time of approval and the approval has not lapsed under
the Borough's Planning Code.80 If significant revisions are made to the
§ 378-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-6
1:273
§ 378-7. Compatibility with other requirements.
Approvals issued pursuant to this chapter do not relieve the applicant of
the responsibility to secure required permits or approvals for activities
regulated by any other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
§ 378-8. Duty of persons engaged in the development of land.
Notwithstanding any provisions of this chapter, including exemption and
waiver provisions, any landowner and any person engaged in the alteration
or development of land which may affect stormwater runoff characteristics
shall implement such measures as are reasonably necessary to prevent
injury to health, safety or other property. Such measures shall include such
actions as are required to manage the rate, volume, direction and quality
of resulting stormwater runoff in a manner which otherwise adequately
protects health and property from possible injury.
drainage plan after both the preliminary plan approval and the effective
date of this chapter, preparation of a new drainage plan subject to
the provisions of this chapter shall be required. Significant revisions
would include a change in control methods or techniques, relocation
or redesign of control measures or changes necessary because soil or
other conditions are not as stated on the original drainage plan.
C. These exemptions shall not relieve the applicant from implementing
such measures as are necessary to protect health, safety, property and
state water quality requirements. These measures include adequate
and safe conveyance of stormwater on the site and as it leaves the site.
These exemptions do not relieve the applicant from the responsibility to
secure required permits or approvals for activities regulated by any
other applicable code, rule, act or ordinance.
D. No exemptions shall be provided for regulated activities as defined in
§ 378-5B(5) and (6).
80.Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 378-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-8
1:274
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 378-9. Word usage.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words used herein shall
be interpreted as follows:
§ 378-10. Terms defined.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ACCELERATED EROSION — The removal of the surface of the land through
the combined action of human activities and natural processes at a rate
greater than would occur because of the natural process alone.*
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE (BMP) — Activities, facilities, measures
or procedures used to manage stormwater quantity and quality impacts
from the regulated activities listed in § 378-5 to meet state water quality
requirements, to promote groundwater recharge and to otherwise meet the
purposes of this chapter.*
BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE
PLAN — Documentation, included as part of a drainage plan, detailing the
proposed BMPs, how they will be operated and maintained and who will be
responsible.*
BIORETENTION — Densely vegetated, depressed features that store
stormwater and filter it through vegetation, mulch, planting soil, etc.
Ultimately stormwater is evapotranspirated, infiltrated or discharged.
Optimal bioretention areas mimic natural forest ecosystems in terms of
species diversity, density, distribution, use of native plants, etc.
BOROUGH — Hellertown Borough, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
BUFFER —
A. Words used in the present tense include the future tense; the singular
number includes the plural, and the plural number includes the
singular; words of masculine gender include feminine gender, and
words of feminine gender include masculine gender.
B. The word "includes" or "including" shall not limit the term to the
specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other
instances of like kind and character.
C. The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory; the words "may" and
"should" are permissive.
STREAMSIDE BUFFER — A zone of variable width located along a
stream that is vegetated and is designed to filter pollutants from runoff.
A.
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURE BUFFER — A required isolation
distance from a special geologic feature to a proposed BMP needed to
B.
§ 378-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-10
1:275
CAPTURE/REUSE — Stormwater management techniques, such as cisterns
and rain barrels, which direct runoff into storage devices, surface or
subsurface, for later reuse, such as for irrigation of gardens and other
planted areas. Because this stormwater is utilized and no pollutant
discharge results, water quality performance is superior to other
noninfiltration BMPs.
CARBONATE BEDROCK — Rock consisting chiefly of carbonate minerals,
such as limestone and dolomite; specifically, a sedimentary rock composed
of more than 50% by weight of carbonate minerals that underlies soil or
other unconsolidated, superficial material.
CISTERN — An underground reservoir or tank for storing rainwater.
CLOSED DEPRESSION — A distinctive bowl-shaped depression in the land
surface. It is characterized by internal drainage, varying magnitude and an
unbroken ground surface.
CONSERVATION DISTRICT — The Northhampton County Conservation
District.
CONSTRUCTED WETLANDS — Constructed wetlands are similar to wet
ponds (see below) and consist of a basin which provides for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool or water level planted
with wetland vegetation. To be successful, constructed wetlands must have
adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well as soils and water
table which allow for maintenance of a permanent pool of water). In these
cases, the permanent pool must be designed carefully, usually with shallow
edge benches, so that water levels are appropriate to support carefully
selected wetland vegetation.
CULVERT — A pipe, conduit or similar structure including appurtenant
works which carries surface water.
DAM — An artificial barrier, together with its appurtenant works,
constructed for the purpose of impounding or storing water or another fluid
or semifluid, or a refuse bank, fill or structure for highway, railroad or other
purposes which does or may impound water or another fluid or semifluid.
DEP — The Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (formerly
the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Resources).
DESIGN STORM — The depth and time distribution of precipitation from
a storm event measured in probability of occurrence (e.g., fifty-year storm)
and duration (e.g., 24 hours), and used in computing stormwater
management control systems.
DETENTION BASIN — A basin designed to retard stormwater runoff by
temporarily storing the runoff and releasing it at a predetermined rate.
DEVELOPER — A person, partnership, association, corporation or other
entity, or a responsible person therein or agent thereof, that undertakes any
regulated activity of this chapter.
reduce the risk of sinkhole formation due to stormwater management
activities.
§ 378-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-10
1:276
DEVELOPMENT SITE (SITE) — The specific tract of land for which a
regulated activity is proposed.
DIFFUSED DRAINAGE — See "sheet flow."
DRAINAGE EASEMENT — A right granted by a landowner to a grantee,
allowing the use of private land for stormwater management purposes.
DRAINAGE PLAN — The documentation of the proposed stormwater
quantity and quality management controls to be used for a given
development site, including a BMP operations and maintenance plan, the
contents of which are established in § 378-20.
EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITY — A construction or other human activity
which disturbs the surface of the land, including, but not limited to, clearing
and grubbing, grading, excavations, embankments, road maintenance,
building construction and the moving, depositing, stockpiling or storing of
soil, rock or earth materials.*
EROSION — The removal of soil particles by the action of water, wind, ice
or other geological agents.
EXISTING USES — Those uses actually attained in the water body on or
after November 28, 1975, whether or not they are included in the water
quality standards. (25 Pa. Code Chapter 93.1)
FILL — Man-made deposits of natural soils or rock products and waste
materials.
FILTER STRIPS — See "vegetated buffers."
FREEBOARD — The incremental depth in a stormwater management
structure, provided as a safety factor of design, above that required to
convey the design runoff event.
GROUNDWATER RECHARGE — Replenishment of existing natural
underground water supplies.
HARDSHIP WAIVER REQUEST — A written request for a waiver alleging
that the provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. Waivers from the water quality provisions of this chapter shall
not be granted.
HOT SPOT LAND USES — A land use or activity that generates higher
concentrations of hydrocarbons, trace metals or other toxic substances
than typically found in stormwater runoff. These land uses are listed in
§ 378-14P.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE (IMPERVIOUS COVER) — A surface which
prevents the percolation of water into the ground.
INFILTRATION PRACTICE — A practice designed to direct runoff into the
ground, e.g., french drain, seepage pit, seepage trench or bioretention area.
KARST — A type of topography or landscape characterized by depressions,
sinkholes, limestone towers and steep-sided hills, underground drainage
§ 378-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-10
1:277
and caves. Karst is usually formed on carbonate rocks, such as limestones
or dolomites and sometimes gypsum.
LAND DEVELOPMENT —
LOADING RATE — The ratio of the land area draining to the system, as
modified by the weighting factors in § 378-17B, compared to the base area
of the infiltration system.
LOCAL RUNOFF CONVEYANCE FACILITIES — Any natural channel or
man-made conveyance system which has the purpose of transporting runoff
from the site to the mainstem.
LOW-IMPACT DEVELOPMENT — A development approach that promotes
practices that will minimize post-development runoff rates and volumes
thereby minimizing needs for artificial conveyance and storage facilities.
Site design practices include preserving natural drainage features,
minimizing impervious surface area, reducing the hydraulic connectivity of
impervious surfaces, and protecting natural depression storage.
MAINSTEM (MAIN CHANNEL) — Any stream segment or other conveyance
used as a reach in the Saucon Creek hydrologic model.
MANNING EQUATION (MANNING FORMULA) — A method for calculation
of velocity of flow (e.g., feet per second) and flow rate (e.g., cubic feet per
second) in open channels based upon channel shape, roughness, depth of
flow and slope. "Open channels" may include closed conduits so long as the
flow is not under pressure.
MARYLAND STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL — A stormwater design
manual written by the Maryland Department of the Environment and the
Center for Watershed Protection. As of January 2004, the Manual can be
obtained through the following website: www.mde.state.md.us.
MINIMUM DISTURBANCE/MINIMUM MAINTENANCE PRACTICES (MD/
MM) — A site design practice in which careful limits are placed on site
clearance prior to development allowing for maximum retention of existing
vegetation (woodlands and other), minimum disturbance and compaction
of existing soil mantle and minimum site application of chemicals post
development. Typically, MD/MM includes disturbance setback criteria from
buildings, as well as related site improvements such as walkways,
driveways, roadways and any other improvements. These criteria may vary
by community context as well as by type of development being proposed.
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
(1) A group of two or more buildings; or
The division or allocation of land or space between or among
two or more existing or prospective occupants by means of or for
the purpose of streets, common areas, leaseholds, condominiums,
building groups or other features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
§ 378-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-10
1:278
Additionally, MD/MM also shall include provisions (e.g., deed restrictions,
conservation easements) to protect these areas from future disturbance and
from application of fertilizers, pesticides and herbicides.
NO HARM OPTION — The option of using a less restrictive runoff quantity
control if it can be shown that adequate and safe runoff conveyance exists
and that the less-restrictive control would not adversely affect health, safety
and property.
NPDES — National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System.
NRCS — Natural Resource Conservation Service — U.S. Department of
Agriculture. (Formerly the Soil Conservation Service.)
OIL/WATER SEPARATOR — A structural mechanism designed to remove
free oil and grease (and possibly solids) from stormwater runoff.
OUTFALL — "Point source," as described in 40 CFR 122.2, at the point
where the Borough's storm sewer system discharges to surface waters of
the commonwealth.*
PEAK DISCHARGE — The maximum rate of flow of stormwater runoff at a
given location and time resulting from a specified storm event.
PENN STATE RUNOFF MODEL (PSRM) — The computer-based hydrologic
modeling technique used in previous Act 167 Plans. PSRM was also updated
to include water quality modeling capabilities and renamed PSRM-QUAL.
The PSRM and PSRM-QUAL calculation methodologies were used as the
basis for writing the watershed model.
PERSON — An individual, partnership, public or private association or
corporation, or a governmental unit, public utility or other for or not for
profit statutory entity or other legal entity whatsoever which is recognized
by law as the subject of rights and duties.*
POINT SOURCE — Any discernible, confined and discrete conveyance,
including, but not limited to, any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel or conduit
from which stormwater is or may be discharged, as defined in state
regulations at 25 Pa. Code § 92.1.*
PRELIMINARY SITE INVESTIGATION — The determination of the depth
to bedrock, the depth to the seasonal high-water table and the soil
permeability for a possible infiltration location on a site through the use
of published data and on-site surveys. In carbonate bedrock areas, the
location of special geologic features must also be determined along with
the associated buffer distance to the possible infiltration area. See Appendix
E.81
PUBLIC WATER SUPPLIER — A person who owns or operates a public
water system.
PUBLIC WATER SYSTEM — A system which provides water to the public for
human consumption which has at least 15 service connections or regularly
81.Editor's Note: Appendix E, Preliminary Site Investigation and Testing Requirements, is
included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-10
1:279
serves an average of at least 25 individuals daily at least 60 days out of the
year. (See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 109.)
QUALIFIED GEOTECHNICAL PROFESSIONAL — A licensed professional
geologist or a licensed professional engineer who has a background or
expertise in geology or hydrogeology.
RATIONAL METHOD — A method of peak runoff calculation using a
standardized runoff coefficient (rational "c"), acreage of tract and rainfall
intensity determined by return period and by the time necessary for the
entire tract to contribute runoff. The rational method formula is stated as
follows: Q = ciA, where "Q" is the calculated peak flow rate in cubic feet
per second, "c" is the dimensionless runoff coefficient (see Appendix A), "i"
is the rainfall intensity in inches per hour, and "A" is the area of the tract in
acres.82
REACH — Any of the natural or man-made runoff conveyance channels
used for watershed runoff modeling purposes to connect the subareas and
transport flows downstream.
REGULATED ACTIVITIES — Actions or proposed actions which impact upon
proper management of stormwater runoff and which are governed by this
chapter as specified in § 378-5.
REGULATED EARTH DISTURBANCE ACTIVITIES — Earth disturbance
activity other than agricultural plowing or tilling of one acre or more with
a point source discharge to surface waters or to the Borough's storm sewer
system or earth disturbance activity of five acres or more regardless of the
planned runoff. This includes earth disturbance on any portion of, part or
during any stage of a larger common plan of development.*
RELEASE RATE — The percentage of the predevelopment peak rate of
runoff for a development site to which the post-development peak rate
of runoff must be controlled to avoid peak flow increases throughout the
watershed.
RETURN PERIOD — The average interval in years over which an event of
a given magnitude can be expected to recur. For example, the twenty-fiveyear
return period rainfall or runoff event would be expected to recur on
the average once every 25 years.
ROAD MAINTENANCE — Earth disturbance activities within the existing
road cross section such as grading and repairing existing unpaved road
surfaces, cutting road banks, cleaning or clearing drainage ditches and
other similar activities.*
RUNOFF — That part of precipitation which flows over the land.
SEDIMENT TRAPS/CATCH BASIN SUMPS — A chamber which provides
storage below the outlet in a storm inlet to collect sediment, debris and
associated pollutants, typically requiring periodic cleanout.
82.Editor's Note: Appendix A, which contains charts and values for calculations, is included
at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-10
1:280
SEEPAGE PIT/SEEPAGE TRENCH — An area of excavated earth filled with
loose stone or similar material and into which surface water is directed for
infiltration into the ground.
SEPARATE STORM SEWER SYSTEM — A conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, Borough streets,
catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels or storm drains)
primarily used for collecting and conveying stormwater runoff.*
SHEET FLOW — Stormwater runoff flowing in a thin layer over the ground
surface.
SOIL-COVER-COMPLEX METHOD — A method of runoff computation
developed by NRCS which is based upon relating soil type and land use/
cover to a runoff parameter called a "curve number."
SPECIAL GEOLOGIC FEATURES — Carbonate bedrock features, including
but not limited to closed depressions, existing sinkholes, fracture traces,
lineaments, joints, faults, caves and pinnacles, which may exist and must
be identified on a site when stormwater management BMPs are being
considered.
SPILL PREVENTION AND RESPONSE PROGRAM — A program that
identifies procedures for preventing and, as needed, cleaning up potential
spills and makes such procedures known and the necessary equipment
available to appropriate personnel.
STATE WATER QUALITY REQUIREMENTS — As defined under state
regulations — protection of designated and existing uses (see 25 Pa. Code
Chapters 93 and 96) — including:
Each stream segment in Pennsylvania has a "designated use," such
as "cold water fishes" or "potable water supply," which are listed in
Chapter 93. These uses must be protected and maintained, under state
regulations.
A.
"Existing uses" are those attained as of November 1975, regardless
of whether they have been designated in Chapter 93. Regulated earth
disturbance activities must be designed to protect and maintain
existing uses and maintain the level of water quality necessary to
protect those uses in all streams, and to protect and maintain water
quality in special protection streams.
B.
Water quality involves the chemical, biological and physical
characteristics of surface water bodies. After regulated earth
disturbance activities are complete, these characteristics can be
impacted by addition of pollutants such as sediment and changes in
habitat through increased flow volumes and/or rates as a result of
changes in land surface area from those activities. Therefore,
permanent discharges to surface waters must be managed to protect
the stream bank, streambed and structural integrity of the waterway, to
prevent these impacts.
C.
§ 378-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-10
1:281
STORAGE INDICATION METHOD — A method of routing or moving an
inflow hydrograph through a reservoir or detention structure. The method
solves the mass conservation equation to determine an outflow hydrograph
as it leaves the storage facility.
STORM DRAINAGE PROBLEM AREAS — Areas which lack adequate
stormwater collection and/or conveyance facilities and which present a
hazard to persons or property. These areas are either documented on the
map and description on file in the Borough offices or identified by the
Borough or Borough Engineer.83
STORM SEWER — A system of pipes or other conduits which carries
intercepted surface runoff, street water and other wash waters, or drainage,
but excludes domestic sewage and industrial wastes.
STORMWATER — The surface runoff generated by precipitation reaching
the ground surface.
STORMWATER FILTERS — Any number of structural mechanisms such
as multichamber catch basins, sand/peat filters, sand filters, and so forth,
which are installed to intercept stormwater flow and remove pollutants
prior to discharge. Typically, these systems require periodic maintenance
and cleanout.
STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN — The plan for managing stormwater
runoff as required by the Act of October 4, 1978, P.L. 864, (Act 167), as
amended, and known as the "Stormwater Management Act."84
STREAM — A watercourse.
SUBAREA — The smallest unit of watershed breakdown for hydrologic
modeling purposes for which the runoff control criteria have been
established in the stormwater management plan.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land by
any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels or other divisions of land,
including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether immediate
or future, of lease, transfer of ownership or building or lot ownership.
SURFACE WATERS OF THE COMMONWEALTH — Any and all rivers,
streams, creeks, rivulets, impoundments, ditches, watercourses, storm
sewers, lakes, dammed water, wetlands, ponds, springs and all other bodies
or channels of conveyance of surface water, or parts thereof, whether
natural or artificial, within or on the boundaries of this commonwealth.*
SWALE — A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface water
runoff. See also "vegetated swale."
TECHNICAL BEST MANAGEMENT PRACTICE MANUAL AND
INFILTRATION FEASIBILITY REPORT, NOVEMBER 2002 — The report
written by Cahill Associates that addresses the feasibility of infiltration in
83.Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
84.Editor's Note: See 32 P.S. § 680.1 et seq.
§ 378-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-10
1:282
carbonate bedrock areas in the Little Lehigh Creek Watershed. The report
is available at the LVPC offices.
TRASH/DEBRIS COLLECTORS — Racks, screens or other similar devices
installed in a storm drainage system to capture coarse pollutants (trash,
leaves, etc.).
VEGETATED BUFFERS — Gently sloping areas that convey stormwater as
sheet flow over a broad, densely vegetated earthen area, possibly coupled
with the use of level spreading devices. Vegetated buffers should be situated
on minimally disturbed soils, have low-flow velocities and extended
residence times.
VEGETATED ROOFS — Vegetated systems installed on roofs that generally
consist of a waterproof layer, a root-barrier, drainage layer (optional),
growth media, and suitable vegetation. Vegetated roofs store and eventually
evapotranspirate the collected rooftop rainfall; overflows may be provided
for larger storms.
VEGETATED SWALES — Broad, shallow, densely vegetated, earthen
channels designed to treat stormwater while slowly infiltrating,
evapotranspirating, and conveying it. Swales should be gently sloping with
low-flow velocities to prevent erosion. Check dams may be added to
enhance performance.
WATERCOURSE — Any channel of conveyance of surface water having
defined bed and banks, whether natural or artificial, with perennial or
intermittent flow.
WATER QUALITY INSERTS — Any number of commercially available
devices that are inserted into storm inlets to capture sediment, oil, grease,
metals, trash, debris, etc.
WATERSHED — The entire region or area drained by a river or other body
of water, whether natural or artificial.
WET DETENTION PONDS — A basin that provides for necessary
stormwater storage as well as a permanent pool of water. To be successful,
wet ponds must have adequate natural hydrology (both runoff inputs as well
as soils and water table which allow for maintenance of a permanent pool
of water) and must be able to support a healthy aquatic community so as to
avoid creation of mosquito and other health and nuisance problems.
§ 378-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-10
1:283

ARTICLE III
Stormwater Management Requirements
§ 378-11. General requirements.
A. All regulated activities in the Borough shall be subject to the
stormwater management requirements of this chapter.
B. Storm drainage systems shall be provided to permit unimpeded flow in
natural watercourses except as modified by stormwater detention
facilities, pipe systems or open channels consistent with this chapter.
C. The existing locations of concentrated drainage discharge onto
adjacent property shall not be altered without written approval of the
affected property owner(s).
D. Areas of existing diffused drainage discharge onto adjacent property
shall be managed such that, at minimum, the peak diffused flow does
not increase in the general direction of discharge, except as otherwise
provided in this chapter. If diffused flow is proposed to be concentrated
and discharged onto adjacent property, the developer must document
that there are adequate downstream conveyance facilities to safely
transport the concentrated discharge to the point of predevelopment
flow concentration, to the stream reach, or otherwise prove that no
harm will result from the concentrated discharge. Areas of existing
diffused drainage discharge shall be subject to any applicable release
rate criteria in the general direction of existing discharge whether they
are proposed to be concentrated or maintained as diffused drainage
areas.
E. Where a site is traversed by watercourses other than those for which a
one-hundred-year floodplain is defined by the Borough, there shall be
provided drainage easements conforming substantially with the line of
such watercourses. The width of any easement shall be adequate to
provide for unimpeded flow of storm runoff based on calculations made
in conformance with § 378-17 for the one-hundred-year return period
runoff and to provide a freeboard allowance of 1/2 foot above the design
water surface level. The terms of the easement shall prohibit
excavation, the placing of fill or structures, and any alterations which
may adversely affect the flow of stormwater within any portion of the
easement. Also, periodic maintenance of the easement to ensure proper
runoff conveyance shall be required. Watercourses for which the onehundred-
year floodplain is formally defined are subject to the applicable
Borough floodplain regulations.85
F. When it can be shown that, due to topographic conditions, natural
drainage swales on the site cannot adequately provide for drainage,
open channels may be constructed conforming substantially to the line
85.Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 378-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-11
1:285
§ 378-12. Permit requirements by other government entities.*
The following permit requirements apply to certain regulated and earth
disturbance activities and must be met prior to commencement of regulated
and earth disturbance activities, as applicable:
and grade of such natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels
shall be calculated using the Manning Equation.
G. Post-construction BMPs shall be designed, installed, operated and
maintained to meet the requirements of the Clean Streams Law86 and
implementing regulations, including the established practices in 25 Pa.
Code Chapter 102 and the specifications of this chapter, to prevent
accelerated erosion in watercourse channels and at all points of
discharge.
H. No earth disturbance activities associated with any regulated activities
shall commence until approval by the Borough of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with the requirements of this chapter.*
I. Techniques described in Appendix D (Low-Impact Development)87 of
this chapter are encouraged because they reduce the costs of
complying with the requirements of this chapter and the state water
quality requirements.*
J. Infiltration for stormwater management is encouraged where soils and
geology permit, consistent with the provisions of this chapter and,
where appropriate, the Recommendation Chart for Infiltration
Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate Bedrock in Appendix B.88
Infiltration is encouraged for capturing and treating the water quality
volume (as calculated in § 378-14), any part of the water quality volume,
or for otherwise meeting the purposes of this chapter.
A. All regulated and earth disturbance activities subject to permit
requirements by DEP under regulations at 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
B. Work within natural drainageways subject to permit by DEP under 25
Pa. Code Chapter 102.
C. Any stormwater management facility that would be located in or
adjacent to surface waters of the commonwealth, including wetlands,
subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 105.
D. Any stormwater management facility that would be located on a state
highway right-of-way or require access from a state highway shall be
subject to approval by the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
(PennDOT).
86.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
87.Editor's Note: Appendix D is included at the end of this chapter.
88.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-11 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-12
1:286
§ 378-13. Erosion and sediment control during regulated earth
disturbance activities.*
§ 378-14. Post-construction water quality criteria.
E. Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must pass
or convey flows from the tributary area and any facility which may
constitute a dam subject to permit by DEP under 25 Pa. Code Chapter
105.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough Engineer of an erosion and
sediment control plan for construction activities. Written approval by
DEP or a delegated county conservation district shall satisfy this
requirement.
B. An erosion and sediment control plan is required by DEP regulations for
any earth disturbance activity of 5,000 square feet or more under 25 Pa.
Code § 102.4(b).
C. A DEP NPDES Stormwater Discharges Associated with Construction
Activities Permit is required for regulated earth disturbance activities
under 25 Pa. Code Chapter 92.
D. Evidence of any necessary permit(s) for regulated earth disturbance
activities from the appropriate DEP regional office or county
conservation district must be provided to the Borough before the
commencement of an earth disturbance activity.
E. A copy of the erosion and sediment control plan and any permit, as
required by DEP regulations, shall be available at the project site at all
times.
A. No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough Engineer of a plan which
demonstrates compliance with this chapter. DEP has determined that
this chapter meets state water quality requirements. Therefore, any
approvals under this chapter would satisfy the post-construction
stormwater management requirements associated with an NPDES
permit for stormwater discharges associated with construction
activities.*
B. The water quality volume (WQv) shall be captured and treated. The
WQv shall be calculated two ways.
(1) First, WQv shall be calculated using the following formula:
§ 378-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-14
1:287
WQv = (c)(P)(A)/12
Where
WQv = Water quality volume in acre-feet
c = Rational Method post-development runoff coefficient
for the two-year storm
P = 1.25 inches
A = Area in acres of proposed regulated activity
(2) Second, the WQv shall be calculated as the difference in runoff
volume from predevelopment to post development for the two-year
return period storm. The effect of closed depressions on the site
shall be considered in this calculation. The larger of these two
calculated volumes shall be used as the WQv to be captured and
treated, except that in no case shall the WQv be permitted to
exceed 1.25 inches of runoff over the site area.
C. The WQv shall be calculated for each post-development drainage
direction on a site for sizing BMPs. Site areas having no impervious
cover and no proposed disturbance during development may be
excluded from the WQv calculations and do not require treatment.
D. If an applicant is proposing to use a wet pond, constructed wetland or
other BMP that ponds water on the land surface and may receive direct
sunlight, the discharge from that BMP must be treated by infiltration, a
vegetated buffer, filter strip, bioretention, vegetated swale or other
BMP that provides a thermal benefit to protect the high quality waters
of the Saucon Creek from thermal impacts.
E. Any stormwater runoff from the site as a result of the regulated
activities must either be treated with infiltration or two acceptable
BMPs, such as those listed in Subsection N.
F. Infiltration BMPs shall not be constructed on fill.
G. The applicant shall document the bedrock type(s) present on the site
from published sources. Any apparent boundaries between carbonate
and noncarbonate bedrock shall be verified through more detailed site
evaluations by a qualified geotechnical professional.
H. For each proposed regulated activity in the watershed, the applicant
shall conduct a preliminary site investigation on the portion of the site
that is judged to be the best candidate hydrogeologically for possible
infiltration, including gathering data from published sources, a field
inspection of the site, a minimum of one test pit and a minimum of two
percolation tests, as outlined in Appendix E.89 This investigation will
determine depth to bedrock, depth to the seasonal high-water table,
soil permeability and location of special geologic features, if applicable.
89.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-14
1:288
The location(s) of special geologic features shall be verified by a
qualified geotechnical professional.
I. For entirely noncarbonate sites, the WQv shall be infiltrated unless the
applicant demonstrates that it is infeasible to infiltrate the WQv for
reasons of seasonal high-water table, permeability rate, soil depth or
isolation distances; or except as provided in Subsection T. The
preliminary site investigation described in Subsection H shall continue
on different areas of the site until a suitable infiltration location is found
or the entire site is determined to be infeasible for infiltration. For
proposed infiltration areas, the additional site investigation and testing
as outlined in Appendix E 90 shall be completed. The Borough may
determine infiltration to be infeasible if there are known existing
conditions or problems that may be worsened by the use of infiltration.
The following conditions are suitable for infiltration in noncarbonate
areas:
(1) Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal
to two feet.
(2) Depth to seasonal high-water table below the invert of the BMP
greater than or equal to three feet. (If the depth to bedrock is
between two and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal highwater
table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the
depth to seasonal high-water table is required.)
(3) Soil permeability greater than or equal to 0.5 inches/hour and less
than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
(4) Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Ten feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields.
(d) Fifty feet from a geologic contact with carbonate bedrock
unless a preliminary site investigation is done in the carbonate
bedrock to show the absence of special geologic features
within 50 feet of the proposed infiltration area.
(e) One hundred feet from the property line unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from wells, foundations
and drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
(5) If it is not feasible to infiltrate the full WQv, the applicant shall
infiltrate that portion of the WQv that is feasible based on the site
characteristics.
90.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-14
1:289
J. In entirely carbonate areas, in addition to the testing required in
Subsection H, the preliminary site investigation shall include an
assessment of the remainder of the site for possible infiltration based
on required isolation distances from special geologic features and the
likely soil depth and permeability based on published data or other site
data available. Where infiltration BMPs are proposed, the applicant
shall conduct the additional site investigation and testing as outlined in
Appendix E.91 The soil depth, percolation rate and proposed loading
rate, each weighted as described in § 378-17, along with the buffer from
special geologic features shall be compared to the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix B92 to determine if the site is recommended for
infiltration. If at any point in the preliminary site investigation the data
(e.g., location of Karst features on the site or the published soils data
for the site) indicates that the entire site will not be recommended for
infiltration based on the chapter standards, then no further
investigation is required. In addition to the recommendation from
Appendix B, the following conditions are required for infiltration in
carbonate areas:
(1) Depth to bedrock below the invert of the BMP greater than or equal
to two feet.
(2) Depth to seasonal high-water table below the invert of the BMP
greater than or equal to three feet. (If the depth to bedrock is
between two and three feet and the evidence of the seasonal highwater
table is not found in the soil, no further testing to locate the
depth to seasonal high-water table is required.)
(3) Soil permeability greater than or equal to 0.5 inches/hour and less
than or equal to 12 inches per hour.
(4) Setback distances or buffers as follows:
(a) One hundred feet from water supply wells.
(b) Ten feet downgradient or 100 feet upgradient from building
foundations.
(c) Fifty feet from septic system drainfields.
(d) One hundred feet from the property line, unless documentation
is provided to show that all setbacks from wells, foundations
and drainfields on neighboring properties will be met.
(5) Applicants are not required to use infiltration BMPs on a carbonate
site even if the site falls in the "Recommended" range on the chart
91.Editor's Note: Appendix E is included at the end of this chapter.
92.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-14
1:290
in Appendix B.93 If infiltration is not proposed, the WQv shall be
treated by two acceptable BMPs, as specified in Subsection O.
K. If a site has both carbonate and noncarbonate areas, the applicant shall
investigate the ability of the noncarbonate portion of the site to fully
meet this chapter to control runoff for the whole site through
infiltration. If that proves infeasible, the applicant shall perform the
preliminary site investigation for the carbonate area to determine the
appropriate design strategy. No infiltration structure in the
noncarbonate area shall be located within 50 feet of a boundary with
carbonate bedrock, except when a preliminary site investigation has
been done showing the absence of special geologic features within 50
feet of the proposed infiltration area.
L. If infiltration BMPs are proposed in carbonate areas, the postdevelopment
two-year runoff volume leaving the site shall be 80% or
more of the predevelopment runoff volume for the carbonate portion of
the site to prevent infiltration of volumes far in excess of the
predevelopment infiltration volume.
M. Site areas proposed for infiltration shall be protected from disturbance
and compaction except as necessary for construction of infiltration
BMPs.
N. If infiltration of the entire WQv is not proposed, the remainder of the
WQv shall be treated by two acceptable BMPs in series for each
discharge location. Sheet flow draining across a pervious area can be
considered as one BMP. Sheet flow across impervious areas and
concentrated flow shall flow through two BMPs. If sheet flow from an
impervious area is to be drained across a pervious area as one BMP, the
length of the pervious area must be equal to or greater than the length
of impervious area. In no case may the same BMP be employed
consecutively to meet this requirement. Acceptable BMPs are listed
below along with the recommended reference for design.
Best Management
Practice Design Reference
Bioretention Low Impact Development Design
Strategies, Prince George's County, Md.,
June 19992
Capture reuse Texas Guide to Rainwater Harvesting,
2nd Edition. Texas Water Development
Board, Center for Maximum Potential
Building Systems, 19973
Constructed wetlands 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design
Manual, Maryland Department of the
Environment4
93.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-14
1:291
Best Management
Practice Design Reference
Minimum disturbance/
minimum maintenance
practices
Conservation Design for Stormwater
Management Delaware Dept. of Natural
Resources and Brandywine
Conservancy, September 19975
Oil/water separators Georgia Stormwater Management
Manual Volume 2 Technical Handbook,
August 20016
Sediment traps/catch basin
sumps
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency's
Post-Construction Stormwater
Management in New Development &
Redevelopment BMP Fact Sheet for
"Catch Basins/Catch Basin Insert"7
Significant reduction of
existing impervious cover
N/A
Stormwater filters (sand,
peat, compost, etc.)
Design of Stormwater Filtering Systems.
Claytor, R. and Schueler, T., Center for
Watershed Protection, December 19968
Trash/debris collectors in
catch basins
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas9 or latest PA
Department of Environmental Protection
Manual
Vegetated buffers/filter
strips
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas9 or latest PA
Department of Environmental Protection
Manual
Vegetated roofs Roof Gardens: History, Design, and
Construction. Osmundson, T., W. W.
Norton & Co., 199810
Vegetated swales/filter strips 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design
Manual, Maryland Department of the
Environment4
Water quality inserts for
inlets
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas9 or latest PA
Department of Environmental Protection
Manual
Wet detention ponds Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas9 or latest PA
Department of Environmental Protection
Manual
§ 378-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-14
1:292
NOTES:
1 If this BMP is used to treat the entire WQv, then only one BMP is
required because of this BMP's superior water quality performance.
2 Available at www.co.pg.md.us/Government/AgencyIndex/DER/PPD/
LID/LiDNatl.pdf as of January 2004
3 Available at www.twdb.state.tx.us/publications/reports/
RainHarv.pdf as of January 2004
4 Available at www.mde.state.md.us as of January 2004
5 Available at www.dnrec.state.de.us/dnrec2000/Divisions/Soil/
Stormwater/Apps/ DesignManualRequest.htm as of January 2004
6 Available at www.georgiastormwater.com as of January 2004
7 Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/menuofbmps/
post_7.cfm as of January 2004
8 Available from the Center for Watershed Protection (www.cwp.org)
as of January 2004
9 Available at www.dep.state.pa.us (keyword "stormwater") as of
January 2004
10 Available at www.wwnorton.com as of January 2004
O. Stormwater runoff from hot spot land uses shall be pretreated. In no
case, may the same BMP be employed consecutively to meet this
requirement and the requirement in Subsection N.
(1) Acceptable methods of pretreatment are listed below.
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Vehicle maintenance
and repair facilities
including auto parts
stores
•
•
•
•
Oil/water separators
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce liquid
releases
Spill prevention and response program
Vehicle fueling
stations
•
•
•
Oil/water separators
Water quality inserts for inlets
Spill prevention and response program
§ 378-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-14
1:293
Hot Spot Land Use Pretreatment Method(s)
Storage areas for
public works
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Oil/water separators
Sediment traps/catch basin sumps
Water quality inserts for inlets
Use of drip pans and/or dry sweep
material under vehicles/equipment
Use of absorbent devices to reduce liquid
releases
Spill prevention and response program
Diversion of stormwater away from
potential contamination areas
Outdoor storage of
liquids
• Spill prevention and response program
Commercial nursery
operations
•
•
•
Vegetated swales/filter strips
Constructed wetlands
Stormwater collection and reuse
Salvage yards and
recycling facilities*
• BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES Permit
Fleet storage yards
and vehicle cleaning
facilities*
• BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES Permit
Facilities that store
or generate
regulated
substances*
• BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES Permit
Marinas* • BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES Permit
Certain industrial
uses (listed under
NPDES)*
• BMPs that are a part of a stormwater
pollution prevention plan under an
NPDES Permit
NOTES:
* Regulated under the NPDES Stormwater Program
(2) Design references for the pretreatment methods, as necessary, are
listed below. The applicant may demonstrate that, due to the site
characteristics, the land use is not a hot spot land use.
§ 378-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-14
1:294
Pretreatment Method Design Reference
Constructed wetlands 2000 Maryland Stormwater Design
Manual, Maryland Department of the
Environment1
Diversion of stormwater
away from potential
contamination areas
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas2 or latest PA
Department of Environmental
Protection Manual
Oil/water separators Georgia Stormwater Management
Manual Volume 2 Technical Handbook,
August 20013
Sediment traps/catch
basin sumps
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency's Post-Construction
Stormwater Management in New
Development and Redevelopment BMP
Fact Sheet for "Catch Basins/Catch
Basin Insert"4
Stormwater collection
and reuse (especially for
irrigation)
Texas Guide to Rainwater Harvesting,
2nd Edition, Texas Water Development
Board, Center for Maximum Potential
Building Systems, 19975
Stormwater filters (sand,
peat, compost, etc.)
Design of Stormwater Filtering
Systems. Claytor, R. and Schueler, T.,
Center for Watershed Protection,
December 19966
Trash/debris collectors in
catch basins
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas2 or latest PA
Department of Environmental
Protection Manual
Vegetated swales/filter
strips
2000 Maryland Stormwater Design
Manual, Maryland Department of the
Environment1
Water quality inserts for
inlets
Pennsylvania Handbook of BMPs for
Developing Areas2 or latest PA
Department of Environmental
Protection Manual
NOTES:
1 Available at www.mde.state.md.us as of January 2004
2 Available at www.dep.state.pa.us (keyword Stormwater) as of
January 2004
3 Available at www.georgiastormwater.com as of January 2004
§ 378-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-14
1:295
§ 378-15. Stormwater management district.
NOTES:
4 Available at http://cfpub.epa.gov/npdes/stormwater/
menuofbmps/post_7.cfm as of January 2004
5 Available at www.twdb.state.tx.us/publications/reports/
RainHarv.pdf as of January 2004
6 Available from the Center for Watershed Protection
(www.cwp.org) as of January 2004
P. The use of infiltration BMPs is prohibited on hot spot land use areas.
Q. Stormwater infiltration BMPs shall not be placed in or on a special
geologic feature(s). Additionally, stormwater runoff shall not be
discharged into existing on-site sinkholes.
R. Applicants shall request, in writing, public water suppliers to provide
the Zone I wellhead protection radius, as calculated by the method
outlined in the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection
Wellhead Protection Regulations, for any public water supply well
within 400 feet of the site. In addition to the setback distances specified
in Subsections I and J, infiltration is prohibited in the Zone I radius as
defined and substantiated by the public water supplier in writing. If the
applicant does not receive a response from the public water supplier,
the Zone I radius is assumed to be 100 feet.
S. The volume and rate of the net increase in stormwater runoff from the
regulated activities must be managed to prevent the physical
degradation of receiving waters from such effects as scour and stream
bank destabilization, to satisfy state water quality requirements.
T. The Borough may, after consultation with DEP, approve alternative
methods for meeting the state water quality requirements other than
those in this section, provided that they meet the minimum
requirements of and do not conflict with state law, including but not
limited to the Clean Streams Law.94
A. To implement the provisions of the Saucon Creek Watershed
Stormwater Management Plan, the Borough is hereby determined to be
a "conditional no-detention district."
B. Conditional no-detention districts. Within these districts, the capacity of
the "local" runoff conveyance facilities (as defined in Article II) must be
calculated to determine if adequate capacity exists. For this
determination, the developer must calculate peak flows assuming that
the site is developed as proposed and that the remainder of the local
watershed is in the existing condition. The developer must also
calculate peak flows assuming that the entire local watershed is
94.Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 691.1 et seq.
§ 378-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-15
1:296
§ 378-16. Stormwater management district implementation
provisions.
developed per current zoning and that all new development would use
the runoff controls specified by this chapter. The larger of the two peak
flows calculated will be used in determining if adequate capacity exists.
If adequate capacity exists to safely transport runoff from the site to
the main channel (as defined in Article II), these watershed areas may
discharge post-development peak runoff without detention facilities.
If the capacity calculations show that the "local" runoff conveyance
facilities lack adequate capacity, the developer shall either use a onehundred-
percent release rate control or provide increased capacity of
downstream elements to convey increased peak flows consistent with
§ 378-16P. Any capacity improvements must be designed to convey
runoff from development of all areas tributary to the improvement
consistent with the capacity criteria specified in § 378-16D. By
definition, a storm drainage problem area associated with the "local"
runoff conveyance facilities indicates that adequate capacity does not
exist.
A. Applicants shall provide a comparative preconstruction and postconstruction
stormwater management hydrograph analysis for each
direction of discharge and for the site overall to demonstrate
compliance with the provisions of this chapter.
B. Any downstream capacity analysis conducted in accordance with this
chapter shall use the following criteria for determining adequacy for
accepting increased peak flow rates:
(1) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased runoff associated with a two-year return period event
within their banks at velocities consistent with protection of the
channels from erosion.
(2) Natural or man-made channels or swales must be able to convey
the increased twenty-five-year return period runoff without
creating any hazard to persons or property.
(3) Culverts, bridges, storm sewers or any other facilities which must
pass or convey flows from the tributary area must be designed in
accordance with DEP Chapter 105 regulations (if applicable) and,
at minimum, pass the increased twenty-five-year return period
runoff.
C. For a proposed development site located within one release rate
category subarea, the total runoff from the site shall meet the
applicable release rate criteria. For development sites with multiple
directions of runoff discharge, individual drainage directions may be
designed for up to a one-hundred-percent release rate so long as the
total runoff from the site is controlled to the applicable release rate.
§ 378-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-16
1:297
D. For a proposed development site located within two or more release
category subareas, the peak discharge rate from any subarea shall be
the predevelopment peak discharge for that subarea multiplied by the
applicable release rate. The calculated peak discharges shall apply
regardless of whether the grading plan changes the drainage area by
subarea. An exception to the above may be granted if discharges from
multiple subareas recombine in proximity to the site. In this case, peak
discharge in any direction may be a one-hundred-percent release rate,
provided that the overall site discharge meets the weighted average
release rate.
E. For a proposed development site located partially within a release rate
category subarea and partially within a conditional no-detention
subarea, a significant portion of the site area subject to the release rate
control may not be drained to the discharge point(s) located in the nodetention
subarea except as part of a no-harm or hardship waiver
procedure.
F. No portion of a site may be regraded between the Saucon Creek
Watershed and any adjacent watershed except as part of a no-harm or
hardship waiver procedure.
G. Within a release rate category area, for a proposed development site
which has areas which drain to a closed depression(s), the design
release from the site will be the lesser of: (a) the applicable release rate
flow assuming no closed depression(s) or (b) the existing peak flow
actually leaving the site. In cases where (b) would result in an
unreasonably small design release, the design discharge of less than or
equal to the release rate will be determined by the available
downstream conveyance capacity to the main channel calculated using
Subsection D and the minimum orifice criteria.
H. Off-site areas which drain through a proposed development site are not
subject to release rate criteria when determining allowable peak runoff
rates. However, on-site drainage facilities shall be designed to safely
convey off-site flows through the development site using the capacity
criteria in Subsection D and the detention criteria in § 378-17.
I. For development sites proposed to take place in phases, all detention
ponds shall be designed to meet the applicable release rate(s) applied
to all site areas tributary to the proposed pond discharge direction. All
site tributary areas will be assumed as developed, regardless of
whether all site tributary acres are proposed for development at that
time. An exception shall be sites with multiple detention ponds in series
where only the downstream pond must be designed to the stated
release rate.
J. Where the site area to be impacted by a proposed development activity
differs significantly from the total site area, only the proposed impact
area shall be subject to the release rate criteria. The impact area
includes any proposed cover or grading changes.
§ 378-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-16
1:298
K. Development proposals which, through groundwater recharge or other
means, do not increase either the rate or volume of runoff discharged
from the site compared to predevelopment are not subject to the
release rate provisions of this chapter.
L. No-harm water quantity option. For any proposed development site not
located in a conditional no-detention district, the developer has the
option of using a less restrictive runoff control (including no detention)
if the developer can prove that special circumstances exist for the
proposed development site and that no harm would be caused by
discharging at a higher runoff rate than that specified by the plan.
Special circumstances are defined as any hydrologic or hydraulic
aspects of the development itself not specifically considered in the
development of the plan runoff control strategy. Proof of no harm would
have to be shown from the development site through the remainder of
the downstream drainage network to the confluence of the creek with
the Lehigh River. Proof of no harm must be shown using the capacity
criteria specified in Subsection D if downstream capacity analysis is a
part of the no-harm justification.
(1) Attempts to prove no harm based upon downstream peak flow
versus capacity analysis shall be governed by the following
provisions:
(a) The peak flow values to be used for downstream areas for the
design return period storms (two-, ten-, twenty-five-, and onehundred-
year) shall be the values from the calibrated
Watershed Model for the Little Lehigh Creek or as calculated
by an applicant using an alternate method acceptable to the
Borough. The flow values from the watershed model would be
supplied to the developer by the Borough upon request.
(b) Any available capacity in the downstream conveyance system
as documented by a developer may be used by the developer
only in proportion to his development site acreage relative to
the total upstream undeveloped acreage from the identified
capacity (i.e., if his site is 10% of the upstream undeveloped
acreage, he may use up to 10% of the documented downstream
available capacity).
(c) Developer-proposed runoff controls which would generate
increased peak flow rates at storm drainage problem areas
would, by definition, be precluded from successful attempts to
prove no harm, except in conjunction with proposed capacity
improvements for the problem areas consistent with
Subsection O.
(2) Any no-harm justifications shall be submitted by the developer as
part of the drainage plan submission per Article IV.
M. Regional detention alternatives. For certain areas within the Borough,
it may be more cost-effective to provide one control facility for more
§ 378-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-16
1:299
§ 378-17. Calculation methodology.
than one development site than to provide an individual control facility
for each development site. The initiative and funding for any regional
runoff control alternatives are the responsibility of prospective
developers. The design of any regional control basins must incorporate
reasonable development of the entire upstream watershed. The peak
outflow of a regional basin would be determined based on the required
release rate at the point of discharge.
N. Capacity improvements.
(1) In certain instances, primarily within the conditional no-detention
areas, local drainage conditions may dictate more stringent levels
of runoff control than those based upon protection of the entire
watershed. In these instances, if the developer could prove that it
would be feasible to provide capacity improvements to relieve the
capacity deficiency in the local drainage network, then the capacity
improvements could be provided by the developer in lieu of runoff
controls on the development site. Peak flow calculations shall be
done assuming that the local watershed is in the existing condition
and then assuming that the local watershed is developed per
current zoning and using the specified runoff controls. Any capacity
improvements would be designed using the larger of the above
peak flows and the capacity criteria specified in Subsection D. All
new development in the entire subarea(s) within which the
proposed development site is located shall be assumed to
implement the developer's proposed discharge control, if any.
(2) Capacity improvements may also be provided as necessary to
implement any regional detention alternatives or to implement a
modified no-harm option which proposes specific capacity
improvements to provide that a less stringent discharge control
would not create any harm downstream.
A. Stormwater runoff from all development sites shall be calculated using
either the Rational Method or the Soil-Cover-Complex Methodology.
B. Infiltration BMP loading rate percentages in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix B95 shall be calculated as follows:
(Area tributary to infiltration BMP/base area of infiltration BMP)
*100%
The area tributary to the infiltration BMP shall be weighted as
follows:
All disturbed areas to be made
impervious:
Weight at 100%
95.Editor's Note: Appendix B is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-17
1:300
All disturbed areas to be made
pervious:
Weight at 50%
All undisturbed pervious areas: Weight at 0%
All existing impervious areas: Weight at 100%
C. Soil thickness is to be measured from the bottom of any proposed
infiltration system. The effective soil thickness in the Recommendation
Chart for Infiltration Stormwater Management BMPs in Carbonate
Bedrock in Appendix D is the measured soil thickness multiplied by the
thickness factor based on soil permeability, as follows:
Permeability Range*
(inches/hour) Thickness Factor
6.0 to 12.0 0.8
2.0 to 6.0 1.0
1.0 to 2.0 1.4
0.75 to 1.0 1.2
0.5 to 0.75 1.0
NOTES:
* If the permeability rate falls on a break between two thickness
factors, the smaller thickness factor shall be used.
Sites with soil permeability greater than 12.0 inches/hour or less
than 0.5 inch/hour are not recommended for infiltration.
D. The design of any detention basin intended to meet the requirements of
this chapter shall be verified by routing the design storm hydrograph
through the proposed basin using the Storage Indication Method or
other methodology demonstrated to be more appropriate. For basins
designed using the Rational Method technique, the design hydrograph
for routing shall be either the Universal Rational Hydrograph or the
modified rational method trapezoidal hydrograph which maximizes
detention volume. Use of the modified rational hydrograph shall be
consistent with the procedure described in Section "PIPE.RAT" of the
Users' Manual for the Penn State Urban Hydrograph Method (1987).
E. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall be routed using the Storage Indication Method.
F. BMPs designed to store or infiltrate runoff and discharge to surface
runoff or pipe flow shall provide storage volume for the full WQv below
the lowest outlet invert.
G. Wet detention ponds designed to have a permanent pool for the WQv
shall assume that the permanent pool volume below the primary outlet
is full at the beginning of design event routing for the purposes of
evaluating peak outflows.
§ 378-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-17
1:301
H. All stormwater detention facilities shall provide a minimum one foot
freeboard above the maximum pool elevation associated with the twoyear
through twenty-five-year runoff events. A 0.5 foot freeboard shall
be provided above the maximum pool elevation of the one-hundred-year
runoff event. The freeboard shall be measured from the maximum pool
elevation to the invert of the emergency spillway. The two-year through
one-hundred-year storm events shall be controlled by the primary
outlet structure. An emergency spillway for each basin shall be
designed to pass the one-hundred-year return frequency storm peak
basin inflow rate with a minimum 0.5 foot freeboard measured to the
top of basin. The freeboard criteria shall be met considering any off-site
areas tributary to the basin as developed, as applicable. If this
detention facility is considered to be a dam as per DEP Chapter 105, the
design of the facility must be consistent with the Chapter 105
regulations, and may be required to pass a storm greater than the onehundred-
year event.
I. The minimum circular orifice diameter for controlling discharge rates
from detention facilities shall be three inches. Designs where a lessersize
orifice would be required to fully meet release rates shall be
acceptable, provided that as much of the site runoff as practical is
directed to the detention facilities.
J. Runoff calculations using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method shall use the
Natural Resources Conservation Service Type II twenty-four-hour
rainfall distribution. The twenty-four-hour rainfall depths for the
various return periods to be used consistent with this chapter may be
taken from NOAA Atlas 14, Volume 2 or the PennDOT Intensity —
Duration — Frequency Field Manual ("PDT-IDF") (May 1986) for Region
4.
(1) The following values are taken from the PDT-IDF Field Manual:
Return Period
24-Hour Rainfall Depth
(inches)
1-year 2.40
2-year 3.00
5-year 3.60
10-year 4.56
25-year 5.52
50-year 6.48
100-year 7.44
(2) A graphical and tabular presentation of the Type II twenty-fourhour
distribution is included in Appendix A.96
96.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-17
1:302
K. Runoff calculations using the Rational Method shall use rainfall
intensities consistent with appropriate times of concentration and
return periods and the intensity-duration-frequency curves as
presented in Appendix A.97
L. Runoff Curve Numbers (CNs) to be used in the Soil-Cover-Complex
Method shall be based upon the matrix presented in Appendix A.
M. Runoff coefficients for use in the Rational Method shall be based upon
the table presented in Appendix A.98
N. All time of concentration calculations shall use a segmental approach
which may include one or all of the flow types below:
(1) Sheet flow (overland flow) calculations shall use either the NRCS
average velocity chart (Figure 3-1, Technical Release-55, 1975) or
the modified kinematic wave travel time equation (Equation 3-3,
NRCS TR-55, June 1986). If using the modified kinematic wave
travel time equation, the sheet flow length shall be limited to 50
feet for designs using the Rational Method and limited to 150 feet
for designs using the Soil-Cover-Complex Method.
(2) Shallow concentrated flow travel times shall be determined from
the watercourse slope, type of surface and the velocity from Figure
3-1 of TR-55, June 1986.
(3) Open channel flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated by the Manning Equation. Bankfull flows shall be used
for determining velocities. Manning "n" values shall be based on
the table presented in Appendix A.99
(4) Pipe flow travel times shall be determined from velocities
calculated using the Manning Equation assuming full flow and the
Manning "n" values from Appendix A.
O. If using the Rational Method, all predevelopment calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
If using the Rational Method, all post-development calculations for a
given discharge direction shall be based on a common time of
concentration considering both on-site and any off-site drainage areas.
P. The Manning Equation shall be used to calculate the capacity of
watercourses. Manning "n" values used in the calculations shall be
consistent with the table presented in Appendix A100 or other
appropriate standard engineering 'n' value resources. Pipe capacities
shall be determined by methods acceptable to the Borough.
97.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
98.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
99.Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
100. Editor's Note: Appendix A is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-17
1:303
Q. The Pennsylvania DEP Chapter 105 Rules and Regulations apply to the
construction, modification, operation or maintenance of both existing
and proposed dams, water obstructions and encroachments throughout
the watershed. Criteria for design and construction of stormwater
management facilities according to this chapter may not be the same
criteria that are used in the permitting of dams under the Dam Safety
Program.
§ 378-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-17
1:304
ARTICLE IV
Drainage Plan Requirements
§ 378-18. General requirements.
For any of the regulated activities of this chapter, prior to the final approval
of subdivision and/or land development plans, or the issuance of any permit,
or the commencement of any regulated earth disturbance activity, the
owner, subdivider, developer or his agent shall submit a drainage plan and
receive Borough approval of the Plan.
§ 378-19. Exemptions.
Exemptions from the drainage plan requirements are as specified in
§ 378-16.
§ 378-20. Drainage plan contents.
The following items shall be included in the drainage plan:
A. General.
(1) General description of project.
(2) General description of proposed permanent stormwater controls.
(3) The name and address of the project site, the name and address of
the owner of the property, and the name of the individual or firm
preparing the drainage plan.
B. Map(s) of the project area, showing:
(1) The location of the project relative to highways, boroughs or other
identifiable landmarks.
(2) Existing contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used. Off-site
drainage areas impacting the project, including topographic detail.
(3) Streams, lakes, ponds or other bodies of water within the project
area.
(4) Other physical features including existing drainage swales,
wetlands, closed depressions, sinkholes and areas of natural
vegetation to be preserved.
(5) Locations of proposed underground utilities, sewers, and
waterlines. The locations of all existing and proposed utilities,
sanitary sewers and waterlines within 50 feet of property lines of
the project site.
(6) An overlay showing soil types and boundaries based on the
Northhampton County Soil Survey, latest edition.
§ 378-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-20
1:305
(7) An overlay showing geologic types and boundaries.
(8) Proposed changes to land surface and vegetative cover.
(9) Proposed structures, roads, paved areas and buildings.
(10) Final contours at intervals of two feet. In areas of steep slopes
(greater than 15%), five-foot contour intervals may be used.
(11) Stormwater management district boundaries applicable to the site.
(12) Clear identification of the location and nature of permanent
stormwater BMPs.
(13) An adequate access easement around all stormwater BMPs that
would provide Borough ingress to and egress from a public right-ofway.
(14) A schematic showing all tributaries contributing flow to the site
and all existing man-made features beyond the property boundary
that would be affected by the project.
(15) The location of all public water supply wells within 400 feet of the
project and all private water supply wells within 100 feet of the
project.
C. Stormwater management controls and BMPs.
(1) All stormwater management controls and BMPs shall be shown on
a map and described, including:
(a) Groundwater recharge methods such as seepage pits, beds or
trenches. When these structures are used, the locations of
septic tank infiltration areas and wells shall be shown.
(b) Other control devices or methods such as rooftop storage,
semipervious paving materials, grass swales, parking lot
ponding, vegetated strips, detention or retention ponds, storm
sewers, etc.
(2) All calculations, assumptions and criteria used in the design of the
BMPs shall be shown.
(3) All site testing data used to determine the feasibility of infiltration
on a site.
(4) A statement, signed by the landowner, acknowledging that the
stormwater BMPs are fixtures that cannot be altered or removed
without approval by the Borough.
D. A description of how each permanent stormwater BMP will be operated
and maintained and the identity of the person(s) responsible for
operations and maintenance.
§ 378-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-21
1:306
§ 378-21. Plan submission.
A. For regulated activities specified in § 378-5A and B:
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Borough Secretary (or other appropriate person) as part of the
preliminary plan submission for the subdivision or land
development.
(2) Four copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(3) Distribution of the drainage plan will be as follows:
(a) One copy to the Borough governing body.
(b) One copy to the Borough Engineer.
(c) Two copies to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, except
for drainage plans involving less than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover.
(4) drainage plans involving more than 10,000 square feet of
additional impervious cover shall be submitted by the developer to
the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission as part of the preliminary
plan submission. The Lehigh Valley Planning Commission will
conduct an advisory review of the drainage plan for consistency
with the Saucon Creek Watershed Stormwater Management Plan.
The LVPC will not review details of the erosion and sedimentation
plan or the BMP operations and maintenance plan.
(a) Two copies of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
(b) The LVPC will provide written comments to the developer and
the Borough, within a time frame consistent with established
procedures under the Borough's Planning Code,101 as to
whether the drainage plan has been found to be consistent
with the stormwater management plan.
B. For regulated activities specified in § 378-5B(3) and (4), the drainage
plan shall be submitted by the developer to the Borough Building
Permit Officer as part of the building permit application.
C. For regulated activities specified in § 378-5B(5), (6) and (7):
(1) The drainage plan shall be submitted by the developer to the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission for coordination with the DEP
permit application process under Chapter 105 (Dam Safety and
Waterway Management), Chapter 106 (Floodplain Management) of
the DEP's rules and regulations and the NPDES regulations.
(2) One copy of the drainage plan shall be submitted.
101. Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Subdivision and Land Development.
§ 378-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-21
1:307
§ 378-22. Drainage plan review.
§ 378-23. Modification of plans.
A modification to a submitted drainage plan for a proposed development
site which involves a change in control methods or techniques, or which
involves the relocation or redesign of control measures, or which is
necessary because soil or other conditions are not as stated on the drainage
plan (as determined by the Borough) shall require a resubmission of the
modified drainage plan consistent with § 378-21, subject to review per
§ 378-22 of this chapter.
§ 378-24. Hardship waiver procedure.
D. Earthmoving for all regulated activities under § 278-5 shall be
conducted in accordance with the current federal and state regulations
relative to the NPDES and DEP Chapter 102 regulations.
A. The Borough shall review the drainage plan, including the BMP
operations and maintenance plan, for consistency with the adopted
stormwater management plan as embodied by this chapter and with
any permits issued by DEP. The Borough shall also review the drainage
plan against any additional storm drainage provisions contained in the
Borough Subdivision and Land Development or Zoning Ordinance, as
applicable.102
B. The Borough shall notify the applicant in writing whether the BMP
operations and maintenance plan is approved.
C. The Borough shall not approve any subdivision or land development
(regulated activities § 378-5B(1) and (2) or building permit application
(regulated activities § 378-5B(3) and (4) if the drainage plan has been
found to be inconsistent with the stormwater management plan.
D. The Borough may require an as-built survey of all stormwater BMPs and
an explanation of any discrepancies with the drainage plan.
A. The Borough may hear requests for waivers where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant. The waiver request shall be in writing and accompanied by
the requisite fee based upon a fee schedule adopted by the Borough. A
copy of the waiver request shall be provided to each of the following:
the Borough, Borough Engineer, Borough Solicitor and Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission. The request shall fully document the nature of
the alleged hardship.
B. The Borough may grant a waiver, provided that all of the following
findings are made in a given case:
102. Editor's Note: See Ch. 390, Subdivision and Land Development, and Ch. 450, Zoning,
respectively.
§ 378-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-24
1:308
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity of lot size or shape, or exceptional
topographical or other physical conditions peculiar to the
particular property, and that the unnecessary hardship is due to
such conditions and not the circumstances or conditions generally
created by the provisions of this chapter in the stormwater
management district in which the property is located;
(2) That, because of such physical circumstances or conditions, there
is no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter, including the noharm
provisions, and that the authorization of a waiver is therefore
necessary to enable the reasonable use of the property;
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
applicant;
(4) That the waiver, if authorized, will represent the minimum waiver
that will afford relief and will represent the least modification
possible of the regulation in issue; and
(5) That financial hardship is not the criteria for granting of a hardship
waiver.
C. In granting any waiver, the Borough may attach such conditions and
safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of this
chapter. If a hardship waiver is granted, the applicant must still manage
the quantity, velocity, direction and quality of resulting storm runoff as
is necessary to prevent injury to health, safety or other property.
D. For regulated activities described in § 378-5B(1) and (2), the Borough
Council shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver requests
on behalf of the Borough.
E. For regulated activities in § 378-5B(3), (4), (5) and (6), the Zoning
Hearing Board shall hear requests for and decide on hardship waiver
requests on behalf of the Borough.
F. The Borough shall not waive the water quality provisions of this
chapter.
§ 378-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-24
1:309

ARTICLE V
Inspections
§ 378-25. Schedule of inspections.*
A. The DEP or its designees (e.g., County Conservation District) normally
ensure compliance with any permits issued, including those for
stormwater management. In addition to DEP compliance programs, the
Borough or its designee may inspect all phases of the construction,
operations, maintenance and any other implementation of stormwater
BMPs.
B. During any stage of the regulated earth disturbance activities, if the
Borough or its designee determines that any BMPs are not being
implemented in accordance with this chapter, the Borough may
suspend or revoke any existing permits or other approvals issued by the
Borough until the deficiencies are corrected.
§ 378-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-25
1:311

ARTICLE VI
Fees and Expenses
§ 378-26. General.
The Borough may charge a reasonable fee for review of BMP operations
and maintenance plans to defray review costs incurred by the Borough. The
applicant shall pay all such fees.
§ 378-27. Expenses covered by fees.
The fees required by this chapter shall at a minimum cover:
A. The review of the BMP operations and maintenance plan by the
Borough.
B. The site inspection.
C. The inspection of required controls and improvements during
construction.
D. The final inspection upon completion of the controls and improvements
required in the plan.
E. Any additional work required to monitor and enforce any permit
provisions regulated by this chapter, correct violations, and assure the
completion of stipulated remedial actions.
F. Administrative and clerical costs.
§ 378-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-27
1:313

ARTICLE VII
Stormwater BMP Operations and Maintenance Plan Requirements
§ 378-28. General requirements.*
No regulated earth disturbance activities within the Borough shall
commence until approval by the Borough of the BMP operations and
maintenance plan which describes how the permanent (e.g., postconstruction)
stormwater BMPs will be properly operated and maintained.
§ 378-29. Responsibilities for operations and maintenance of
BMPs.*
§ 378-30. Adherence to approved BMP operations and maintenance
plan.*
It shall be unlawful to alter or remove any permanent stormwater BMP
required by an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan or to
allow the property to remain in a condition which does not conform to
an approved BMP operations and maintenance plan unless an exception is
granted in writing by the Borough.
§ 378-31. Operations and maintenance agreement for privately
owned stormwater BMPs.*
A. The BMP operations and maintenance plan for the project site shall
establish responsibilities for the continuing operation and maintenance
of all permanent stormwater BMPs, as follows:
(1) If a plan includes structures or lots which are to be separately
owned and in which streets, sewers and other public improvements
are to be dedicated to the Borough, stormwater BMPs may also be
dedicated to and maintained by the Borough;
(2) If a plan includes operations and maintenance by a single
ownership or if sewers and other public improvements are to be
privately owned and maintained, then the operation and
maintenance of stormwater BMPs shall be the responsibility of the
owner or private management entity.
B. The Borough shall make the final determination on the continuing
operations and maintenance responsibilities. The Borough reserves the
right to accept or reject the operations and maintenance responsibility
for any or all of the stormwater BMPs.
A. The property owner shall sign an operations and maintenance
agreement with the Borough covering all stormwater BMPs that are to
be privately owned. The agreement shall include the terms of the
format agreement referenced in Appendix C of this chapter.103
103. Editor's Note: Appendix C is included at the end of this chapter.
§ 378-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-31
1:315
§ 378-32. Stormwater management easements.*
Stormwater management easements shall be provided by the property
owner if necessary for access for inspections and maintenance or for
preservation of stormwater conveyance, infiltration, detention areas and
other BMPs by persons other than the property owner. The purpose of the
easement shall be specified in any agreement under § 378-31.
§ 378-33. Borough Stormwater BMP Operation and Maintenance
Fund.*
B. Other items may be included in the agreement where determined by the
Borough to be reasonable or necessary to guarantee the satisfactory
operation and maintenance of all permanent stormwater BMPs. The
agreement shall be subject to the review and approval of the Borough.
A. If stormwater BMPs are accepted by the Borough for dedication, the
Borough may require persons installing stormwater BMPs to pay a
specified amount to the Borough Stormwater BMP Operation and
Maintenance Fund to help defray costs of operations and maintenance
activities. The amount may be determined as follows:
(1) If the BMP is to be owned and maintained by the Borough, the
amount shall cover the estimated costs for operation and
maintenance in perpetuity, as determined by the Borough.
(2) The amount shall then be converted to present worth of the annual
series values.
B. If a BMP is proposed that also serves as a recreation facility (e.g., ball
field, lake), the Borough may adjust the amount due accordingly.
§ 378-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-33
1:316
ARTICLE VIII
Prohibitions
§ 378-34. Prohibited discharges.*
A. No person in the Borough shall allow or cause to allow stormwater
discharges into the Borough's separate storm sewer system which are
not composed entirely of stormwater, except as provided in Subsection
B below or as allowed under a state or federal permit.
B. Discharges that may be allowed, based on the Borough finding that the
discharge(s) do not significantly contribute pollution to surface waters
of the commonwealth, are listed below.
(1) Discharges from fire-fighting activities.
(2) Potable water sources including dechlorinated waterline and fire
hydrant flushings.
(3) Irrigation drainage.
(4) Routine external building wash down which does not use
detergents or other compounds.
(5) Air-conditioning condensate.
(6) Water from individual residential car washing.
(7) Springs.
(8) Water from crawl space pumps.
(9) Uncontaminated water from foundation or from footing drains.
(10) Flows from riparian habitats and wetlands.
(11) Lawn watering.
(12) Pavement wash waters where spills or leaks of toxic or hazardous
materials have not occurred (unless all spill material has been
removed) and where detergents are not used.
(13) Dechlorinated swimming pool discharges.
(14) Uncontaminated groundwater.
C. In the event that the Borough determines that any of the discharges
identified in Subsection B significantly contribute to pollution of waters
of the commonwealth or is so notified by DEP, the Borough will notify
the responsible person to cease the discharge.
D. Upon notice provided by the Borough under Subsection C, the
discharger will have a reasonable time, as determined by the Borough
Engineer and DEP, to cease the discharge consistent with the degree of
pollution caused by the discharge.104
§ 378-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-34
1:317
§ 378-35. Prohibited connections.*
The following connections are prohibited, except as provided in § 378-34B
above.
§ 378-36. Roof drains.*
§ 378-37. Alteration of BMPs.*
E. Nothing in this section shall affect a discharger's responsibilities under
state law.
A. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which
allows any nonstormwater discharge including sewage, process
wastewater and wash water to enter the separate storm sewer system
and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains and
sinks.
B. Any drain or conveyance connected from a commercial or industrial
land use to the separate storm sewer system which has not been
documented in plans, maps or equivalent records and approved by the
Borough.
C. A connection from any basement sump pump device that connects
directly into the Borough sanitary sewer system.105
A. Roof drains shall not be connected to streets, sanitary or storm sewers
or roadside ditches, except as provided in Subsection C.
B. When it is more advantageous to connect directly to streets or storm
sewers, connections of roof drains to streets or roadside ditches may be
permitted by the Borough Engineer after plan revision and
recommendation.106
C. Roof drains shall discharge to infiltration areas or vegetative BMPs to
the maximum extent practicable.
A. No person shall modify, remove, fill, landscape or alter any existing
stormwater BMP without the written approval of the Borough unless it
is part of an approved maintenance program.
B. No person shall place any structure, fill, landscaping or vegetation into
a stormwater BMP or within a drainage easement which would limit or
alter the functioning of the BMP without the written approval of the
Borough.
104. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
105. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
106. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 378-34 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-37
1:318
ARTICLE IX
Right-of-Entry, Notification and Enforcement
§ 378-38. Right-of-entry.*
§ 378-39. Notification.*
A. Upon presentation of proper credentials, duly authorized
representatives of the Borough may enter at reasonable times upon any
property within the Borough to inspect the implementation, condition
or operation and maintenance of the stormwater BMPs or to investigate
or ascertain the condition of the subject property in regard to any
aspect regulated by this chapter.
B. BMP owners and operators shall allow persons working on behalf of the
Borough ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of
determining compliance with this chapter.
C. Persons working on behalf of the Borough shall have the right to
temporarily locate on any BMP in the Borough such devices as are
necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the discharges
from such BMPs.
D. Unreasonable delays in allowing the Borough access to a BMP is a
violation of this article.
A. Whenever the Borough finds that a person has violated a prohibition or
failed to meet a requirement of this chapter, the Borough may order
compliance by written notice to the responsible person. Such notice
may require, without limitation:
(1) The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting.
(2) The elimination of prohibited connections or discharges.
(3) Cessation of any violating discharges, practices or operations.
(4) The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
(5) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs.
(6) The implementation of stormwater BMPs.
(7) Operation and maintenance of stormwater BMPs.
B. Such notification shall set forth the nature of the violation(s) and
establish a time limit for correction of the violation(s). Said notice may
further advise that, should the violator fail to take the required action
within the established deadline, the work will be done by the Borough
or designee and the expense thereof, together with all related lien and
enforcement fees, charges and expenses, shall be charged to the
violator.
§ 378-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-39
1:319
§ 378-40. Public nuisance.*
§ 378-41. Suspension and revocation of permits and approvals.*
§ 378-42. Violations and penalties.
C. Failure to comply within the time specified shall also subject such
person to the penalty provisions of this chapter. All such penalties shall
be deemed cumulative and shall not prevent the Borough from pursuing
any and all other remedies available in law or equity.
A. The violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby deemed a public
nuisance.
B. Each day that an offense continues shall constitute a separate violation.
A. Any building, land development or other permit or approval issued by
the Borough may be suspended or revoked by the Borough for:
(1) Noncompliance with or failure to implement any provision of the
permit.
(2) A violation of any provision of this chapter.
(3) The creation of any condition or the commission of any act during
construction or development which constitutes or creates a hazard
or nuisance, pollution or which endangers the life or property of
others.
B. A suspended permit or approval shall be reinstated by the Borough
when:
(1) The Borough or designee has inspected and approved the
corrections to the stormwater BMPs or the elimination of the
hazard or nuisance.
(2) The Borough is satisfied that the violation of the ordinance, law or
rule and regulation has been corrected.
(3) Payment of all Borough fees, costs and expenses related to or
arising from the violation has been made.
C. A permit or approval which has been revoked by the Borough cannot be
reinstated. The applicant may apply for a new permit under the
procedures outlined in this chapter.
A. Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be subject to a fine of not
more than $1,000 for each violation, recoverable with costs, or
imprisonment of not more than 90 days, or both. Each day that the
violation continues shall be a separate offense.
§ 378-39 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-42
1:320
§ 378-43. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by any action of the Borough or its designee relevant
to the provisions of this chapter may appeal using the appeal procedure
established in the Pennsylvania Borough's .
B. In addition, the Borough, through its Solicitor, may institute injunctive,
mandamus or any other appropriate action or proceeding at law or in
equity for the enforcement of this chapter. Any court of competent
jurisdiction shall have the right to issue restraining orders, temporary
or permanent injunctions, mandamus or other appropriate forms of
remedy or relief.
§ 378-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 378-43
1:321
Chapter 385
STREETS AND SIDEWALKS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Municipal claims and liens — See Ch. 270.
Tampering with public property — See Ch.
314.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading
control — See Ch. 360.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
§ 378-43 HELLERTOWN CODE § 378-43
1:322
ARTICLE I
Snow and Ice Removal
§ 385-1. Duty of property owners; definition.
§ 385-2. Exception to removal.108
In case snow and ice on any sidewalks, walkways and fire hydrants shall be
frozen so hard that it cannot be removed without injury to the sidewalk or
walkway, it shall, within the time limit specified in § 385-1 of this article, be
strewn and kept strewn with ashes, sand, sawdust or other suitable material
so as to be no longer dangerous. As soon as practicable thereafter, the
sidewalk, walkway or fire hydrant shall be completely cleared of the snow,
ice and other material strewn thereon.
§ 385-3. Prohibited snow and ice disposal.109
Snow and ice removed from sidewalks, walkways and fire hydrants shall in
no case be thrown onto any street but shall be placed in such a manner as
not to obstruct the free passageway on either the sidewalk and walkway
or the abutting street. Snow covering or around a fire hydrant shall be
removed to ensure said fire hydrant is visible and readily accessible for use.
§ 385-4. Borough may remove and collect expenses.
In addition to citing the owner for violation of this article, the Borough
may remove the snow and ice and collect its expenses, together with the
A. It shall be the duty of owners of property abutting on sidewalks,
walkways and fire hydrants in the Borough to remove from the
sidewalks, walkways and fire hydrants all snow, sleet or ice within 24
hours after the same has ceased to fall or accumulate thereon. Where
the property in question is not inhabited, it shall be the duty of the
owner to comply with this article.107
B. In this section, the term "owner" shall be defined as follows:
OWNER — Any person holding any interest in the title to the premises
in question. Owner shall be either the husband or wife if the property
is owned by both, although the violation of this article may be, but need
not be, charged against both. Where the premises are owned or titled
in any name, then any party to the title shall be deemed an owner,
and in the event that the premises are titled in the name of a business
entity, partnership, corporation, trust or any other form of ownership,
any officer, director, manager, personal representative or any person
having any interest in said entity shall be liable for violation of this
article.
107. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
108. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
109. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-4
1:323
actual costs of labor, materials and use of machinery for doing so, plus an
administrative overhead cost of not less than $10 nor greater than 20% of
the costs of removal, which amount shall be collected in the same manner
as municipal claims and liens.110
§ 385-5. Short title.
The short title of this article shall be "Snow Removal Ordinance."
§ 385-6. Violations and penalties.111
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 upon
the first finding, $100 upon the second finding, $200 upon the third finding
and not more than $1,000 upon the fourth and any subsequent findings
plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of
imprisonment not to exceed 30 says.
§ 385-7. Log kept during snow removal year.
A. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall keep a written log
of all offenses committed between October 1 of each partial year until
September 30 of the subsequent partial year ("snow removal year").112
B. In lieu of bringing a prosecution under this article, the Borough may
issue a warning notice to the owner, notifying the same that a violation
has occurred. If the owner has not caused the snow and ice to be
removed within 24 hours after receiving such notice, the Borough will
proceed with prosecution in accordance with the terms of this article.
C. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to obligate the
Borough to this warning procedure where the owner cannot be readily
located or notified. It shall not be a defense to any action brought under
this article that the violator had not received a warning or was not
afforded an opportunity to avail himself, herself or themselves of the
warning procedure, provided the police shall make every reasonable
effort to give warnings. The reasonableness of said effort shall be solely
within the discretion of the police.
110. Editor's Note: See Ch. 270, Municipal Claims and Liens.
111. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
112. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 385-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-7
1:324
ARTICLE II
Excavations
[Adopted 11-3-2003 by Ord. No. 656]
§ 385-8. Permit required to excavate in street or alley.
On and after the passage of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person,
partnership or corporation to dig up, excavate, or tunnel any street, lane or
alley of this Borough for the purpose of tapping and/or extending any gas,
water mains, sewers, data lines, electric power lines, underground utilities
or for any other purpose without first getting a permit from the Borough for
each excavation for the above-named purposes.
§ 385-9. License fee; deposit; width; shoring and sheathing.
A. Before issuing such permit, the Borough shall demand and receive of
the party making application for the same a permit fee of $5 for the use
of the Borough for each separate excavation to be made, and shall issue
a permit containing, in writing, a statement of the place where the said
digging or excavation is to be done, and for what purpose. The Borough,
before issuing a permit for the extension or repair of any water, gas
main, sewer or other conduit, or excavation for any purpose, shall
demand and receive of the party making application for the same a fee
as follows:
(1) On unimproved streets of earth, cinder or like material:
(a) For extensions: the sum of $10 for the first 100 feet or fraction
thereof, and the sum of $5 for each additional 100 feet or
fraction thereof.
(b) For all other excavations and/or tunneling: the sum of $1 for
the first square yard or fraction thereof, and the sum of $0.10
per square yard for any additional excavating over and above
the first square yard of roadway excavated or tunneled.
(2) On tarvia or asphaltic surfaced streets. For all excavations and/or
tunneling: the sum of $10 for the first square yard or fraction
thereof, and the sum of $6 for each additional square yard or
fraction thereof of roadway excavated or tunneled.
(3) On paved streets, either of brick, concrete, andesite or other
asphaltic covering on a concrete subbase. For all excavations and/
or tunneling: the sum of $20 for the first square yard or fraction
thereof, and the sum of $15 for each additional square yard or
fraction thereof of roadway excavated or tunneled.
B. The width of the trench excavated, and the shoring or sheathing
necessary, shall in every case conform to that of the accepted
engineering practice and shall be subject to the approval of the
Borough Engineer.
§ 385-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-10
1:325
§ 385-10. Refilling of excavation.
All parties opening or digging any of the streets of the Borough, for any
purpose whatever, shall refill the same in the manner following: If the
street is unimproved or consists of the natural ground or ordinary material,
the excavation or trench shall be filled with the material excavated and
thoroughly compacted by adequate tamping; whenever the excavation is in
a macadamized or stone-surfaced street, the ground or ordinary material
excavated shall first be replaced in the excavation and all macadam or
broken stone shall be used to fill the top part of the trench or excavation;
if the street is paved with arnesite, concrete or similar material, the
excavation shall be filled solidly to the street level, but no pieces or parts
of the concrete which shall have been dug up shall be used to fill said
excavation at any point between the lower level of said concrete and the
surface of the street, and the material removed therefrom shall be deposited
at such place as may be designated by the Public Works Director. All
natural ground removed in the digging of trenches shall be compacted when
replaced by adequate tamping.
§ 385-11. Violations and penalties.
Any person or persons, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this article shall, upon conviction thereof by any Magisterial District Judge
of the Borough, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $50 for each
offense together with costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such
fine and costs, to imprisonment in the County Jail for not more than 30 days.
§ 385-12. Work requiring excavation should be done prior to street
improvement or not for five years thereafter; exception.
The Borough shall give timely notice to all persons owning property
abutting on any street within the Borough about to be paved or improved,
and to all public utility companies operating in the Borough, and all such
persons and utility companies shall make all water, gas, sewer connections,
telephone lines, data lines and electric power lines or for any other purpose
as well as any repairs thereto which would necessitate excavation of the
said street within 30 days from the giving of such notice, unless such time is
extended in writing for cause shown by the Borough. New paving shall not
be opened for a period of five years after the completion thereof, except in
case of emergency, the existence of which emergency and the necessity for
the opening of such paving to be determined by the Borough. If it is sought
to excavate upon or open a street within five years after the completion of
the paving thereof for any other reason than an emergency as above stated,
the applicant shall make written application to the Borough, and a permit
for such opening shall be issued by the Borough.
A. Permit/degradation fee. Prior to the issuance of a permit allowing
excavation to be done to a street within five years after the last paving,
a degradation fee shall be added to the permit fee. The applicant shall
§ 385-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-12
1:326
pay to the Borough a degradation fee in addition to the permit fee
required in § 385-9 in accordance with the following schedule:
(1) For excavations that involve any portion of the paved roadway,
including, but not limited to, tarvia or asphaltic surfaced streets,
paved streets, either of brick, concrete, arnesite or other asphaltic
covering on a concrete subbase, or other such rock material other
than earth or cinders, the following roadway excavation permit fee
shall apply and be added to the permit fee for each excavation as
finally restored:
(a) Roadway pavement age more than five years: $0.
(b) Roadway pavement age less than five years: $100.
(c) Roadway pavement age less than four years: $300.
(d) Roadway pavement age less than three years: $500.
(e) Roadway pavement age less than two years: $700.
(f) Roadway pavement age less than one year: $900.
B. Additional restoration. Additional restoration shall be required as
follows: [Added 2-21-2017 by Ord. No. 812113]
(1) Disturbed portions of the highway, including, but not limited to,
slopes and appurtenances and structures such as guide rails,
curbs, signs, markings, drain pipes, driveways and vegetation, shall
be restored by the permittee to a condition at least equal to that
which existed before the start of work authorized by the permit, if
the restoration is consistent with the "Roadway Construction
Standards." Additional restoration may also be required, upon
written notification, to restore the structural integrity of the
pavement or shoulder.
(2) If the permittee opens pavement having a bituminous concrete
surface and the Department's wearing course is less than five years
old, the permittee shall, in addition to the restoration conditions
outlined in the permit and in this section, overlay the pavement in
accordance with the following conditions:
(a) When a longitudinal opening longer than 100 linear feet has
been made in the pavement, the permittee shall overlay the
traffic lanes in which the opening was made, for the entire
length of highway that was opened, in a manner authorized by
the Department.
(b) When two or more transverse openings have been made within
100 linear feet of pavement, the permittee shall overlay traffic
lanes in which the openings were made, for the entire length of
113. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsection B as Subsection C.
§ 385-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-12
1:327
highway between the openings, in a manner authorized by the
Department.
(c) When four or more emergency openings have been made by
the same permittee within 100 linear feet of pavement, the
permittee shall overlay traffic lanes in which the openings
were made, for the entire length of highway between the
openings, in a manner authorized by the Department.
(d) If disturbed lanes adjacent to undisturbed lanes are overlayed,
the edge of the disturbed lane shall be saw cut or milled to a
depth of 1 1/2 inches or the depth of the existing surface
course, whichever is less, for the length of the opening to
ensure a smooth joint, with proper elevation and cross section.
A full width overlay may be authorized on various highways
instead of saw cutting or milling the disturbed lane.
(e) If disturbed lanes adjacent to shoulders are overlayed, the
shoulder shall be raised, with material and in a manner
authorized by the Department for the type of existing shoulder,
so that the overlaid pavement and shoulder edges are at the
same elevation.
(3) Regardless of the age of the wearing course:
(a) If more than 100 linear feet of longitudinal or transverse
openings, or both, are made in the pavement, the Department
may require the permittee to overlay traffic lanes in which the
openings were made, for the entire length of highway that was
opened, if the district office determines that the rideability or
structural integrity of the pavement has been impaired by the
openings.
(b) If four or more openings are made by the same permittee
within 100 linear feet of pavement, the district office may
require the permittee to restore the entire disturbed pavement
between the openings by milling, planing or other authorized
method and overlaying the entire disturbed pavement.
(4) Aggregate used in a bituminous overlay wearing course shall
comply with skid resistance level (SRL) criteria specified in Design
Manual, Part 2, Chapter 11.
(5) If an opening is made in a bituminous concrete pavement within
three feet from the edge of pavement or other longitudinal joint or
opening, the surface restoration shall be extended to the edge of
pavement or other longitudinal joint or opening.
(6) At each end of an overlay, the permittee shall install a paving notch,
under Roadway Construction Standard RC-28, by milling, planing
or other authorized method and provide a minimum ten-foot
transition.
§ 385-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-12
1:328
(7) The transition areas at each end of an overlay shall follow the
contour of the surrounding surface.
(8) When pavement markings on more than 100 linear feet of highway
are covered or destroyed by the permitted work, including
overlays, they shall be replaced with temporary pavement
markings, under § 203.72114 relating to temporary pavement
markings) before opening the disturbed pavement to traffic. When
the pavement surface is restored, pavement markings that were
covered or destroyed shall be replaced in their former location.
C. Validation period. Any permit issued by the Borough for excavation of a
street or alley shall be valid for a period of 90 days from the date of
issuance, and no work shall be done after the permit has expired. All
work shall be done in accordance with the specifications of the Borough
Engineer.
114. Editor's Note: Refers to 67 Pa. Code § 203.72, which was reserved 2-3-2006, effective
2-4-2006.
§ 385-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-12
1:329

ARTICLE III
Curbs, Sidewalks, Handicap Ramps and Driveways
[Adopted 11-7-2005 by Ord. No. 683]
§ 385-13. Responsibility of property owner to construct concrete
sidewalk, curb, handicap ramps, and crossovers (driveways).
§ 385-14. Responsibility of property owner to repair, replace or
install sidewalk, curb, handicap ramps, and/or crossovers
(driveways).
A. Every owner of property abutting upon any public street or alley, and
along private roads within residential developments and subdivisions,
shall be required, after notice given as herein provided, to construct a
concrete curb, sidewalk, handicap ramps, and driveway apron, or any of
them, adjacent to their property or properties in accordance with the
grade and line established or to be established by the Borough
Engineer or the Borough Codes Office. Locations where existing
conditions limit the ability to install sidewalks, partial or complete, shall
be exempted from installing sidewalks at the sole and absolute
discretion of the Borough Council. The cost of constructing said curb,
sidewalk, handicap ramps, and driveway apron, or any of them, shall be
paid in each and every case by the owner of the property affected.
[Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No. 770]
B. Further, it shall be the duty of property owners, as above, to construct
concrete ramps at corners of intersections when new installation of
corner sidewalk and/or curb is made or when a replacement of same is
made, so as to make the transition from street to sidewalk easily
negotiable for handicapped persons in wheelchairs and for other
persons who may have difficulty in making the required step up or down
from curb level to street level. Ramps shall be constructed in
accordance with the standards established by the Borough Engineer
and/or Borough Codes Office.
C. All improvements in the public right-of-way, or abutting upon any public
street or alley, or abutting private roads within residential
developments or subdivisions, shall require approval of the Borough of
Hellertown Code Enforcement Office and the issuance of a work permit
prior to the start of any work thereunder.
A. Whenever any sidewalk, curb, handicap ramp, and/or driveway apron
shall become out of repair or require replacement or, if absent, require
installation of same, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of such
property or properties to repair, reconstruct or install sidewalk, curb,
handicap ramps, and/or driveway apron, as directed by the Borough of
Hellertown Code Enforcement Office. The property owner is hereby
required and enjoined to repair the same with concrete or, in the
alternative, with said materials with which said curb or sidewalk had
been constructed if such alternative material shall be approved by the
§ 385-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-14
1:331
§ 385-15. Notification, work permit and warrant of survey
requirement.
Codes Office. Appropriate construction details must be submitted for
review by the Borough Engineer. The cost of repairing, replacing and/
or installing said curb, sidewalk, handicap ramps, and driveway apron,
or any of them, shall be paid in each and every case by the owner of the
property affected.
B. In addition to the above requirements, prior to the property changing
ownership by transfer from grantor to grantee by legal deed, it shall be
the responsibility of the owner or owners of the property to make
necessary repairs to a sidewalk, curb, handicap ramp and cross-over
driveways abutting a property or, if absent, require their installation to
comply with the terms of this article. The legal owner or owners of the
property shall, prior to transfer of ownership of the property, notify the
Borough of the pending sale and/or transfer of ownership in the
property. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer, or his or her
designee, shall inspect the owner's sidewalk, curbs, handicap ramps
and/or cross-over driveways abutting upon any public street or alley,
and/or any private road or subdivision of the Borough, to determine
compliance with the article. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to
bring the sidewalk, curbs, handicap ramps and/or cross-over driveways
adjacent to and/or traversing the property into compliance with this
article prior to the sale and/or transfer of the real estate. The owners
shall obtain written verification from the Borough that the sidewalk,
curbs, handicap ramps and/or cross-over driveways adjacent to and/or
traversing the property are in compliance with the requirements of this
article prior to the sale and/or transfer of the property to any third
party. Locations where existing conditions limit the ability to install
sidewalks, partial or complete, curbs, handicap ramps, and/or crossover
driveway shall be exempted from installing sidewalks at the sole
and absolute discretion of Borough Council. The cost of repairing,
replacing and/or constructing said curb, sidewalk, handicap ramps and
driveway apron, or any of them, shall be paid in each and every case by
the owner of the property affected. [Amended 6-18-2012 by Ord. No.
770]
C. All improvements in the public right-of-way or abutting upon any public
street or alley or abutting a private road within a residential
development or subdivision shall require the approval of the Borough of
Hellertown Code Enforcement Office and the issuance of a work permit
for same.
D. In addition to applicable Borough codes and ordinances, this article
incorporates by reference the 2003 International Property Maintenance
Code and subsequent revisions, Section 302.3, Sidewalks and
Driveways, which provides that all sidewalks, walkways, stairs,
driveways, parking spaces and similar areas shall be kept in a proper
state of repair and maintained free from hazardous conditions.
§ 385-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-15
1:332
§ 385-16. Inspection.
All work performed in the public right-of-way or abutting upon any public
street or alley or abutting upon a private road in a residential development
or subdivision is subject to inspection by the Borough of Hellertown Code
Enforcement Officer, his designee, or the Borough Engineer.
A. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer, his designee, or representative
shall notify, in writing, the owners of property or properties in the
public right-of-way or abutting upon any public street or alley or
abutting a private road within a residential development or subdivision
that they shall comply with the provisions of this article within a time
period of not more than 90 days, and as specified in said notice. The
property owner so notified shall, prior to commencing work, procure
and pay for a work permit and warrant of survey, if required, from the
Borough of Hellertown Code Enforcement Office. A warrant of survey, if
required, shall fix the line and grade for the setting or resetting of
curbing, the laying or relaying of sidewalks, handicap ramps, and
driveway aprons, as appropriate. Such work permit, and warrant of
survey if required, when duly served and recorded by the Code
Enforcement Officer, his designee, or the Borough Engineer, shall be
sufficient authority for such owner or contractor to commence and
complete along such public right-of-way or property abutting upon any
public street or alley or abutting upon private roads in residential
developments or subdivisions, and in accordance with the regulations,
rules, and specifications established by the Code Enforcement Office or
by ordinance, the setting or resetting of curb, the laying or relaying of
sidewalks, handicap ramps, and driveway aprons for which such permit
and/or warrant of survey has been granted. If construction has not been
completed within the time frame set forth in this section, a new work
permit and warrant of survey shall be obtained. The fee for such work
permit and/or warrant of survey shall be established from time to time
by resolution of Borough Council. Any property owner, contractor or
laborer who shall proceed to construct any curb, sidewalks, handicap
ramps, and driveway apron, or any of them, without having first
obtaining such work permit and warrant of survey, if required, shall be
in violation of this article and subject to penalty as described in
§ 385-18.
B. All points and/or stakes placed under the work permit and warrant of
survey shall be protected, maintained and kept clear by the contractor
so that they may be visible when an inspector arrives at the site.
A. Preliminary. The owner, contractor or laborer, prior to placing any
concrete, shall request an inspection of his forms at least 24 hours in
advance. Permission to proceed will be granted and a preliminary
inspection slip will be issued if the work is in accord with established
lines, grades and applicable standards and specifications.
B. Final.
§ 385-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-16
1:333
§ 385-17. Construction specifications; special provisions.
Curbs, sidewalks, handicap ramps, and gutters shall be constructed to meet
current standards and specifications of PennDOT Publication 408 and the
Americans with Disabilities Act, as amended.
(1) After concrete has been placed and finished in accordance with
standards and specifications, a final inspection will be conducted. If
the work meets all specified requirements, the owner, contractor or
laborer will be given a final approval slip.
(2) All work not meeting specifications, standards and ordinances as
defined by the Borough of Hellertown Code Enforcement Office is
subject to removal. All costs associated with such removal shall be
borne by the owner, contractor or laborer, as the case may be.
A. Lines and grades — warrant. The location, dimensions and finished
grades of the proposed walks and curbs shall be marked in the field. If
required by the Code Enforcement Officer, a warrant of survey must be
obtained from the Borough. Lines and grades for the proper location of
the walk shall be furnished by the Borough Engineer, whose duty it is to
establish, locate and field mark such grades for construction.
B. Subgrade preparation. Prior to placing the subbase, the subgrade shall
be prepared to the proper grade, it shall be uniformly compacted (95%),
and any soft or spongy places shall be removed and replaced with a
stable material. Any hard places shall be scarified to a depth of six
inches so that, when rolled, the subgrade will be of a uniform
compaction throughout. On a poorly drained soil, either four-inch tile
drains should be used or a five-inch subbase of gravel, cinders or
crushed stone shall be constructed and thoroughly tamped. Where fill is
required, bottom of curb must be carried down to a firm foundation.
C. Subbase preparation. A subbase of stone aggregate shall be uniformly
placed a minimum of four-inch-thick below the concrete. Subbase shall
be raked level and compacted.
D. Cement. Cement shall be a portland cement and shall comply with
current PennDOT Publication 408 Specifications.
E. Fine aggregate. Fine aggregate shall consist of natural sand or
screenings from hard, tough, crushed rock. It shall be clean, free from
vegetable matter, and well-graded 1/4 inch to not more than 5% passing
the 100 mesh sieve, with from 10% to 30% passing the 50 mesh sieve.
When tested for silt by the sedimentation method, the volume removed
shall not exceed 3%.
F. Coarse aggregate. Coarse aggregate shall be gravel or broken stone. It
shall be clean, free from vegetable matter, hard, durable and uncoated.
All coarse aggregate shall pass a one-inch screen and 95% shall be
retained on a one-fourth-inch screen.
§ 385-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-17
1:334
G. Water. Clean water shall be used for mixing and curing. Any supply that
is considered fit for drinking purposes will be satisfactory.
H. Joint filler. Material for expansion joints shall be premolded strips of
bitumen-treated fiber or mineral aggregate, one-half-inch thick. It shall
be placed 1/4 inch below the surface, and after the surface has been
finished, the joint grove shall be exposed and cleaned. The edges shall
then be tooled and rounded to a one-eighth-inch radius.
I. Forms. Forms may be of steel furnished by a manufacturer of standard
metal forms or they may be of wood not less than two inches thick and
dressed on one side. They shall be set to line and grade approved by the
Engineer. They shall be held firmly in place by stakes and braces
sufficient to withstand pressure of concrete and to prevent movement.
They shall be cleaned and thoroughly oiled before the concrete is
placed. They shall be left in place at least 12 hours after placing of
concrete. Flexible strips may be used on curves.
J. Division plates. Division plates shall be of one-eighth-inch steel
extending the complete width and length of the slab or block.
K. Thickness and width.
(1) A concrete sidewalk shall be a single layer or one course of fiveinch
minimum thickness increased to seven-inch thickness where
crossing driveways and alleys. Sidewalks shall be built a minimum
of five feet in width unless directed otherwise by the Codes Office
or the Engineer, with one-eighth-inch joints perpendicular to the
surface for the full depth of pavement. The outer edges of all
surfaces shall be finished to a radius of not less than 1/2 inch.
Contraction and expansion joints shall be evenly spaced.
(2) A concrete curb shall be seven inches in width at the top, 18 inches
in depth, exclusive of the foundation, and eight inches in width at
the base, the front face being battered and the back vertical. Curb
shall have a minimum of seven inches of reveal at the street edge. It
shall be constructed in uniform lengths of blocks of not less four
feet nor more than 20 feet, separated by one-eighth-inch joints
formed by division plates perpendicular to the surface. The outer
edges of all surfaces shall be finished or rounded with special steel
trowels or edging tool to a radius of not less than 1/2 inch.
(3) A concrete depressed curb shall be eight inches in width at the top
and 18 inches in depth. Curb shall be reinforced with two parallel
three-sixteenth-inch (No. 5) rebar the entire length of the
depressed curb up to and including the tapers on either side. A twofoot
taper shall be provided on either side of a depressed curb to
transition to the adjacent curb.
(4) A concrete driveway apron shall be a single layer of seven-inch
thickness, with six-by-six welded wire mesh set a minimum of two
inches above the subbase. Adequate distance shall be provided
§ 385-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-17
1:335
between the depressed curb and the sidewalk to slope the driveway
apron.
(5) A concrete gutter, when directed by the Codes Office, shall be a
single layer or one course of seven-inch thickness concrete. The
width shall be 30 inches, unless otherwise directed by the Codes
Office or Engineer. They shall be constructed in place and entirely
separated from the curb, in uniform lengths or slabs of not more
than 10 feet, separated by one-eighth-inch joints formed by division
plates perpendicular to the surface.
L. Roof drains. New and existing downspouts must outlet into the street
gutter by means of a three-inch-diameter plastic (or approved equal)
pipe placed within the new or repaired sidewalk and at least three
inches beneath the top surface of the sidewalk. If a suitable outlet
cannot be achieved with a three-inch pipe, the Borough Codes Office
may authorize an alternate means of discharge.
M. Concrete proportions. Concrete shall conform to the current
publication of PennDOT Specifications 408 for curb and sidewalk
concrete. Concrete shall be Class A.
N. Mixing.
(1) Ready-mixed or transit-mixed concrete may be used, provided that
the concrete produced conforms to these specifications, and that
the central plant producing the concrete, the equipment and the
transporting of it are suitable for the production and transportation
of the specified concrete.
(2) Mechanical mixing in an approved batch mixer for not less than 1/2
minute is recommended but, if circumstances necessitate, mixing
by hand may be permitted, in which case the ingredients shall be
first mixed dry and then the required amount of water added to
make a stiff, workable mix. It shall be turned over several times
until appearance indicates that all particles are coated with cement
mortar. When mixing is done by hand, the dry ingredients shall be
deposited on a mixing board or other suitable, flat, clean surface.
O. Placing and finishing.
(1) Concrete shall be placed immediately after mixing. It shall be
tamped and struck off with a template and shall be floated with a
wood float until the surface has a true and even contour. Care shall
be taken not to bring to the surface an excess of water and fine
sand by over-finishing. All surfaces shall be medium coarse broom
finish swept perpendicular to the pedestrian movement.
(2) Handicap ramps shall be finished with a detectable surface as
recommended by ADA Standards, as revised.
§ 385-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-17
1:336
§ 385-18. Failure to comply and penalty provisions.
P. Expansion joints. Expansion joints shall extend from the surface to the
subgrade for the full width of the slab and shall be perpendicular to the
surface and completely filled with compressible material. A one-halfinch
expansion joint shall be made at approximately fifty-foot intervals.
At all places where the walk intersects a curbline, catch basins,
manholes or another walk, or other rigid structures, one-inch expansion
joints shall be made, with one-half-inch expansion joints at the ends of
all radius curbs.
Q. Contraction joints. Contraction joints shall be placed at equal intervals
between expansion joints, but such intervals shall not exceed five feet.
The contraction joints shall be formed either by division plates or
approved methods of cutting a groove in the surface to a depth of not
less than 1/3 of the entire depth of the slab.
R. Curing. As soon as it can be done without marring the surface, the
concrete shall be covered with wet burlap, placed lightly on the finished
slab. The burlap shall be kept wet for 72 hours, during which time all
traffic shall be kept off the sidewalk or driveways.
S. Barricades. The contractor shall provide suitable barricades and
warning signs to protect the finished concrete until, with the approval
of the Codes Office, it be opened to traffic.
T. Alternate surface finish. Alternate surface treatments to concrete, such
as integral color, color hardener, stamping or exposed aggregate, may
be permitted upon approval from the Planning Commission and Codes
Office.
U. Slope/grade. A slope of 1/4 inch to the foot is to be provided to take care
of surface drainage, unless otherwise directed by the Codes Office or
Engineer. Depressions shall be removed and repaired to prevent
ponding. Adjacent grades shall be adjusted as needed to provide full
depth curb at the street edge and a uniform gradient between the top of
the curb and the parallel sidewalk.
V. Sidewalk location. A planting strip 24 inches in width will be permitted
where conditions allow and where it is consistent with sidewalks on
adjoining properties.
A. If any property owner fails to comply with any and all provision of this
article and/or fails to either construct new concrete curb, sidewalks,
handicap ramps, and driveway apron, or any of these, or if any property
owner fails to reconstruct or repair existing curbs, sidewalks, handicap
ramps, and driveway aprons, or any of these, with concrete, as specified
elsewhere herein, within 90 calendar days following the date of written
notice from the Borough Manager and/or Borough of Hellertown Codes
Enforcement Office, or either of their designees, to do so, or fails to
notify the Borough of a pending sale and/or transfer of ownership in the
§ 385-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-18
1:337
§ 385-19. Emergency repairs.
property so that the Borough can inspect said sidewalk for compliance
with this article, and/or fails to make any or all repairs required
pursuant to said inspection prior to sale and/or transfer of ownership of
the real estate, he shall be guilty of a violation of this article.
B. Any person or persons violating any of the provisions or requirements
of this article, standards and specifications or refusing or neglecting to
comply with the same shall, for each such violation upon conviction
thereof before a Magisterial District Judge, forfeit and pay a fine or
penalty of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment of not more than 90
days, or both, for each offense. An additional penalty shall also be
assessed for each and every day any work remains contrary to the
provisions of this article, and/or standards and specifications set forth
by the Borough of Hellertown Codes Enforcement Office after the
expiration of the ninety-day period as set forth in § 385-15. Each day the
violation continues beyond the period set forth in § 385-15 shall be
considered a separate and distinct violation of this article. The Borough
shall also have the right to seek any and all enforcement remedies in
the Court of Common Pleas of Northampton County to enforce the
provisions of this article. Nothing herein shall prevent the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer or his designee, in his sole and absolute
discretion, from extending the deadline for compliance with the
provisions of this article for an additional period of 45 days upon good
cause shown by the property owner.
C. Upon the neglect of any property owner to comply with any of the
requirements provided in the preceding sections of this article, in
addition to the remedies set forth above in this section regarding
enforcement of the article, the Borough may, after notice, cause the
grading, paving, repairing, curbing and/or guttering to be done at the
cost of such owner and may collect the cost thereof and 10% additional,
together with all charges and expenses, from such owner and may file a
municipal claim therefore or collect the same by action in assumpsit.
D. All such notices shall be served upon the owner of the premises to
which the notice refers, if such owner is a resident of the Borough. If
the owner is not a resident, then the notice may be served upon the
agent or tenant of the owner or upon the occupant of such premises. If
the owner has no agent or tenant or there is no occupier of such
premises, then services shall be by notice posted upon the premises.
A. In addition to the remedies now vested in this article to make repairs to
sidewalks, the Borough shall have power to make emergency repairs to
any sidewalks thereon where, in the opinion of the Borough Codes
Officer and/or Borough Engineer or their designee lawfully having
charge of sidewalk repairs, a dangerous condition exists. Before any
such repairs are made, a notice to make the repairs within seven
business days shall be served upon the owner of said property. If the
owner cannot be served within the County, notice may be served upon
§ 385-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-19
1:338
§ 385-20. Public complaint procedure.
Should a citizen of the Borough of Hellertown feel that appropriate
measures have not been taken by a property owner to correct an unsafe
or hazardous condition of curb, sidewalk, handicap ramp, and/or driveway
apron, he may file a formal, written complaint with the Borough of
Hellertown Codes Office on a complaint form available at the Borough
Hall during normal business hours. The form provides space for the
complainant's name and address, the location of the condition cited and
a brief explanation of the nature of the complaint. Upon receipt of the
complaint, the Code Enforcement Office will investigate the matter and
respond to the applicant, in writing, with its findings, opinion, and follow-up
action, if any. Should corrective action be appropriate, the provisions of this
article, including penalties, shall apply.
the agent or the owner or the party in possession, or if there is no agent
or party in possession, the notice may be served by posting the same
upon such premises.
B. Upon completion of the work, the cost thereof shall be a charge against
the owner of the property and shall be a lien until paid upon the
abutting property, provided a claim is filed therefor in accordance with
the law providing for the filing and collection of municipal claims. Any
such charge may also be collected by action of assumpsit. This section
is intended to provide an additional remedy to the Borough in
connection with emergency repairs. The certificate of the officer or
department head or committee in charge of repairs to sidewalks shall
be conclusive evidence of the existence of the emergency justifying the
repair under the terms of this section of the article.
§ 385-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 385-20
1:339
Chapter 390
SUBDIVISION AND LAND DEVELOPMENT
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 61.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Sewers — See Ch. 338.
Soil erosion, sedimentation and grading
control — See Ch. 360.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 378.
Water system — See Ch. 438, Art. I.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 385-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 385-20
1:340
ARTICLE I
Title, Authority, Jurisdiction and Purpose
§ 390-1. Title and short title.
§ 390-2. Authority and jurisdiction.
§ 390-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this chapter is to create conditions favorable to the health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the citizens by:
A. Title. "An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards
governing the subdivision of land within the Borough, setting forth the
procedures to be followed by the Borough Council and Borough
Planning Commission in administering these rules, regulations and
standards and setting forth the penalties for the violation thereof as
established by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania."
B. Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the
"Borough of Hellertown Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
of 1986."
A. Authority. The Borough Council is empowered to adopt, by ordinance,
land subdivision regulations by virtue of the provisions of § 501 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.115
B. Jurisdiction.
(1) No subdivision of any lot, tract or parcel of land in the Borough
shall be effected; no street, sanitary sewer, storm sewer, water
main or other facilities in connection therewith shall be laid out,
constructed, opened or dedicated for public use and travel or the
common use of occupants of buildings abutting thereon, except in
strict accordance with the regulations as herein provided.
(2) No lot in a subdivision may be sold; no permit to erect, alter or
repair any building upon land in a subdivision may be issued; and
no building may be erected in a subdivision unless and until a plan
of such subdivision shall have been approved and properly
recorded and until the improvements required by Council in
connection therewith shall have either been constructed or
guaranteed as herein provided.
C. The Borough Council shall have the authority to enforce the provisions
of any floodplain and/or flood hazard ordinance for any subdivision and/
or land development as defined in Article II, § 390-4. [Added
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
115. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501.
§ 390-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-3
1:341
A. Assisting in the orderly and efficient integration of subdivisions within
the Borough.
B. Ensuring conformance of subdivision plans with the public
improvement plans of the Borough.
C. Ensuring sites suitable for building purposes and human habitation and
use.
D. Facilitating the safe and efficient movement of vehicular and pedestrian
traffic.
E. Securing equitable handling of all subdivision plans by providing
uniform procedures and standards.
F. Improving land records by establishing standards for surveys and
plans.
G. Securing adequate sites for recreation, conservation, scenic and other
open space purposes.
H. Safeguarding the interests of the public, the homeowner, the subdivider
and the Borough.
§ 390-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-3
1:342
ARTICLE II
Definitions
§ 390-4. General terms. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
As used in this chapter, words in the singular include the plural and those
in the plural include the singular. The word "person" includes a profit
or nonprofit corporation, company, partnership or individual. The word
"structure" includes the word "building" and shall be construed as if
followed by the phrase "or part thereof." The word "may" is permissive, and
the word "shall" is mandatory.
APPLICATION FOR DEVELOPMENT — Every application, whether
preliminary, tentative or final, required to be filed and approved prior
to start of construction or development, including, but not limited to, an
application for a building permit, for the approval of a subdivision plat or
plan, or for the approval of a development plan.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 775]
BLOCK — A tract of land or a lot or group of lots, bounded by streets, public
parks or parkways, railroad rights-of-way, watercourse or body of water,
unsubdivided land or a boundary line or lines of the Borough.
BOROUGH — The Borough of Hellertown, Northampton County,
Pennsylvania.
BOROUGH COUNCIL — The Borough Council of Hellertown Borough,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
BUILDING LINE — A line which designates the minimum distance that
a building must be erected from a road right-of-way. Such line shall be
measured at right angles from the front street right-of-way line which abuts
the property upon which said building is located and be parallel to said
right-of-way line.
CARTWAY — That portion of the street designated for vehicular traffic.
COMMON OPEN SPACE — A parcel or parcels of land or an area of water,
or a combination of land and water, within a development site and designed
and intended for the use or enjoyment of residents of a development, not
including streets, off-street parking areas and areas set aside for public
facilities.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN — The Comprehensive Development Plan for
Hellertown Borough, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
CONDOMINIUM — Residential real estate, portions of which are
designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is
designated for common ownership solely by the owners of these portions,
created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of July 3, 1963, or
the Amended Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act, July 2, 1980.116
116. Editor's Note: The Unit Property Act, former 68 P.S. § 700.101, was repealed 7-2-1980 (P.L.
286, No. 82); see 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 3101 et seq., for the Uniform Condominium Act.
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:343
CROSSWALK or WALKWAY — A right-of-way dedicated to public use to
facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision block.
DEVELOPER — Any landowner, agent of such landowner, or tenant with
the permission of such landowner, who makes or causes to be made a
subdivision of land or a land development.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
DEVELOPMENT PLAN — The provisions for development, including a
planned residential development, a plat of subdivision, all covenants
relating to use, location and bulk of buildings and other structures, intensity
of use or density of development, streets, ways and parking facilities,
common open space and public facilities. The phrase "provisions of the
development plan," when used in this chapter, shall mean the written and
graphic materials referred to in this definition.117
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended or designated to be occupied
by one or more families.
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for cooking, living,
sanitary or sleeping facilities for the use of one family. (See "single-family
detached dwelling," "multiple dwelling," "single-family semidetached
dwelling," "multiple dwelling," "single-family attached dwelling," mobile
home" and "condominium.")
FAMILY — One or more individuals living independently as a single
housekeeping unit and using cooking facilities and certain rooms in
common. A family shall not be deemed to include the occupants of a college
dormitory, residential club, motel, hotel or lodging house.
EASEMENT — A right of land generally established in a real estate deed to
permit the use of land by the public, a corporation or particular persons for
specified uses.
LAND DEVELOPMENT — Any of the following activities:
The improvement of one lot or two or more contiguous lots, tracts or
parcels of land for any purpose involving:
A group of two or more residential or nonresidential buildings,
whether proposed initially or cumulatively, or a single
nonresidential building on a lot or lots regardless of the number of
occupants or tenants.
(1)
The division or allocation of land or space, whether initially or
cumulatively, between or among two or more existing or
prospective occupants by means of or for the purpose of streets,
common areas, leaseholds, condominiums, building groups or other
features.
(2)
A.
B. A subdivision of land.
117. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-4
1:344
LATERAL SEWER — A sewer which discharges into another sewer and has
only building sewers tributary to it.
LEHIGH VALLEY PLANNING COMMISSION — The Regional Planning
Commission for Lehigh and Northampton Counties.120
LOT — A parcel of land used or designed to be used by one use or structure,
or by a related group of uses or structures, and the accessory uses or
structures customarily incident thereto, including such open spaces as are
arranged or designed and required in connection with a structure or group
of structures. A lot may or may not be the land shown as a single lot on a
duly recorded plat or other official record.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The distance along a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT, INTERIOR — Any lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot. Any lot line not a rear lot line or a front
lot line shall be deemed a side lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line at the front of a lot. On a corner lot,
the owner may specify the front lot line on the plot plan.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line or lines opposite to the front lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot extending from one street to another.
LOT, WIDTH OF — The distance between the side lot lines, measured at the
building line.
MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough Council to ensure that improvements will be kept in good
condition for a period of one year after completion of construction and
installation, including corporate bonds, escrow agreements and other
similar collateral or surety agreements.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for a
permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one unit
or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit, capable of
again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site complete
and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental unpacking and
assembly operations, and constructed so that it may be used without a
permanent foundation.
Development in accordance with § 503(1.1) of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.118119
C.
118. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10503(1.1).
119. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
120. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:345
MOBILE HOME LOT — A parcel of land in a mobile home park, improved
with the necessary utility connections and other appurtenances necessary
for the erection thereon of a single mobile home.121
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel or contiguous parcels of land which has
been so designated and improved that it contains two or more mobile home
lots for the placement thereon of mobile homes.122
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A single building or group of attached dwelling
units intended and designed to be occupied by three or more families living
independently of each other as separate housekeeping units. The individual
dwelling units share a common access and common yard area.
MUNICIPAL AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant
to the Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164),123 known as the "Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945."124
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE — Any security which may be accepted by
the Borough in lieu of a requirement that certain improvements be made
by the subdivider before the plat is approved, including performance bonds,
escrow agreements and other similar collateral or surety agreements.
PERMANENT MONUMENT — Any structure of masonry or steel
permanently placed on or in the ground, including those expressly placed
for surveying reference.
PLANNING COMMISSION — The Planning Commission of Hellertown
Borough, Northampton County, Pennsylvania.
PLAN PRELIMINARY — The preliminary map or maps of a proposed
subdivision drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
PLAN SKETCH — The sketch map or maps of a proposed subdivision drawn
and submitted in accordance with the requirements of this chapter.
PLAT — A map of certain described land showing land boundaries together
with all data essential to the description and identification of the units
shown thereon and prepared as an instrument for recording of real estate
interests with the County Recorder of Deeds.
PLAT, FINAL — A complete and exact subdivision plat prepared for official
recording and drawn and submitted in accordance with the requirements of
this chapter.
PLAT, RECORD — The copy of the final plat which contains the original
endorsements of the Borough Planning Commission, Borough Council and
the Borough Planning Commission, and which is intended to be recorded
with the County Recorder of Deeds.
121. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
122. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
123. Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 301 et seq. [5-2-1945 (P.L. 382)] was repealed 6-19-2001
(P.L. 287, No. 22); see now 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
124. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-4
1:346
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice by
the Borough Council or Borough Planning Commission, intended to inform
and obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.125
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65 Pa.C.S.A.
Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings).126
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two successive
weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough. Such notice
shall state the time and place of the hearing and the particular nature of
the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first publication shall not be
more than 30 days and the second publication shall not be less than seven
days from the date of the hearing.127
REVERSE FRONTAGE LOTS — Lots which front on one public street and
back on another with vehicular access solely from one street.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, ON-LOT — Any structure designed to treat
sewage within the boundaries of an individual lot.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PUBLIC — The utility system designed to
collect, centrally treat and dispose of sewage operated by the Hellertown
Borough Authority.
SIGHT DISTANCE — The required length of roadway visible to the driver
of a motor vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is
unobstructed by traffic. Sight distance measurements shall be made from a
point 3.75 feet above the center line of the road surface to a point 0.5 above
the center line of the road surface.
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a permanent
foundation designed and occupied as a residence for one family with direct
outside access, which is part of a group of three or more dwellings with
one or two vertical walls in common with adjacent dwelling units. These
dwelling units are commonly referred to as "townhouses."128
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a permanent
foundation or a mobile home stand constructed in conformance with the
Hellertown Borough Zoning Ordinance of 2002, designed and occupied as a
residence for one family, and which has no part or wall in common with an
adjacent building.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit on a
permanent foundation designed and occupied as a residence for one family,
which has one vertical wall in common with the adjacent dwelling. The
dwellings are commonly referred to as "twins" or "duplexes."
125. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
126. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
127. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
128. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:347
STORM DRAINAGE SYSTEMS — All facilities and features, such as pipes,
culverts, open channels, ditches, swales, stormwater detention facilities,
etc., used to transmit or temporarily store surface water runoff.
STORMWATER DETENTION FACILITIES — Basins, ponds, ponding areas,
depressions or other structures or features used to temporarily store
rainfall and release it at a controlled rate.
STREET — Any street, avenue, boulevard, road, lane, parkway, viaduct,
alley or other way for the movement of vehicular traffic which is an existing
state, county, Borough roadway or street or way shown upon a plat
heretofore approved, pursuant to law, or approved by official action, and
includes the land between street lines, whether improved or unimproved,
and may comprise pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, parking areas
and other areas within the right-of-way. For the purpose of this chapter,
streets shall be classified as defined in Subsections A through I.129
ALLEY — A minor way which is used primarily for vehicular service
access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a street.
A.
ARTERIAL STREET OR HIGHWAY — A major regional highway
designed to carry heavy vehicular traffic into, out of, or through the
regional area.
B.
COLLECTOR STREET — A street or road designed to carry vehicular
traffic from one or more local streets to or from arterial streets or
expressways.
C.
CUL-DE-SAC — A short dead-end street terminating in a vehicular
turnaround area.
D.
EXPRESSWAY — A major highway designed to carry a large volume
of through traffic at high speed, with points of access limited or
controlled.
E.
HALF STREET — A street parallel and contiguous to a property line and
of lesser right-of-way width than is required for minor or major streets.
F.
LOCAL STREET — A street or road designed primarily to provide
access to or from adjacent properties.
G.
SERVICE ROAD — A street or road paralleling and abutting major
streets to provide access to adjacent property so that each adjacent lot
will not have direct access to the major street.
H.
STUB STREET — A street or road within a subdivision, terminating
at the subdivision boundary, with no permanent vehicular turnaround.
Stub streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of
land to be developed later with an adequate connecting street system.
I.
129. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-4
1:348
STREET RIGHT-OF-WAY — That portion of land dedicated to public use
for street and utility purposes, including cartway, curbs, sidewalks and
pedestrianways.
STRUCTURE — Any man-made object having an ascertainable stationary
location on or in land or water, whether or not affixed to the land.130
SUBDIVIDER — The person owning an interest in the land being subdivided
who is the responsible party directing the subdivision action.
SUBDIVISION — The division or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land
by any means into two or more lots, tracts or parcels or other divisions
of land, including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, partition by the court for distribution to
heirs or devisees, transfer of ownership, or building or lot development.
Providing, however, that subdivision by lease of land for agricultural
purposes into parcels of more than 10 acres, not involving any new street
or easement of access or any residential dwelling, shall be
exempted.[Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, ON-LOT — A system for supplying water to a
single-family dwelling or other building from a source located on the same
lot.
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — The public utility system designed to
transmit water from a common source to users operated by the Hellertown
Borough Authority.
WATER SURVEY — An inventory of the source, quantity, yield and use of
groundwater and surface water resources within a municipality.131
130. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
131. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-4
1:349

ARTICLE III
Submission Procedures
§ 390-5. General. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
§ 390-6. Sketch plan submission.
A. Sketch plan. Review materials and fees may be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee for discussion with the Borough
Planning Commission as to the suitability of a parcel of land for a
specific subdivision or land development use and for direction or advice
from the Borough Planning Commission. The feasibility review
materials shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer and the Lehigh
Valley Planning Commission for review.
B. Preliminary plan. Plans, supplementary data and fees shall be
submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee for
distribution to various review bodies. All reviews shall be submitted to
the Borough Planning Commission, which shall review the plan and
recommend action to the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall
take action and advise the applicant in writing of its decision.
C. Final plan. Plans, supplementary data, and fees shall be submitted to
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee for distribution to various
review bodies. Unless an extension has been granted in writing from
the Borough Council, the final plan shall be submitted within two years
of preliminary plan approval. All reviews shall be submitted to the
Borough Planning Commission, which shall review the plan and
recommend action to the Borough Council. The Borough Council shall
take action on the plan and advise the applicant in writing of its
decision. As a condition of approval, the applicant shall enter into
improvements and maintenance agreements with the Borough Council.
No permits shall be issued until said agreements have been executed
and secured to the satisfaction of the Borough Solicitor and until the
approved final plan has been recorded in the Northampton County
Recorder of Deeds Office.
A. Sketch plan maps and materials may be submitted for proposed
subdivisions and land developments for purpose of discussion between
the Borough Planning Commission and the developer, and for the
review of the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission of Lehigh and
Northampton Counties.
B. Seven copies of all sketch plans and materials, as set forth in § 390-16,
shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
C. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall refer three copies
of sketch plan maps and materials to the Borough Planning Commission
for its review and recommendations.
§ 390-5 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-6
1:351
§ 390-7. Sketch plan review.
§ 390-8. Submission of the preliminary plan.
D. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall refer one copy of
feasibility review maps and materials to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission for review and recommendations.
A. When sketch plan maps and materials have been submitted to the
Borough Planning Commission, the data presented will be reviewed by
that body at its next regular meeting, provided that submission has
occurred no less than seven days prior to such scheduled meeting.
B. The Borough Planning Commission shall review the data to determine
the development potential of the site. The general development
concepts of the developer will be reviewed to determine their
compatibility with relevant plans and ordinances. Also, the sketch plan
stage is designed to offer the developer an opportunity to informally
discuss his plans for the proposed subdivision or land development with
the Borough Planning Commission.
C. No recommendations shall be made by the Borough Planning
Commission until the Commission has received and considered the
written report of the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission of Lehigh and
Northampton Counties or until 45 days have passed from the date that
the plans were forwarded to the LVPC.
D. Within 60 days of submission of sketch plan maps and materials to the
Borough Planning Commission, the Commission shall make any
recommendations to the developer which it deems necessary or
advisable in the public interest in order to provide an acceptable
subdivision or land development plan for the site. Within 15 days after
such meeting, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall send
written notice of the Commission's recommendations to the following:
(1) The developer or his representative.
(2) The Borough Council.
(3) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
A. Preliminary plans and all supplementary data for all proposed
subdivisions and land developments shall be submitted to the Code
Enforcement Officer or his designee.
B. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall issue a receipt for a
preliminary plan submission after he has determined that the
submission includes the required plans and supporting documents as
specified by this chapter.
C. Official submission of a preliminary plan to the Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee by a developer shall comprise:
§ 390-6 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-8
1:352
(1) One copy of a completed application for review of preliminary
subdivision plans.
(2) Submission of 16 black-on-white prints on paper of the preliminary
plan, which shall fully comply with the provisions of this chapter as
set forth in § 390-17B. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(3) Submission of 16 copies of all required supplemental information
as set forth in § 390-17A. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(4) Proof of plan submission to Lehigh Valley Planning Commission and
the Borough Authority, and if required, PennDOT and/or
Northampton County Conservation District. [Added 9-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 775]
D. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall refer preliminary
plan submission materials to the various review bodies as follows:
(1) One application, five plan prints and five copies of the supplemental
information to the Borough Planning Commission. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(2) One application, one plan print and one copy of the supplemental
information to the Borough Engineer.
(3) One application, seven plan print and seven copies of the
supplemental information to the Borough Council. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775132]
(4) One application and one plan print and one copy of the
supplemental information to the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee.
(5) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is located
adjacent to another municipality, one application and one plan print
shall be referred to that municipality.
(6) One application and one plan print and one copy of any
supplemental information to the Hellertown Borough Authority.
[Added 12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 709]
E. Notice. An applicant who elects to apply the Flexible Redevelopment
Overlay (FRO) to a parcel of land or set of contiguous parcels of land
within an area designated on the Zoning Map which permits a Flexible
Redevelopment Overlay shall be required to provide written notice of
the public meeting before the Hellertown Planning Commission and
Hellertown Borough Council on the applicant's request to apply the
Flexible Redevelopment Overlay District at least 15 days prior to the
date of the hearing by first-class mail to the addresses to which real
132. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed original Section 334.5, regarding copies of
supplemental information to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, which immediately
followed this subsection.
§ 390-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-8
1:353
§ 390-9. Review of preliminary plan. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 566]
estate tax bills are sent for all real property located within a radius
of 500 feet of the property. The notice shall include the location, date
and time of the public meeting. A good-faith effort and substantial
compliance shall satisfy the notice requirements of this Subsection E.
[Added 8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 771]
A. By the Borough Planning Commission.
(1) When a preliminary plan has been officially submitted, such plan
shall be placed on the agenda of the Planning Commission for
review at its next regular monthly meeting, provided that such
official submission has occurred no less than 21 calendar days prior
to such regular meeting. The Planning Commission may hold a
public hearing on the preliminary plan at this time. [Amended
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the preliminary plan to
determine its conformance with the standards contained in this
chapter and other applicable Borough ordinances and shall require
or recommend such changes and modifications as it deems
necessary.
(3) No action shall be taken by the Borough Planning Commission with
respect to a preliminary plan until the Borough Planning
Commission has received and considered the written report of the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission; provided, however, that, if the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission shall fail to report thereon
within 45 days after receipt of a preliminary plan, then the Borough
Planning Commission may officially act without having received
and considered such report.
(4) Within 60 days after the date of the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission next following the date the preliminary plan
application is submitted, the Planning Commission shall
recommend to the Borough Council, in writing, that the preliminary
plan be approved, conditionally approved or disapproved, together
with the documented findings upon which the recommendations
are based. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
B. By the Borough Council. Within 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission or Borough Council next
following the date of the application, the Borough Council shall, in
accordance with the provisions of relevant ordinances and considering
the recommendations of the Planning Commission, take action by
approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the preliminary
plan. The exception to this procedure shall occur when either a
Planning Commission or Borough Council meeting is not scheduled
within 30 days of the date of the application. In such cases, the actions
§ 390-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-9
1:354
§ 390-10. Submission of the final plan.
by the Borough Council shall be within 120 days of the date of the
application. The Borough Council, in all cases, shall document the
action and the findings on which it is based within 15 days of the action
to the:
(1) Applicant.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
(3) Borough Planning Commission.
(4) Borough Engineer.
A. Unless an extension has been granted in writing from the Borough
Council, a final subdivision or land development plan and all required
supplemental data shall be submitted to the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee within 24 months after approval of the preliminary plan.
An extension of time may be granted by the Borough Council upon
written request. Otherwise, the plan submitted may be considered as a
new preliminary plan.
B. The final plan shall conform in all significant respects to the preliminary
plan as previously reviewed by the Borough Planning Commission and
approved by the Borough Council and shall incorporate all
modifications required by the Borough Council in its preliminary plan
approval. The Borough Planning Commission may, however, accept a
final plan modified so as to reflect any substantial changes which have
occurred on the site of the proposed subdivision, or in its surroundings,
since the time of preliminary plan review.
C. The final plan may be submitted in sections or stages, each covering a
reasonable portion of the entire proposed subdivision as shown on the
reviewed preliminary plan, in accordance with the regulations set forth
in § 390-17. In the case of the final subdivision or land development
plan which is to be submitted in sections or stages over a period of
years, the time between submission of application for final approval of
each stage or section shall be no greater than 12 months.
D. Final plans and all required supplemental data set forth in § 390-18 for
all proposed subdivisions and land developments shall be submitted to
the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee. The Code Enforcement
Officer or his designee shall issue a receipt for the final plan submission
after it has been determined that the submission includes the required
plans and supporting documents as specified by this chapter.
E. Official submission of a final plan to the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee by a developer shall comprise:
(1) One copy of a completed application for review of final subdivision
plan.
§ 390-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-10
1:355
§ 390-11. Review of final plan. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No.
566]
(2) Submission of 16 black-on-white prints on paper of the final plan,
which shall fully comply with the provisions of this chapter as set
forth in § 390-18B. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(3) Submission of 16 copies of all required supplemental information
as set forth in § 390-18A. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(4) Proof of plan submission to Lehigh Valley Planning Commission and
the Borough Authority and, if required, PennDOT and/or
Northampton County Conservation District. [Added 9-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 775]
F. The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall refer final plan
submission materials to the various review bodies as follows:
(1) One application, five plan prints, and five copies of the
supplemental information to the Borough Planning Commission.
[Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(2) One application, one plan print, and one copy of the supplemental
information to the Borough Engineer.
(3) One application, seven plan prints, and seven copies of the
supplemental information to the Borough Council. [Amended
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(4) One application, one plan print and one copy of the supplemental
information to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission of Lehigh-
Northampton Counties.
(5) The Code Enforcement Officer or his designee shall retain one
application, one plan print, and one copy of the supplemental
information for the files.
(6) Whenever a proposed subdivision or land development is located
adjacent to another municipality, one application and one plan print
shall be referred to that municipality.
A. By the Borough Planning Commission.
(1) When a final plan has been submitted, such plan shall be placed on
the agenda of the Planning Commission for review at its next
regular meeting, provided that such official submission has
occurred no less than 21 calendar days prior to such regular
meeting. The Planning Commission may hold a public hearing on
the original plan at this time. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No.
783]
(2) The Planning Commission shall review the final plan to determine
its conformance with the standards contained in this chapter and
§ 390-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-11
1:356
§ 390-12. Recording of the final plan.
other applicable Borough ordinances and shall require or
recommend such changes and modifications as it deems necessary.
(3) No action shall be taken by the Borough Planning Commission with
respect to a final plan until the Borough Planning Commission has
received and considered the written report of the Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission; provided, however, that if the Lehigh Valley
Planning Commission shall fail to report thereon within 45 days
after receipt of a final plan, then the Borough Planning Commission
may officially act without having received and considered such
report.
(4) Within 60 days after the date of the regular meeting of the Planning
Commission next following the date the final plan application is
submitted, the Planning Commission shall recommend to the
Borough Council, in writing, that the final plan be approved,
conditionally approved or disapproved together with the
documented findings upon which the recommendations are based.
[Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
B. By the Borough Council. Within 90 days following the date of the
regular meeting of the Planning Commission or Borough Council next
following the date of the application, the Borough Council shall, in
accordance with the relevant ordinances and considering the
recommendations of the Planning Commission, take action by
approving, conditionally approving or disapproving the final plan. The
exception to this procedure shall occur when either a Planning
Commission or Borough Council meeting is not scheduled within 30
days of the date of the application. In such cases, the actions by the
Borough Council shall be within 120 days of the date of the application.
The Borough Council, in all cases, shall document the action and the
findings on which it is based within 15 days of the action to the:
(1) Developer or his representative.
(2) Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
(3) Borough Planning Commission.
(4) Borough Engineer.
(5) The Hellertown Borough Authority. [Added 12-17-2007 by Ord.
No. 709]
A. After the completion of the procedures set forth in § 390-31 and after
the final plan is approved by the Borough Planning Commission and the
Borough Council, six paper prints and one reproducible sepia copy of
the final plan shall be endorsed by the Borough Council and the
Planning Commission. The signature of the LVPC shall also be placed on
the plans indicating LVPC review of the plans.
§ 390-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-12
1:357
§ 390-13. Plans exempted from standard procedures.
In the case of any proposed residential subdivision or lot boundary
adjustment which does not, and will not in the future, involve more than a
total of three lots, including the remaining parcel, and does not involve the
provision of any new street or easement for access (i.e., one in which all
proposed lots will have frontage on an existing public street), the following
procedure shall be followed:
§ 390-14. Modifications.133
B. After the plan has been endorsed by the Borough Planning Commission,
the Borough Council and the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission, the
plan shall be filed at the Northampton County Recorder of Deeds Office
by the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee.
C. After the plan has been endorsed as per the requirements of § 390-11A,
two prints of the plan shall be retained by the Code Enforcement Officer
or his designee. One print shall be forwarded to each of the following:
subdivider, Borough Solicitor, Borough Engineer and the LVPC.
A. The applicant shall prepare a submission meeting the requirements of
§ 390-18.
B. The submission shall be processed according to the procedures
contained in § 390-10.
C. Upon approval of the plan, the subdivision shall be recorded according
to the procedures contained in § 390-11.
A. The Borough Council or the Borough Planning Commission, if
authorized to approve applications within the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, may grant a modification of the requirements
of one or more provisions if the literal enforcement will exact undue
hardship because of peculiar conditions pertaining to the land in
question, provided that such modification will not be contrary to the
public interest and that the purpose and intent of the chapter is
observed.
B. All requests for a modification shall be in writing and shall accompany
and be a part of the application for development. The request shall state
in full the grounds and facts of unreasonableness or hardship on which
the request is based, the provision or provisions of the chapter involved
and the minimum modification necessary.
C. If approval power is reserved by the Borough Council, the request for
modification may be referred to the Borough Planning Commission for
advisory comments.
133. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-14
1:358
§ 390-15. Recording of plats and deeds.134
D. The Borough Council or the Borough planning agency, as the case may
be, shall keep a written record of all action on all requests for
modification.
A. Upon the approval of a final plat, the developer shall, within 90 days of
such final approval or 90 days after the date of delivery of an approved
plat signed by the Borough Council following completion of conditions
imposed for such approval, whichever is later, record such plat in the
office of the Recorder of Deed of Northampton County. Whenever such
plat approval is required by the Borough, the Recorder of Deeds shall
not accept any plat for recording, unless such plat officially notes the
approval of the Borough Council and review by the county planning
commission, if one exists.
B. The recording of the plat shall not constitute grounds for assessment
increases until such time as lots are sold or improvements are installed
on the land included within the subject plat.
134. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-15
1:359

ARTICLE IV
Submission and Drawing Requirements
§ 390-16. Sketch plan submission and drawing requirements.
Drawing requirements. The sketch plan may be a freehand drawing with
approximate dimensions and should include:
§ 390-17. Preliminary plan submission and drawing requirements.
A. Property boundaries (may be obtained from county tax map or similar
sources).
B. Topographic contours from available data (may be obtained from the
United States Geological Surveys) and other prominent physical
features.
C. Proposed lot and street layout with dimensions of lots and proposed
widths of street right-of-way to the nearest foot.
D. Site data, including:
(1) Acres of entire tract.
(2) Number of lots.
(3) Zoning of area.
E. Magnetic North point.
F. Appropriate scale.
G. Name of subdivision.
H. A location map showing the general location of the subdivision in
relation to adjacent properties, roads and streams.
A. Submission requirements. The preliminary plan application shall be
accompanied by, but not limited to, the following:
(1) Plan. Sixteen copies of clear and legible white paper prints of the
preliminary plan.135
(2) Application form. One copy of application for subdivision approval.
(Blank forms will be furnished by the Code Enforcement Officer or
his designee upon request.)
(3) Review fee. The review fee as referred to in § 390-35 shall be paid
to the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee at the time of the
preliminary plan submission.
135. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-17
1:361
(4) All parcels shall be serviced by and connected to public water
supply. Applicant shall submit evidence that the subdivision or
development is to be serviced by the Borough Authority.136
(5) Certification of public sewerage. When the subdivision is to be
served by the public sewage disposal system, the developer shall
submit two copies of a letter from the Authority which certifies that
the Authority can adequately serve the subdivision.
(6) Certification of on-lot sewage system. When the subdivision is to be
sewered by individual on-lot sewage disposal systems, the
developer shall submit two copies of the site investigation and
percolation test report for on-lot disposal of sewage as approved by
the Sewage Enforcement Officer.
(7) The following additional data shall be submitted upon request of
the Borough Planning Commission or Borough Council:
(a) Subsurface conditions of the tract.
(b) Drainage plan which shows existing and proposed storm
sewers, culverts, natural watercourses, drainage easements
and existing and proposed topographic contours.
(c) Profile drawings of proposed streets which show existing and
proposed grades.
(d) Typical cross sections of proposed streets.
(e) Water system and/or sewage disposal system plan(s).
B. Drawing requirements. The preliminary plan shall be in accordance
with and show the following:
(1) The plan shall be at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the inch.
(2) Proposed subdivision name or identifying title.
(3) Municipality in which subdivision is located.
(4) North point, graphic scale and date.
(5) Name, seal and certification of the registered engineer or surveyor
responsible for the plan and qualified to do such work according to
Pennsylvania Act No. 367 of 1945, as amended.
(6) A signed statement that the applicant is the owner, equitable owner
or authorized by the owner to make application for the land
proposed to be subdivided.
(7) Site data, including:
(a) Total acreage of tract.
136. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-17
1:362
(b) Number of lots proposed.
(c) Lineal feet of new streets proposed.
(d) Type of water supply system.
(e) Type of sewage disposal system.
(f) Zoning district.
(g) Tax map sheet, block and lot numbers from county records.
(8) A location map at a scale not less than 1,000 feet to the inch,
showing:
(a) Relation of tract to adjoining property.
(b) Relationship to road and highway system within 1,000 feet of
subdivision.
(c) Municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of subdivision.
(d) Zoning districts within 1,000 feet of subdivision.
(e) Watercourses and any areas subject to flooding.
(9) Tract boundaries showing bearings and distances. The traverse
shall have an area of closure of not more than 1 in 5,000. The
survey should tie into the nearest USGS monument, if practicable.
(10) Contours at vertical intervals of two feet for land with an average
slope of 5% or less, or vertical intervals of five feet for more steeply
sloping land.
(11) Datum to which contour elevations refer and, where reasonably
practicable, shall be to known established elevations.
(12) All existing property lines and the names of owners of immediately
adjacent unplatted land; the names of existing or proposed
subdivisions immediately adjacent.
(13) All existing watercourses or bodies, significant features such as
rock outcrops, slag piles, quarrying holes, springs and swampy
areas.
NOTE: It would be desirable to locate all trees over six inches in
diameter if sparsely scattered.
(14) All existing buildings, sewer mains, culverts, petroleum or
petroleum products lines, gas lines, transmission lines, fire
hydrants and other significant man-made features.
(15) All existing streets, easements and rights-of-way within the
subdivision and within 200 feet of any part of the tract.
§ 390-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-17
1:363
§ 390-18. Final plan submission and drawing requirements.
(16) Location and width of all proposed streets, alleys, rights-of-way and
easements; lot lines with dimensions in feet; proposed minimum
setback lines; public areas and parcels proposed to be dedicated or
reserved for public uses.
(17) Existing and proposed street names.
(18) Where the preliminary plan covers only a part of the subdivider's
entire holding, a sketch plan shall be submitted of the prospective
street layout for the remainder of the tract.
(19) The full plan of proposed development, including:
(a) Utility easement locations.
(b) Lot lines with approximate dimensions.
(c) A statement of the intended use of all nonresidential lots and
parcels.
(d) Lot numbers and the lot size in square feet or acres for each
lot.
A. Submission requirements. The final plan shall be accompanied by the
following:
(1) Plan. Seven copies of clear and legible white paper prints of the
final plan.
(2) Application form. One copy of application for approval. (Blank
forms will be furnished by the Code Enforcement Officer or his
designee upon request.)
(3) Appropriate fee. The review fee as referenced in § 390-35 shall be
paid to the Code Enforcement Officer or his designee at the time of
the final plan submission.
(4) Improvements agreement. One copy of an executed subdivision
improvements agreement in accord with the requirements of
Article VI.
(5) A performance guarantee in the amount and manner set forth in
§ 390-31 of this chapter, guaranteeing the construction and
installation of all such improvements within a stated period, which
shall not be longer than two years from the date of final subdivision
approval. Where the final plan is submitted in stages or sections,
the amount of the guarantee may also be provided in stages if
acceptable to the Borough Council. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord.
No. 566]
(6) A maintenance guarantee in an amount of not less than 12% of the
Borough Council's estimate of the cost of all required
§ 390-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-18
1:364
improvements as set forth in § 390-30. This guarantee assures
that the developer shall maintain all such improvements in good
condition for a period of one year after completion of construction
and installation of all such improvements by the Borough Council.
(7) A copy of the Department of Environmental Protection acceptance
or approval of the planning module.
(8) The applicant shall submit, along with the final plan, written
verification from the appropriate municipal body that there are no
outstanding fees or charges owed to the Borough of Hellertown
and/or the Hellertown Borough Authority and that all required
approvals have been obtained. [Added by 6-17-2002 by Ord. No.
641]
(9) For any subdivision and/or land development plan whenever
municipal water and/or municipal sewers are to be provided, the
applicant shall be required to obtain prior written plan approval
from the Hellertown Borough Authority for the proposed water
and/or sewer systems as a condition of final plan approval. [Added
12-17-2007 by Ord. No. 709]
B. Final plan drawing requirements. The final plan shall be in accordance
with and show the following:
(1) The plan shall be on sheets of one of the following sizes:
(a) Fifteen inches by 21 inches.
(b) Twenty-four inches by 36 inches.
(c) Thirty inches by 42 inches.
(2) The final plan shall be at a scale of not less than 100 feet to the
inch.
(3) Name under which the subdivision is to be recorded.
(4) Municipality in which subdivision is located.
(5) The registered professional engineer or surveyor responsible for
the plan and qualified to do such work according to Pennsylvania
Act No. 367 of 1945, as amended,137 shall certify that the plan is
correct and that the monuments described on it have been placed
as described. He shall affix his name and seal.
(6) A notarized statement to the effect that the applicant is the owner
of the land to be subdivided and that the subdivision shown on the
final plan is made with his, her or their free consent and that it is
desired to record the same.
137. Editor's Note: The Engineer, Land Surveyor and Geologist Registration Law, Act of 1945,
P.L. 913, No. 367.
§ 390-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-18
1:365
(7) Site data, including:
(a) Total acreage of the tract.
(b) Number of lots.
(c) Lineal feet of new streets.
(d) Type of water supply.
(e) Type of sewage disposal.
(f) Zoning district.
(g) Tax Map lot and block numbers from county records.
(8) A location map for the purpose of locating the site to be subdivided
at a scale of not less 1,000 feet to the inch, showing:
(a) Relation of the tract to adjoining property.
(b) Relationship to road and highway system within 1,000 feet.
(c) Municipal boundaries within 1,000 feet of the subdivision.
(d) Zoning districts within 1,000 feet of the subdivision.
(e) Watercourses and any areas subject to flooding.
(9) North point, graphic scale and date.
(10) Boundaries of the tract showing bearings and distances and having
an error of closure of not more than one in 5,000. All bearings and
distances shall be indicated outside the boundary line, not inside
with the lot dimensions. When a plan is bounded with an irregular
shoreline of a body of water, the bearings and distances of a closing
intermediate traverse should be given, and a notation made, that
the plot includes all land to the water's edge or otherwise.
(11) Location and width of all streets, alleys, rights-of-way, easements
and lot lines, with dimensions in feet and hundredths of a foot;
minimum setback lines for every street; public areas and parcels of
land to be dedicated to public use.
(12) Sufficient data to determine readily the location, bearing and
length of every street, lot and boundary line and to reproduce such
lines upon the ground.
(13) For curved boundaries and all curves on the plan, sufficient data
should be given to enable the reestablishment of the curves. The
curve data should include the following:
(a) Point of curvature.
(b) Point of tangency.
§ 390-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-18
1:366
(c) Tangent distance.
(d) Radius of curve.
(e) Degree of curve.
(f) Angle of curve by arc definition.
(14) Lot and blocks within a subdivision shall be numbered.
(15) Names of streets within and adjacent to the subdivision shall be
shown.
(16) Excepted parcels shall be marked "not included in this plat" and
the boundary completely indicated by bearings and distances.
(17) The names of owners of immediately adjacent unplatted land; the
names of existing or proposed subdivisions immediately adjacent,
and locations and dimensions of any streets or easements shown
thereon, which abut the land to subdivided.
(18) If the subdivision proposed a new access point to a state legislative
route, the highway occupancy permit from PennDOT shall be
attached.
(19) A signature block for certification of approval of the plan by the
Borough Planning Commission and the Borough Council.
(20) A signature block for certification of review of the plan by the
Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
(21) Space shall be left along the lower edge of the sheet in order that
the County Recorder of Deeds may acknowledge receipt and
recording of the plan when it is presented.
(22) A signature block for certification of review by the Borough
Engineer.138
138. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-18
1:367

ARTICLE V
Location and Design Standards
§ 390-19. General procedure.
§ 390-20. Street design.
A. Natural and historic features. In all subdivisions, measures shall be
taken to ensure that the design and development shall preserve insofar
as possible all natural and historic features which will add
attractiveness and value to the remainder of the property being
subdivided. Some of these features are large trees or groves,
watercourses and falls, historic areas and structures, exceptional views
and other community assets.
B. Open space and community facilities. In order to obtain approval of a
subdivision plan, the developer may be required to dedicate or reserve
land for the following open space uses and community facilities:
(1) School sites.
(2) Other public and semipublic buildings and facilities.
(3) Locations for water supply systems or sewage treatment plant
facilities in accordance with local and regional comprehensive
plans.
(4) Highway rights-of-way reservations in accordance with local and
regional comprehensive plans.
(5) Playlots and neighborhood parks. In considering the needs for
playlots and neighborhood parks, the standards recommended in
the Borough Comprehensive Plan may be applied.
C. Location of site. The location of proposed subdivisions shall be viewed
with regard to the following:
(1) Comprehensive Plan. The subdivision shall conform to any
applicable provisions of the Borough and County Comprehensive
Plan or to such parts as may have been prepared and adopted.
(2) Zoning. The use of land in proposed subdivisions shall conform to
the Borough Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 450).
(3) Nearby developments. A subdivision must be coordinated with
existing nearby developments or neighborhoods, so that the area as
a whole may be developed harmoniously.
A. Street requirements.
(1) Street plan. Proposed streets shall be properly related to the road
and highway plans of the state, county and Borough.
§ 390-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-20
1:369
(2) Through traffic. Local residential streets shall be laid out to
discourage through traffic, but provisions for street connections
into and from adjacent areas will be generally required.
(3) Stub streets. To provide an integrated street system, all stub
streets of abutting subdivisions shall be incorporated into the
proposed street system. Stub streets greater than one lot in length
shall be provided with a temporary turnaround to the standards
required for culs-de-sac.
(4) Dead-end streets. Dead-end streets shall be prohibited, except as
stub streets to permit future street extension into adjoining streets
or when designed as culs-de-sac.
(5) Cul-de-sac streets. Permanent cul-de-sac streets of not over 600
feet in length may be permitted and must be provided with a rightof-
way at the turnaround of 45 feet radius or more and the curb
radius must be 40 feet or more.
(6) Half streets. Half streets shall not be permitted except when
required to complete a half street already in existence.
B. Right-of-way and cartway standards. Minimum street right-of-way and
cartway widths shall be as follows: [Amended 6-21-2004 by Ord. No.
657]
Street
Classification
Right-of-
Way
(feet)
No. and
Width of
Traffic
Lanes
(number/
feet)
No. and
Width of
Parking
Lanes
(number/
feet)
Cartway
Width
(feet)
Expressway (As determined by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation)
Arterial (As determined by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation)
Collector 60 2/11 2/8 paved
parking
lanes
38
Local 50 2/11 2/8 paved
parking lane
30
Alley — 18 feet
minimum
C. Intersection standards.
(1) Intersections. Intersections of local streets with collector streets
shall be kept to the minimum.
§ 390-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-20
1:370
§ 390-21. Block and lot standards.
(2) Number of streets at intersection. No more than two streets shall
intersect at one point.
(3) Angle of street intersection. Streets shall intersect at 90°, except
where this may be impractical. Angles of less than 90° may be
designed, subject to the approval of the Borough Planning
Commission.
(4) Center lines of intersecting streets. Two streets intersecting from
opposite sides shall intersect at their center lines, or their center
lines shall be offset at least 150 feet.
(5) Curbs at intersections. At all street intersections, curbs shall have a
radius equivalent to the distance from the face of the curb to the
street right-of-way measured at right angles. In cases where this
distance is varied, the lesser of the two distances is to be used as
the radius length.
D. Curvature and alignment.
(1) Horizontal curves. To ensure adequate sight distances, when street
center lines deflect more than 5°, connection shall be made by
horizontal curves. The minimum center-line radii for local streets
shall be 150 feet, and of all other streets shall be 300 feet. A
minimum tangent of 100 feet shall be required between curves and
between a curve and street intersection.
(2) Vertical curves. Vertical curves shall be used at changes of grade
exceeding 1% and shall be designed to provide minimum sight
distances of 200 feet for local streets and 300 feet for all other
streets.
E. Street grades. Center-line grades shall not exceed 12% for local streets,
8% for collector streets, and 6% for arterial streets. A minimum grade
of 1% shall be maintained for all streets.
F. Intersections shall be approached on all sides by leveling areas. Such
leveling areas shall have a minimum length of 75 feet (measured from
the edge of the cartway of the intersecting road), within which no grade
shall exceed a maximum of 4%.
G. Street names. A street that is an extension of an existing street shall
have the same name as that existing street. There shall be no
duplication of street names within the Borough.
A. Block length. The length of blocks shall not exceed 1,600 feet nor less
than 500 feet.
B. Block width. Blocks shall be wide enough to provide for two tiers of lots
having a depth which complies with existing zoning requirements.
§ 390-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-21
1:371
C. Pedestrian crosswalks. Where blocks exceed 1,000 feet in length,
pedestrian rights-of-way of not less than 10 feet in width shall be
provided where needed for adequate pedestrian circulation. Paved
walks of not less than five-foot width shall be placed within the
pedestrian rights-of-way.
D. Wedge-shaped lots. In the case of wedge-shaped lots, no lot shall be less
than 50 feet in width measured along the arc at the front street right-ofway
line.
E. Lot line. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines.
F. Front on public street: [Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 725139]
(1) All lots shall front on a public street having a cartway width of no
less than 30 feet.
(2) The facade of a primary permitted use structure shall face and
address a public street having a cartway width of no less than 30
feet.
G. Driveways. Driveways shall not be permitted to have direct access to
state highways, unless authorized by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation through issuance of a highway occupancy permit.
(1) Unless otherwise specified in the Borough Zoning Ordinance,
(Chapter 450) driveways shall be located a minimum of 50 feet
from street intersections, measured from the intersection of the
street center lines.
(2) Driveway grades shall not exceed 7%.
(3) Driveways shall intersect streets at right angles.
H. Access for emergency vehicles. Suitable access for emergency vehicles
shall be provided within all subdivisions and land developments,
including adequate clear width and including access to reach all
principal buildings. Driveways shall be designed to be accessible to
emergency vehicles. Driveways that are greater than 100 feet in length
and that provide access to a principal building shall have a ten-foot
minimum horizontal clearance, a twelve-foot minimum vertical
clearance and be designed to accommodate the weight of a fire
engine.140
(1) Where an access is limited to use by emergency vehicles, the
following standards shall apply:
(a) A Borough-appointed method shall be used to restrict access
by nonemergency vehicles, with such construction detail
submitted to the Borough.
139. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
140. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-21 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-21
1:372
§ 390-22. Easement standards.142
Easements shall follow rear and side lot lines, wherever practical, and shall
have a minimum total of 20 feet apportioned equally between abutting
properties. They shall be designed so as to provide efficient installation of
utilities. Public utility installations shall be so located as to permit multiple
installations within the easements.
(b) One coordinated emergency accessway may be shared by
adjacent developments.
(c) Existing or proposed utility easements or rights-of-way should
be considered for use as emergency accessways.
(d) The applicant shall provide evidence that the design of the
emergency access will be able to accommodate the weight of
emergency vehicles.
(e) Such access should be offered for review by the fire and police
chiefs.
I. Dumpsters. Applicants shall provide for the temporary storage of trash
for all non-single-family residential developments. Locations and
enclosures shall be approved by the Borough.141
A. Stormwater drainage, sanitary sewage, central water, emergency
access and other types of easements shall be provided as determined to
be needed by the Borough and as indicated on the plans.
B. Maintenance and obstructions. The owner of the lot shall maintain an
easement in such a condition that does not inhibit its intended
purpose(s). Fill or structures shall not be placed in an easement in a
way that inhibits its intended purpose(s). Specifically, structures or
grading that could alter or obstruct stormwater flows in violation of the
approved final plan shall be prohibited within stormwater easements.
C. Borough entry. The Borough, at its option, shall have the right to enter a
stormwater easement or any municipal easement to maintain it or
improve it for its intended purpose(s), although the Borough does not
accept the responsibility to complete such work.
D. The following note or a Borough-approved equivalent may be required
to be placed on the record plan, unless another method of maintenance
is specifically approved by the Borough.
141. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
142. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-22
1:373
§ 390-23. Storm drainage systems.
"The property owner shall have the responsibility for the perpetual
maintenance of the permanent stormwater management facilities. No
changes shall be made to the stormwater management facilities or
finish grading without prior written approval from the Borough. A
blanket easement is hereby granted giving the Borough the right,
but not the obligation, to enter the property to perform any required
maintenance which has not been properly performed in a timely
manner. The property owner shall be responsible for the cost of any
maintenance which is performed by the Borough. The Borough shall
lien the property for said costs until the Borough has been reimbursed
in full."
A. Storm drainage systems shall be provided in order to:
(1) Permit unimpeded flow of normal watercourses except as modified
by stormwater detention facilities required by § 390-23C or open
channels pursuant to § 390-23B(8).
(2) Ensure adequate drainage of all low points along the line of streets.
(3) Intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals related to the
extent and grade of the area drained.
(4) Take surface water from the bottom of vertical grades, lead water
from springs and avoid excessive use of cross-gutters at street
intersections and elsewhere.
(5) Prevent overloading of drainage systems and watercourses
downstream as a result of increased rate of runoff caused by the
proposed development.
B. General requirements.
(1) A site drainage plan for the proposed subdivision tract shall be
prepared which illustrates the following information:
(a) Mapping of the watershed area or areas in which the proposed
subdivision is located.
(b) Calculations of runoff for all points of runoff concentration
within the site.
(c) Complete drainage systems for the subdivision. All existing
drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design
shall be so identified. If the subdivision is to be developed in
stages, a general drainage plan for the entire subdivision shall
be presented, on which the first stages for the drainage system
shall be indicated.
§ 390-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-23
1:374
(2) The existing points of natural drainage discharge onto adjacent
property shall not be altered without the written approval of the
affected landowners.
(3) No stormwater runoff or natural drainage shall be so diverted as to
overload existing drainage systems or create flooding or the need
for additional drainage structures on other private properties or
public lands without approved provisions being made by the
developer for properly handling such conditions.
(4) Storm drainage systems through the subdivision/land development
shall be designed to convey the peak runoff that will occur when all
tributary areas upstream are developed to the extent reasonable
projected during the next 40 years. The calculation of this runoff
rate shall take into account the land use and development
regulations including runoff controls in effect in the tributary
areas.
(5) Where a subdivision is traversed by watercourses other than
permanent streams, there shall be provided a drainage easement
conforming substantially with the line of such watercourse. The
width of the easement shall be adequate to provide unimpeded flow
of stormwater runoff based on calculations made in conformance
with § 390-23D and to provide a freeboard allowance of 1/2 foot
above the design water surface level. The terms of the easement
shall prohibit excavation, the placing of fill or structures and any
alterations which may adversely affect the flow of stormwater
within any portion of the easement. Also, periodic cutting of
vegetation in all portions of the easement shall be required.
(6) Drainage facilities that are located on state highway rights-of-way
shall be approved by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation, and a letter indicating such approval shall be
directed to the Borough Planning Commission.
(7) All streets shall be designed so as to provide for the eventual
discharge of surface water away from their right-of-way.
(8) When it can be shown to the satisfaction of the Borough Engineer
that, due to topographic conditions, natural drainage swales on the
site cannot adequately provide for drainage, open channels may be
constructed conforming substantially to the line and grade of such
natural drainage swales. Capacities of open channels shall be
calculated using the Manning equation as explained in Appendix
B.143
(9) Storm drainage facilities and appurtenances shall be so designed
and provided as to minimize erosion in watercourse channels and
at all points of discharge.
143. Editor's Note: See Article VIII, Appendixes.
§ 390-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-23
1:375
C. Stormwater detention.
(1) Stormwater detention facilities shall be used whenever postdevelopment
runoff would exceed predevelopment runoff for the
design storms as determined by the Borough Engineer.
(2) Whenever detention facilities are required under § 390-23C(1),
facilities will be designed to provide that the peak runoff rate at all
points of discharge from the site, when developed, will not exceed
the peak runoff rate at each of those points prior to development
unless existing or planned detention facilities located elsewhere in
the same drainage basin will provide that the peak runoff rate from
the drainage basin after the site is developed will not exceed the
peak runoff rate prior to development.
(3) Where detention facilities are included as part of the storm
drainage system, the following provisions will apply:
(a) Detention points shall be designed so that they return to
normal conditions within approximately 12 hours after the
termination of the storm, unless the Borough Engineer finds
that downstream conditions may warrant other design criteria
for stormwater release.
(b) The developer shall demonstrate that such ponds are designed,
protected and located to assure that public safety is maximized
and health problems are prevented.
(c) The developer shall verify that the operation of the detention
facilities will not aggravate potential downstream peaking
conditions.
(d) Emergency overflow facilities shall be provided for detention
facilities to handle runoff in excess of design flows.
(e) If the lands of the proposed land development will remain in
common ownership, the developer shall provide written
assurances to the Borough that the detention ponds will be
properly maintained.
(f) If the lands of the proposed land development will be conveyed
to two or more separate owners, the developer shall provide
written assurances to the Borough that the detention ponds
will be properly maintained or dedicate the land on which the
detention ponds are located to the Borough, which shall then
be responsible for maintaining the detention ponds.
D. Calculations of runoff and design and storm frequency.
(1) Storm drainage systems required by this chapter shall be designed
to provide protection from a ten-year to one-hundred-year storm, as
determined by the Borough Planning Commission. A ten-year
design storm would be appropriate where a storm in excess of the
§ 390-23 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-23
1:376
§ 390-24. Underground utilities and utility easements.
In accordance with the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission
Investigation Docket No. 99, as amended from time to time, all electric
utility distribution lines shall be installed underground in subdivisions or
land developments of five or more dwelling units. In addition, the following
design requirements shall be observed:
design storm would have minor impact, such as inconvenience to
traffic on local streets. A twenty-five-year design storm would be
appropriate where a storm in excess of the design storm would
cause major inconvenience to people and traffic in high-use areas
such as business districts and major highways. A one-hundred-year
design storm would be appropriate where a storm in excess of the
design storm would cause damage to existing or future structures
or their contents.
(2) Stormwater runoff from watersheds of 200 or less acres shall be
calculated by the Rational Method as described in Manual Number
37 of the American Society of Civil Engineers. The Rational Method
of runoff calculation is explained in Appendix B.144
(3) Stormwater runoff from watersheds of more than 200 acres shall
be calculated using the Soil Cover Complex Method developed by
the Soil Conservation Service (now the Natural Resources
Conservation Service) or other appropriate method acceptable to
the Borough Engineer.
(4) The Manning equation explained in Appendix B shall be used in
calculating capacities of watercourses and storm sewers, except
culverts which shall be designed using methods acceptable to the
Borough Engineer.
(5) Complete detailed drainage calculations and applicable charts and
nomographs certified by the design engineer shall be submitted to
the Municipal Engineer.
(6) Hydrograph models, such as the Natural Resources Conservation
Services Soil Cover Complex Method, shall be used as the method
of computation for the design of stormwater detention facilities.
E. Improvement specifications. Inlets shall be designed and located to
prevent hazardous conditions for vehicles, bicycles or pedestrians.
A. Established public utility and state and federal governmental agency
design standards shall be observed in preparing the utility plan.
B. Utility line to be installed within street rights-of-way shall be located
according to Borough or Borough Authority requirements.
144. Editor's Note: See Article VIII, Appendixes.
§ 390-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-24
1:377
§ 390-25. Tree preservation and planting.
C. Whenever practicable, telephone and cable TV utilities shall be
installed underground in connection with the installation of electric
utility distribution lines.
D. Streetlighting, where required, shall be provided at each intersection of
the development and at intervals not to exceed 350 feet between
intersections.
E. Utility lines shall be installed at the rough grade phase of construction.
Utility lines shall be installed according to their depth, with the utility
line installed at the greatest depth being installed first.
A. Trees six inches or more in diameter (measured at a height of 4 1/2 feet
above grade) shall not be removed unless they are located within the
proposed cartway or sidewalk portion of a street right-of-way or within
15 feet of the foundation area of a new building. Areas in which trees
are retained shall remain at original grade level and undisturbed
wherever possible.
B. Where no existing trees are retained along street rights-of-way, trees
shall be planted at intervals of between 50 and 100 feet, but in no
instance shall there be less than one tree per lot. Trees shall not be
retained or planted within three feet of the street curb or the sidewalk.
Trees may be retained or planted between the street curb and the
sidewalk if there is a minimum distance of six feet.
C. A landscape plan shall be drawn for all developments and subdivisions.
The shall show existing and proposed vegetative cover; plant schedule
with botanical and common names, root condition, size and general
notes; planting details; and the following note: "Street trees, buffers
and other required landscaping shall be maintained by the property
owner and replaced if it dies or loses its effectiveness for the purpose to
which it was required."145
D. The landscape plan shall include trees in addition to those required
along the street rights-of-way. The following standards are to be used as
a guide to the number, not the spacing or location, of additional trees
required.
(1) One tree per dwelling unit.
(2) One tree per 50 linear feet of newly constructed street.
E. Consideration shall be given in species selection to disease and storm
resistance.
F. Street trees. Street trees shall be provided as shown on the approved
plans in accordance with the following standards:146
145. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-24 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-25
1:378
(1) Selection. Species of street tree shall conform to design plans
approved by the Borough. If no such plan exists, applicant shall
coordinate with the Borough on an appropriate street tree species.
(2) Quality of trees. Street trees shall be of the deciduous type, of
symmetrical growth, free of insect pests and disease, and deemed
durable by regional nursery standards.
(3) Size of trees. Trees shall have a minimum of a seven-foot single
straight stem to first lateral branches above ground level. The
trunk diameter, measured at a height of three feet above the
finished grade level, shall be a minimum of 2 1/2 inches.
(4) Planting of trees. Trees shall be planted and staked in conformance
with good landscaping practices. Tree locations shall be adjusted
insofar as practical to avoid conflicts with overhead or
underground utilities.
(5) Maintenance of street trees. Street trees shall be properly
maintained by the developer after they are planted. This
maintenance shall include initial watering, replacement of dead
trees, control of insects and diseases, repair of mechanical injury,
removal of dead branches and removal of stakes and guy wires
after the first year.
(6) Recommended tree species.
(a) Small trees, smaller than 30 feet. Suitable for narrow street
tree lawns/pits (less than six feet wide), and low overhead
utility lines. Trees should be planted at thirty-foot to thirty-fivefoot
intervals.
Acer buergerianum Trident maple
Acer campestre (cultivars
Queen Elizabeth 'Evelyn' or
'Schichtel's Upright')
Hedge maple
Carpinus caroliniana Ironwood, Musclewood or
American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis (single
leader)
Eastern redbud
Cornus mas Cornelian-cherry
Pyrus betulaefolia
'Southworth' Dancer™
Ornamental birch-leaf pear
Pyrus calleryana 'Jaczam,'
'Jilzam'
Jack™, Jill™ callery pear
Syringa reticulata 'Ivory Silk' Japanese tree lilac
146. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-25
1:379
Tilia cordata 'Halka' Summer Sprite® littleleaf
linden
Zelkova serrata 'Schmidtlow' Wireless® zelkova
(b) Medium to large trees, larger than 30 feet. Suitable for wide
tree lawns/pits (greater than six feet wide) or park settings
without overhead utility lines. Trees should be planted at
thirty-five-foot to forty-foot intervals.
Acer x freemanii 'Armstrong' Columnar red maple
Acer rubrum Red maple
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura tree
Celtis occidentalis Common hackberry
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo, sometimes called
"Maidenhair Tree"
Gleditsia triacanthos var.
inermis (nonfruiting cultivars)
Thornless common
honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioicus (male
only)
Kentucky coffeetree
Phellodendron amurense
(male only)
Amur cork tree
Platanus x aceriflolia London planetree
Prunus sargentii Sargent cherry
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak or mossycup oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin oak, sometimes
called "Yellow chestnut oak"
Quercus phellos Willow oak
Quercus rubra Northern red oak
Quercus robur English oak
Quercus shumardii Shumard oak
Robinia pseudoacacia Black locust
Tilia cordata 'Greenspire' Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa 'Green
Mountain'
Silver linden
Ulmus carpinifolia (Dutchelm-
disease-resistant
cultivars)
Elm hybrids
§ 390-25 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-25
1:380
Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
G. Site landscaping. All subdivisions and land developments shall provide
plantings in addition to any required street trees or buffer yard planting
screens in accordance with the following requirements:147
(1) At least one tree shall be provided for each 500 square feet of new
impervious cover.
(2) Besides the types of trees specified for use as street trees, the site
landscaping trees may include flowering or ornamental trees (at
least 1 1/2 inches in diameter, measured three feet above finished
grade level) or evergreen trees (at least five feet high). The number
of flowering ornamental and evergreen trees shall not comprise
more than 75% of the total site landscaping plantings.
(3) Existing retained trees may be counted towards meeting the
number of plantings required.
H. Parking lot landscaping. Any parking facility for five or more cars shall
provide no less than one two-and-one-half-inch caliper shade tree per
five parking spaces and additional plant materials as necessary to
prevent headlights from glaring onto adjacent streets or properties to
the satisfaction of the Borough.148
I. Buffers.149
(1) Purpose. Buffer yards enhance the environmental quality by the
separation and screening of uses of different types and
incompatible abutting land uses.
(2) Application. Any new building, structure, land use or expansion of
existing buildings, structures or land uses shall require a buffer to
separate said development from incompatible abutting land uses.
The developer who is proposing the new development is
responsible for installing said buffer.
(3) The occupancy permit for a use on the premises shall not be issued
until such time as the landscaping requirements, buffer yards and/
or other approved improvements required are either actually
installed in full compliance herewith or, in the event that the season
is not appropriate, a performance guaranty of 110% of the cost, as
approved by the municipality, has been deposited with the
municipality. Such guaranty shall be in a form acceptable to the
municipality, and the depositor shall agree in making the deposit
that, if performance is not completed within the time specified by
the Zoning Officer on the receipt delivered to the depositor, the
municipality may complete the requirements and charge the cost
147. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
148. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
149. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-25
1:381
against the deposit; otherwise the deposit shall be returned in full
after the satisfactory completion of the work.
(4) In addition to plant materials, fences, walls and planted earthen
berms may be provided in addition to or substituted for plant
materials after review by the Planning Commission and approval by
Borough Council as to their function and suitability.
(5) Buffers and planting screen requirements.
(a) A buffer shall consist of a dense screen of trees, shrubs or
other plant materials or fences or walls extending the full
length of the land use to serve as a barrier to visibility, glare
and noise.
(b) A buffer shall be a minimum of six feet high and, if plant
material, shall produce, within three years, a complete visual
screen of at least six feet in height.
(c) A buffer screen may be comprised of one or more elements,
including plantings, walls or fences.
(d) The planting screen shall be maintained permanently, and any
plant material which does not live shall be replaced within six
months.
(e) Planting screens shall not interfere with traffic visibility along
a curve, across the corner of a lot and at access driveways.
(6) Fences, hedges and wall screens. Fences, walls or other structures
and hedges or plantings shall not be located at street corners so as
to interfere with the clear sight triangle. Their height is restricted
to three feet within the sight triangle. Fences shall not be permitted
within a riparian buffer area.
(7) In residential, mixed and town center districts, fences, walls or
hedges may be erected in the front, side and rear yards of
properties. The height shall be no more than three feet in a front
yard and no more than six feet in a side and rear yard. Exceptions
to the maximum permitted heights may be granted by the Zoning
Officer.
(8) In all other districts, fences, walls and hedges may not exceed eight
feet in height, regardless of location in any required yard. Salvage
and storage yard sites must be completely enclosed by a sightobscuring
hedge, masonry wall or wooden fence.
(9) Fences shall be constructed of durable fencing material. Waste
materials such as discarded vehicles, appliances, assembled or
partially assembled materials or raw materials are prohibited. No
fence shall contain or have attached barbs, razors or similar types
of injurious materials or configurations, unless specifically
approved by the Zoning Officer for appropriate reasons and
§ 390-25 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-25
1:382
§ 390-26. Erosion and sedimentation control.
circumstances such as the containment of livestock or high-level
security.
(10) Fences may be constructed of wood, metal chain link, steel,
aluminum, iron, plastic resin or other materials deemed suitable by
the Borough. Fences may be left bare or finished with paint, plastic
or vinyl coating or other finishes deemed suitable by the Borough.
(11) Freestanding walls may be constructed of stone, poured or precast
concrete, brick or tile masonry, and shall be subject to all
applicable building codes.
(12)No hedge shall consist of plant material featuring conspicuous
thorns or other threats to public safety. No hedge shall consist of
plant material listed as an invasive species by the Pennsylvania
Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR).
(13) The property owner is solely responsible for the continued
maintenance of any fence, wall or hedge. If a fence, wall or hedge is
not properly maintained, or is deemed unsafe, or is damaged,
destroyed or deteriorated, the owner must remove, replace or
repair it within 30 days of receipt of written notice to do so from the
Zoning Officer or Borough official.
A. All earthmoving activities shall be conducted in such a way as to
prevent accelerated erosion and the resulting sedimentation.
B. No earthmoving or soil disturbance may take place until an erosion and
sedimentation control plan has been developed in accordance with
Chapter 102, Erosion Control, P.L. 1987.150 Such a plan is to be
maintained on the construction site until all disturbed areas are finally
stabilized.
C. The erosion and sedimentation control plan shall be developed in the
form outlined in the Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Manual
issued by the Department of Environmental Protection.
D. All erosion and sedimentation control plans shall be submitted with the
final plan.
E. When it has been determined that an earthmoving permit is required,
the application for such a permit must be filed with the County
Conservation District.
F. The Borough may require the submission of the erosion and
sedimentation control plan to the County Conservation District for
review and recommendations, whether a permit for earthmoving is
required or not.
150. Editor's Note: See 25 Pa. Code Chapter 102.
§ 390-25 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-27
1:383
§ 390-27. Open space and recreation areas.
A. In proposed subdivisions which are intended to provide housing for
more than 50 families, the Borough Council, upon the recommendation
of the Borough Planning Commission, may require that the developer
dedicate land for open space and recreation in accordance with the
following guidelines:
Families to be Served
Minimum Open Space
and Recreation Acreages
50 to 174 3.0
175 to 374 6.0
375 to 624 10.0
625 to 800 12.0
For each additional 175 families 1.5
B. In circumstances where the recreation needs of a development could
better be met through the use of off-site facilities, cash to be used for
these facilities may be accepted by the Borough Council in lieu of open
space dedication. The contribution shall be made according to the fee
schedule adopted by the Borough Council.
C. In proposed subdivisions intended to provide housing for less than 50
families or whenever a new residential unit is initially created or there
is a conversion of a dwelling unit into two or more residential
apartments, cash in lieu of open space dedication for each new
residential unit may be required by Borough Council and may be used
for recreational purposes in accordance with the standards as set forth
in § 390-27B. Payment of recreational fees shall be paid at the time of
issuance of the building permit. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No.
783; 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 390-27 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-27
1:384
ARTICLE VI
Improvement Specifications
§ 390-28. General requirements.
§ 390-29. Required improvements.
Improvements shall be provided, constructed and installed by the developer
as stated in the improvements agreement, shown on the final plan, and in
accordance with the design standards set forth in § 390-19 of this chapter.
The following improvements will be required in all applicable cases.
A. Physical improvements to the subdivision/land development tract shall
be provided, constructed and installed as shown on the final plan, in
accordance with the requirements of the Borough Council.
B. As a condition to review of a final plan by the Borough Planning
Commission, the developer shall agree with the Borough Council as to
installations of all improvements shown on the plan and required by this
chapter. Before the final plan may be endorsed by the Borough Council,
the developer shall submit a completed and executed original copy of
the subdivision improvements agreement and performance and
maintenance guarantees in the amount required by § 390-30B.
C. All improvements installed by the developer shall be constructed in
accordance with the design specifications set by the Borough Council.
The Borough Council shall instruct the Borough Engineer to prepare
improvement specifications for a required improvement in cases where
no applicable Borough specifications exist.
D. Supervision of the installation of those improvements required by
§ 390-29 shall, in all cases, be the responsibility of the Borough Council
and Borough Engineer.
A. Monuments.
(1) Location. Permanent reference monuments shall be located at each
street intersection, at the beginning and ending of all street curves,
and on each traverse of the subdivision.
(2) Type. Reference monuments shall be one-inch I.D. galvanized iron
pipe, encased in concrete, with a minimum diameter of four inches
and shall have a minimum length of 18 inches.
B. Streets. All roads and streets shall be constructed and built in
accordance with current Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
Specifications, Publication 408, latest edition. [Amended 6-21-2004
by Ord. No. 657; 8-20-2012 by Ord. No. 771; 9-17-2012 by Ord.
No. 775]
(1) Base course. On a properly rolled and crowned subgrade, there
shall be constructed a crushed aggregate base course of eight
§ 390-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:385
inches minimum depth when compacted, conforming to the
Pennsylvania Department of Transportation Publication 408.
Should conditions warrant, the Borough Council may require a
base course greater than minimum depth.
(2) Pavement courses.
(a) Low traffic volume. On the compacted crushed aggregate,
provide a pavement base course of four inches of Superpave
25.0 mm base course mix, PG 64-22, 0.3 to 3.0 million ESALs;
and two inches of Superpave 9.5 mm wearing course mix, PG
64-22, 0.3 to 3.0 million ESALs.
(b) High traffic volume. On the compacted crushed aggregate,
provide a pavement base course of four inches of Superpave
25.0 mm base course mix, PG 64-22, over 30.0 million ESALs; a
binder course of three inches of Superpave 19.0 mm binder
course mix, PG 64-22, over 30.0 million ESALs; and two inches
of Superpave 9.5 mm wearing course mix, PG 64-22, over 30.0
million ESALs.
(3) Surface course. On the crushed aggregate base course, a
bituminous penetration surface course shall be constructed of twoand-
one-half-inch minimum thickness, conforming to Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation specifications for bituminous surface
course CP-2. Should conditions warrant, the Borough Planning
Commission may specify asphaltic concrete surface course,
conforming to Pennsylvania Department of Transportation
specifications ID-2.
(4) Curbs. Curbs of cement concrete are required and shall be of either
straight or rolled type. Straight curbs shall be 22 inches in depth.
Rolled-type curbs shall be 24 inches in total width, six inches wide
at the top, and have a seventeen-inch curb return, except at
corners, where it shall have a fifteen-inch curb return.
(5) Sidewalks.
(a) Sidewalks shall not be less than five feet in width on local
residential streets and five feet in width on collector and
arterial streets. All sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete.
Sidewalks shall commence one foot inside the right-of-way line
and extend toward the streets.
(b) Where a subdivision or land development abuts an existing
street, the Borough may require additional right-of-way and
cartway widths and sidewalk, curb, driveway aprons and/or
handicapped ramp installation to promote public safety and
convenience. The Borough may require redesign and
reconstruction to widen the street or correct the alignment to
ensure that said streets in and bordering subdivision or land
development shall be coordinated and be of such width and
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:386
grade and in such location as deemed necessary by the
Borough Engineer to accommodate prospective traffic and
facilitate fire protection. The Borough may require the
developer to improve, at the developer's expense, the Borough
road which abuts the subdivision and/or land development to
meet those width standards as prescribed by § 390-20B, as
amended, and/or according to the guidelines for design of local
roads and streets issued by the Pennsylvania Department of
Transportation.
(c) The Borough may require, as a condition of site plan approval,
that an applicant comply with the Borough's sidewalk
ordinance as amended which may require installation,
including but not limited to sidewalk, curb, driveway aprons
and/or handicapped ramps.
(6) Traffic impact study.
(a) Purpose. A traffic impact study shall be undertaken for all
subdivisions and land developments as further defined in
Subsection B(6)(b) below. This study will enable the Borough to
assess the impact of a proposed development upon the local
transportation system, including the streets bordering a
subdivision or land development. Its purpose is to ensure that
proposed land development or subdivision do not adversely
affect the transportation network. The purpose of the study is
also to identify any traffic problems associated with access
from the site to the existing transportation network. The traffic
impact study will also aid the Borough to delineate solutions to
potential future traffic problems and to determine if any
improvements, as defined pursuant to the Municipalities
Planning Code, must be incorporated into the proposed
development. This section is not and shall not be construed to
be an impact fee ordinance. Any traffic studies submitted by
the applicant shall not be considered as submitted pursuant to
an impact fee ordinance nor shall the transportation impact
study be accepted by the Borough as such.
(b) Subdivisions and land developments for which study is
required:
[1] A traffic impact study shall be required for all subdivisions
and land developments that meet one or more of the
following criteria.
[a] Residential: 10 or more dwelling units.
[b] A commercial building or buildings: land development
plan with a total footprint of 10,000 square feet or
greater.
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:387
[c] An office building or buildings: land development plan
with a total footprint of 10,000 square feet or greater.
[d] An industrial building or buildings: land development
plan with a total footprint of 10,000 square feet or
greater.
[e] An institutional building or buildings: land
development plan with a total footprint of 10,000
square feet or greater.
[f] The Borough may require a traffic impact study for
other uses if deemed necessary by the Borough
Engineer.
[2] The Borough Council, upon recommendation of the
Borough Engineer, shall have the discretion to require the
posting of additional monies in escrow, by the applicant,
for the preparation of a traffic impact study to determine
the effect of the development upon the local transportation
system, including the streets in and bordering a
subdivision or land development.
(c) The Borough, at its sole discretion, shall select a qualified
traffic engineer and/or transportation planner with previous
traffic study experience or shall require the applicant to
prepare the traffic impact study. If the Borough conducts the
study, the Borough may utilize applicant's fees, placed in
escrow, to fund such studies.
(d) The traffic study shall contain, but not be limited to, the
following information:
[1] A general site description. The site description shall
include the size, location, proposed land uses, construction
staging and completion date of the proposed land
development.
[2] A transportation facilities description. The description
shall contain a full documentation of the proposed internal
and existing external transportation system which borders
the land development. This description shall include all
proposed ingress and egress locations, all internal
roadway widths and rights-of-way, parking conditions,
traffic channelizations and any traffic signals or other
intersection control devices within the land development
site.
[3] Existing traffic conditions.
[a] Existing traffic conditions shall be measured and
documented on all streets and intersections within the
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:388
study area. Traffic volume shall be recorded for
existing average daily traffic; existing peak-hour
traffic counts at all major intersections within the
study area, encompassing the peak highway and
development-generated hours; and documentation
shall be included in the report. Study area is to be
approved by the Borough Engineer. A volume/capacity
analysis based upon existing volume shall be
performed during the peak hours and the peak
development-generated hours for all roadways and
major intersections within the study area.
[b] This analysis will determine the adequacy of the
existing roadway system to serve the current traffic
demand. Roadways and/or intersections experiencing
level of service "E" or "F" shall be noted as congestion
locations. Levels of service shall be as defined by the
2000 Highway Capital Manual Special Report 209,
and any subsequent amendments, and shall be
incorporated by reference into this section as the
standard for a level-of-service determination.
[c] This analysis shall also examine and determine the
adequacy of off-street parking spaces and loading
zones for the public streets which border the proposed
land development. The analysis shall make
recommendations as to the adequacy of parking
spaces and loading zones and whether or not
additional parking spaces and loading zones should be
created by the Borough or the applicant based upon
the effect that the land development may have on
traffic flow which borders the subdivision or land
development.
[4] Analysis of transportation impact.
[a] The total future traffic demand based on full
occupancy of the proposed subdivision or land
development shall be calculated. This demand shall
consist of the combination of the existing traffic
expanded to the completion year, the developmentgenerated
traffic and traffic generated by other
proposed developments in the study area. A volume/
capacity analysis shall also be conducted using the
total future demand and the future roadway capacity.
If staging of the proposed development is anticipated,
calculations for each stage of completion shall be
made. Ten-year projections are also required for the
build and rebuild conditions. These analyses shall be
performed using the peak highway hour(s) and peak
development-generated hour(s) for all streets and
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:389
major intersections in the study area. Volume/capacity
calculations shall be completed for all major
intersections. The level-of-service data must be
presented in a matrix format.
[b] All access points and pedestrian crossings shall be
examined as to the feasibility of installing traffic
signals. This evaluation shall compare the projected
traffic and pedestrian volumes to the warrants for
traffic signal installation. Levels of service for all
streets and intersections shall be listed.
[5] Conclusions and recommended improvements.
[a] All streets and/or intersections which border the
subdivision or land development which shall be
considered deficient shall be analyzed by the engineer,
and special recommendations for the elimination of
these problems shall be listed.
[b] The listing of recommended improvements for the
streets in and bordering a subdivision or land
development shall include, for each improvement, the
party responsible for the improvement, the cost and
funding of the improvement and the completion date
of the improvement.
[c] The Planning Commission shall review the traffic
study and analyze its adequacy in solving any traffic
problems that will occur due to the subdivision and/or
land development and make recommendations to
Borough Council.
[d] Borough Council may decide that certain
improvements for the streets in and bordering the
subdivision or land development are required for
preliminary/final plan approval and may attach these
conditions to the preliminary/final approval.
(7) Parking lot dimensions. Parking lot dimensions shall be no less than
those listed in the following table:
Parking Stall
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of
Parking
Depth
(feet)
Width
(feet) One-Way Two-Way
90° 18 9 24 24
60° 18 9 18 20
45° 18 9 16 20
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:390
Parking Stall
Aisle Width
(feet)
Angle of
Parking
Depth
(feet)
Width
(feet) One-Way Two-Way
Parallel 22 8 16 20
(8) Off-street parking. Required off-street parking spaces shall be free
and unencumbered by another parking space unless otherwise
approved by the Borough.
(9) Subgrade drains. In low areas of roads and in areas of high water
table or springs, suitable subgrade drains shall be provided,
subject to the approval of the Borough Engineer. Subgrade drains
shall conform to the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408 and
shall be provided with a suitable outlet into a fixed-pipe storm
sewer system.
(10) Sealer. The edge of the wearing course adjacent to curbs, inlets,
manholes, water valves and other appurtenances shall be sealed
with hot bituminous material of the class and type designated for
the wearing course, extending 12 inches from the curb or other
surface. Class AET, E-6 or E-8 emulsified asphalt may be used in
place of hot bituminous material.
(11) Trench backfill. Backfilling of all trenches shall be in accordance
with the requirements of PennDOT Publication 408. When the
trench is within the pavement of an existing street or is within the
limits of a proposed street pavement, the backfill material shall be
2RC coarse aggregate, as specified in PennDOT Publication 408.
Stone backfill is not required if the bituminous concrete base
course is not placed for at least three months from the time the
trench is backfilled and binder or wearing course paving is not
placed for at least six months from the time the trench is backfilled.
(12) Guide rail. All guide rails shall be installed in accordance with
Section 620 of PennDOT Publication 408 and PennDOT's Standards
for Roadway Construction RC-52.
(13) Repairs shall be made to the same specifications as new paving.
Repairs shall be done neatly and shall be sealed at the joint with
hot bituminous material. The seal is to be at least 12 inches wide
and is to be coated with sand or screening.
C. Sanitary sewers. In all new subdivisions all lots must be provided with
adequate means of sewage disposal by one of the following:
(1) Connection to the public sewage disposal system.
(2) Individual on-lot disposal systems in accordance with minimum
standards of the Pennsylvania Department of Environmental
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:391
Protection, only when the connection to the public system is not
possible.
D. Water system. In all subdivisions all lots must be provided with an
adequate supply of water by means of one of the following methods:
(1) Connection to the public water supply system.
(2) Individual on-lot water system, only when connection to the public
system is not possible.
E. Fire hydrants. Wherever a public water supply system is provided, fire
hydrants shall be installed within 600 feet of all existing and proposed
structures, measured along accessible streets.
F. Storm drainage. Storm sewers, culverts and related installations shall
be provided to permit the unimpeded flow of natural watercourses, to
ensure the drainage of all low points along the line or streets, and to
intercept stormwater runoff along streets at intervals reasonably
related to the extent and grade of the area drained.
G. Street signs. Street signs shall be placed at all street intersections.
Their design shall be approved by the Borough Planning Commission
and Borough Council.
H. Lighting requirements.151
(1) Purposes. This subsection is enacted for the following purposes:
(a) To establish requirements for outdoor lighting installations
which promote public safety and welfare during the nighttime
while minimizing the adverse effects of glare and light
trespass;
(b) To prohibit outdoor lighting installations which are of
excessive intensity and/or are deficient of photometric control
such that the resulting glare and light trespass create a
nuisance on neighboring properties and roadways;
(c) To promote outdoor lighting installations which serve to
enhance the nighttime safety and enjoyment of the community;
and
(d) To set forth outdoor lighting requirements which are
consistent with lighting industry standards and practices and
available technologies.
(2) Applicability. The requirements shall apply to the following outdoor
lighting installations:
151. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:392
(a) Outdoor lighting installations which are newly designed,
constructed, erected or otherwise placed into operation after
the effective date of this subsection.
(b) Alterations, rehabilitations or renovations to existing outdoor
lighting installations which are commenced after the effective
date of this subsection and which involve the complete
replacement of an existing lighting system with a new lighting
system.
(c) Whenever a new outdoor light fixture replaces an outdoor light
fixture that existed on the effective date of this subsection, the
new fixture must meet the standards of this subsection.
(d) Streetlights are to be provided. The developer shall be
responsible for making necessary arrangements with the
Borough and the Pennsylvania Power and Light Company.
(e) Parking lots for all non-single-family residential lots shall be lit
to provide safe use.
(3) Nonapplicability. The requirements of this subsection shall not
apply to nor be retroactive to existing outdoor lighting installations
which began operation before the effective date of this subsection.
Routine maintenance of said existing outdoor lighting installations
shall not be required to comply with the requirements of this
subsection. Routine maintenance activities include the following:
(a) Replacement of lamps that are burned-out or inoperative.
(b) Replacement/repair of damaged or inoperative fixture
components such as ballasts, ignitors, lenses, reflectors,
refractors, sockets, or photocell controls.
(4) Adoption by reference.
(a) Unless superseded by requirements listed in this subsection,
the IESNA Lighting Handbook, most recent edition, as
published by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America (IESNA), shall be a reference for lighting standards.
(b) Unless superseded by requirements listed in this subsection,
the American National Standard Nomenclature and Definitions
for Illuminating Engineering, most recent edition, as published
by the Illuminating Engineering Society of North America
(IESNA) and approved by the American National Standards
Institute, Inc. (ANSI), and referred to in this subsection as "the
ANSI/IESNA lighting definitions," shall be a reference for
lighting standards.
(5) Design calculations in accordance with the IESNA Lighting
Handbook. In addition to the specific requirements established in
this subsection, the design calculations for outdoor lighting
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:393
installations shall be in accordance with the IESNA Lighting
Handbook. This includes, but is not limited to, technical definitions,
terminology, calculation methods and procedures, photometric
classifications, and photometric testing procedures. Illuminance
selection should be based on the usage of the area to be
illuminated, the level of activity, and nighttime security
requirements.
(6) Performance standards.
(a) Any lighting used to illuminate an off-street parking area or
other structure or area shall be arranged so as to deflect light
away from any adjoining property or from the public street.
The light source shall be downcast, hooded, shielded or
controlled so as not to light adjacent property in excess of the
levels noted below.
(b) Use of full cutoff fixtures required. All fixtures employed in
outdoor lighting installations shall be the full cutoff fixture
type.
(c) Fixtures which do not meet the strict definition for full cutoff
fixtures, yet employ advanced or alternative technology which
causes the photometric performance to approach that of full
cutoff fixtures may be approved by the Borough, on a case-bycase
basis.
(d) Illumination levels. Outdoor lighting, where required by this or
any other applicable ordinance or provided on property within
the Borough, shall be provided within the range of permitted
lighting levels as specified in the following table.
Required Lighting Levels
(footcandles)
Use Minimum Average MaximumUniformity
Residential offstreet
parking
lots
0.2 0.8 3.0 6:1
Nonresidential
off-street
parking lots
0.2 0.8 3.0 6:1
Off-street
loading areas
2.0 10 20 6:1
Building
entrances and
signs
0.5 NA 2.0 4:1
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:394
Required Lighting Levels
(footcandles)
Use Minimum Average MaximumUniformity
Building,
facades and
features
0 NA 5 4:1
NOTE:
As recommended by the IESNA.
(e) Intensity. No light source or combination thereof which casts
light on a public street shall exceed a meter reading of one
footcandle as measured from the center line of said street, nor
shall any light source or combination thereof which casts light
on adjacent residential property or open space exceed 0.1
footcandle as measured at the property line or one footcandle
on an adjacent nonresidential property of similar use.
(f) Method of measuring light intensity. The footcandle level of a
light source shall be taken after dark with the light meter held
six inches above the ground with the meter facing the light
source. A reading shall be taken with the light source on, then
with the light source off. The difference between the two
readings will be identified as the illumination intensity.
(g) Height. The maximum height above the ground grade
permitted for light sources mounted on a pole is 20 feet. A light
source mounted on a building shall not exceed the height of the
face of the building to which it is attached, and no light sources
shall be located on the roof unless said light enhances the
architectural features of the building.
(h) Hours. Outdoor lighting which serves commercial or industrial
uses that do not operate after dark must be turned off 1/2 hour
after closing, except for approved security lighting. For those
commercial or industrial uses that offer services after dark,
outdoor lighting may be utilized during the nighttime hours,
provided the commercial or industrial use is open for service.
Once the commercial or industrial use closes, the outdoor
lighting must be turned off one hour after closing except for
security lighting.
(i) Security lighting. In all zones, exterior lighting of a building
and/or grounds for security surveillance purposes is permitted.
Such lighting shall be arranged and of sufficient illumination to
enable the detection of suspicious movement rather than the
recognition of definitive detail.
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:395
(j) Illumination under outdoor canopies. Under-canopy lighting
shall be accomplished using flat-lens full-cutoff fixtures aimed
straight down and shielded in such a manner that the lowest
opaque edge of the fixture shall be below the light source at all
lateral angles. The illumination in the area directly below the
canopy shall not exceed 20 average footcandles and the
maximum shall not exceed 30 footcandles. Outdoor canopies
include, but are not limited to, the following applications:
[1] Fuel island canopies associated with service stations and
convenience stores.
[2] Exterior canopies above storefronts in shopping centers
and malls.
[3] Exterior canopies above driveways and building
entrances.
[4] Pavilions and gazebos.
(k) Billboards and signs. The lighting of new, or replacement of
lighting systems of existing, billboards and signs shall be
subject to the following requirements:
[1] Externally illuminated billboards and signs shall have
fixtures mounted at the top of the billboard or sign and
aimed downward. The fixtures shall be designed, fitted and
aimed to shield the source from off-site view and to place
the light output onto the billboard or sign and not to
project their output into the windows of neighboring
residences, adjacent uses, past the face of the billboard or
sign, skyward or onto a public roadway. At no point on the
face of the sign or billboard and at no time shall the
illumination exceed 30 vertical footcandles during
nighttime.
[2] The maximum illumination on the face of an externally
illuminated billboard or sign shall not exceed 30
footcandles and shall have a maximum-to-minimum
uniformity ratio not to exceed 4:1.
[3] Rotating, traveling, pulsing, flashing, animated,
"marching" or oscillating light sources, lasers, beacons or
strobe lighting shall not be permitted except within the
Highway Commercial (HC) and Shopping Center (SC)
Zones and not within 200 feet of a signalized traffic
intersection, a residential use or an R-1, R-2 Zone.
[4] Signs incorporating LCD, LED, plasma, CRT, pixilated
lights or other animated and/or video-like displays shall be
limited to the HC and SC Zones.
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-29
1:396
[5] The use of highly reflective signage that creates nuisance
glare or a safety hazard shall not be permitted.
[6] Applications for the lighting or relighting of signs and
billboards shall be accompanied by catalog cuts of
proposed fixtures and any glare-reduction devices, and a
description of lamps, mounting locations, aiming angles
and proposed hours of operation, and method for
automatically extinguishing the lighting.
(l) Outdoor recreation. The nighttime illumination of outdoor
recreational facilities for baseball, basketball, soccer, tennis,
track and field, football or similar sports necessitates higher
than normally allowed fixture mounting heights and aiming
angles, utilizes very high-wattage lamps. The following
requirements shall apply to the lighting of outdoor recreation
facilities:
[1] Lighting shall be accomplished only through the use of
fixtures conforming to IESNA cutoff criteria, or as
otherwise approved by the Borough based on suitable
control of glare and light trespass.
[2] No outdoor recreation facility, whether public or private,
shall be illuminated after 11:00 p.m.
[3] Maximum mounting heights for recreational lighting shall
be 90 feet, unless approved by the Borough Council.
(7) Prohibitions. No searchlights, flashing lights or lights that may
cause a hazard by impairing driver's vision shall be permitted.
(8) Submission of lighting plans. Where site lighting is required by this
subsection or required by the Borough or proposed by the applicant
(except in the case of lighting on an individual residential
property), lighting plans shall be submitted for review and
approval. The submission shall contain the following in addition to
other required data:
(a) Plans indicating the location on the premises, and the type of
illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports, reflectors and
other devices.
(b) Description of illuminating devices, fixtures, lamps, supports,
reflectors and other devices, and the description may include,
but is not limited to, catalog cuts by manufacturers and
drawings (including sections, where required; the angle of the
cutoff or light emissions, etc.).
(c) A point-by-point illuminance-grid plot on ten-feet-by-ten-feet
centers (or as necessary for suitable legibility) of footcandles
overlaid on the site plan, plotted out to 0.0 maintained
§ 390-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-29
1:397
footcandles, which demonstrates compliance with the light
trespass, illuminance and uniformity requirements.
(d) When landscaping plans are involved, they shall contain the
lighting fixture locations and shall demonstrate that the site
lighting and landscaping have been coordinated to minimize
conflict between vegetation and intended light distribution,
both initially and at vegetation maturity.
(e) When requested by the Borough, the applicant shall also
submit a visual impact plan that demonstrates appropriate
steps have been taken to mitigate the potential consequences
of on-site and off-site glare. This plan may require the inclusion
of footcandle values at specific off-site locations (e.g., bedroom
windows of adjacent residential uses, street center lines, etc.).
(f) Required plan notes. The following notes shall appear on the
lighting plan:
[1] "Post-approval alterations to lighting plans or intended
substitutions for approved lighting equipment shall be
submitted to the Borough for review and approval."
[2] "The Borough reserves the right to conduct postinstallation
nighttime inspections to verify compliance
with the requirements of this subsection and as otherwise
agreed upon by the Borough and, if appropriate, to require
remedial action at no expense to the Borough."
(9) Exemptions. The standards of this subsection shall not apply to the
following:
(a) Temporary holiday lighting. This subsection does not prohibit
the use of temporary outdoor lighting during customary
holiday seasons.
(b) Civic event lighting. This subsection does not prohibit the use
of temporary outdoor lighting used for civic celebrations and
promotions.
(c) Lighting fixtures and standards required by the Federal
Communications Commission, Federal Aviation
Administration, or other federal, state, county or municipal
agencies, to include streetlights within the public right-of-way.
(d) Outdoor lighting fixtures required by law enforcement, fire and
rescue, or other emergency response agencies to perform
emergency or construction repair work or to perform
nighttime road construction.
I. Street trees. Trees and landscaping in accord with the requirements of
§ 390-25 shall be planted.
§ 390-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-30
1:398
§ 390-30. Improvement guarantee procedure.
A. Before the Borough Council approves any final plan and as a
prerequisite for approval, the developer shall deliver to the Borough
Council a performance guarantee in the amount of 110% of the cost of
completion of all improvements required by this chapter, estimated as
of 90 days following the date scheduled for completion by the
developer. Annually, the Borough may adjust the amount of the
performance guarantee by comparing the actual cost of the
improvements which have been completed and the estimated cost for
completion of the remaining improvements as of the expiration of the
90th day after either the original date scheduled for completion or a
rescheduled date of completion. Subsequent to said adjustment, the
Borough may require the developer to post additional security in order
to assure that the financial security equals 110%. Any additional
security shall be posted by the developer in accordance with this
subsection.
B. The amount of financial security required shall be based upon an
estimate of the cost of completion of the required improvements,
submitted by the developer and prepared by a professional engineer
licensed as such in the commonwealth and certified by such engineer to
be a fair and reasonable estimate of such cost. The Borough, upon
recommendation of the Borough Engineer, may refuse to accept such
estimate for good cause shown. If the developer and the Borough are
unable to agree upon the estimate, then the estimate shall be
recalculated and recertified by another professional engineer licensed
as such in this commonwealth and chosen mutually by the Borough and
the developer. The estimate certified by the third engineer shall be
presumed fair and reasonable and shall be the final estimate. In the
event that a third engineer is so chosen, fees for the services of said
engineer shall be paid equally by the Borough and the developer.
C. If the developer requires more than one year from the date of posting of
the performance guarantee to complete the required improvements,
the amount of the performance guarantee may be increased by an
additional 10% for each one-year period beyond the first anniversary
date from posting of the performance guarantee or to an amount not to
exceed 110% of the cost of completing the required improvements as
reestablished on or about the expiration of the preceding one-year
period by using the above bidding procedure.
D. The stated period for completion of the improvements shall not be
longer than two years from the date of final subdivision approval. Upon
written application signed by both the obligor and the surety of a
performance guarantee in a form approved by the Borough Solicitor,
the Borough Council may, at its discretion, extend such period by not
more than two years by formal resolution. In the event of default under
the performance guarantee, the proceeds of the performance
guarantee received by the Borough shall be used to construct and
install the improvements. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
§ 390-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-30
1:399
§ 390-31. Approval of improvements and release of performance
guarantee by the Borough Council.
E. Before the Borough Council approves any final plan and as a
prerequisite for approval, the developer shall deliver to the Borough
Council a maintenance guarantee in an amount of not less than 15% of
the Borough Engineer's estimate of the cost of all improvements
required by this chapter, guaranteeing that the developer shall
maintain all such improvements in good condition for a period of one
year after completion of construction and installation of all such
improvements and approval of all such improvements by the Borough
Council.152
A. As the work of installing the required improvements proceeds, the
developer may request the Borough Council to release or authorize the
release, from time to time, of such portions of the performance
guarantee necessary for payment to the contractor(s) performing the
work. Any such request shall be in writing addressed to the Borough
Council, and the Borough Council shall have 45 days from receipt of
such request within which to allow the Borough Engineer to certify, in
writing, to the Borough Council that such portion of the work upon the
improvements has been completed in accordance with the final
subdivision approval. Upon such certification, the Borough Council
shall authorize release by the bonding company or lending institution of
an amount as estimated by the Borough Engineer fairly representing
the value of the improvements completed. The Borough Council may,
prior to final release at the time of completion and certification by its
Engineer, require retention of 10% of the estimated cost of the
aforesaid improvements. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
B. Nothing herein, however, shall be construed as limitation of the
developer's right to contest or question, by legal proceedings or
otherwise, any determination of the Borough Council or the Borough
Engineer.
C. General improvement construction standards.153
(1) All improvements shall be provided, constructed and installed by
the developer as stated in the improvements agreement, as shown
on the approved plans, and in accordance with the standards of this
or other Borough ordinances.
(2) Prior to construction, the contractor shall secure all necessary
permits from the Borough and outside agencies, if required by law.
(3) All material and equipment shall be new when installed and in good
condition prior to approval by the Borough. All material and
152. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
153. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-30 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-31
1:400
equipment shall be purchased for the subdivision or land
development and not leased.
(4) Compliance with all state and federal and/or local regulations and
rules regarding the safety of all the people on the construction site
is the developer's responsibility.
(5) The Borough and/or its agents, employees or consultants have no
control over the actual construction of improvements and cannot
stop improvement construction even if it is proceeding improperly.
The construction methods, procedures and safety precautions are
the developer's or contractor's responsibility.
(6) Shop drawings shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer for
approval, when requested, in order to ascertain that the materials
that the developer proposes to use comply with applicable
requirements.
(7) Survey cut sheets shall be submitted to the Borough Engineer at
least three working days prior to the start of any construction for
which control of line and grade is required. Work shall not
commence until the cut sheets are approved by the Borough
Engineer.
(8) Not more than 100 feet of trench shall be excavated in advance of
pipe or utility installation and backfilling. All trenches shall be
closed at the end of each working day, or appropriate safety
precautions shall be taken to guard against accidents or collapse of
trench walls.
(9) Any erosion or sinkholes which exist within any public street or
right-of-way shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Borough.
Eroded areas and/or sinkholes may not be filled with construction
waste materials or any other type of debris.
(10) All construction activities shall be limited to the project site. Any
debris, erosion, material or activity which extends beyond this limit
must be removed, cleaned and/or repaired within 24 hours and to
the satisfaction of the Borough.
(11)Working hours. Usual working hours of 7:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. shall
be observed. Work beyond these times will require Borough
approval.
(12) Traffic control. Any temporary traffic controls required to make
improvements on, within or adjacent to a Borough street shall
require seven-day prior notice and review and approval by the
Borough. Any temporary traffic controls required to make
improvements on, within or adjacent to a state highway shall
require PennDOT review and approval and notification to the
Borough.
§ 390-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-31
1:401
D. In the event that any improvements which may be required have not
been provided per this chapter or in accord with the approved final
plan, the Borough Council is hereby granted the power to enforce any
corporate bond or other security by appropriate legal and equitable
remedies. If proceeds of such bonds or other security are insufficient to
pay the cost of installing or making repairs or corrections to all the
improvements covered by said security, the Borough Council may, at its
option, install part of such improvements in all or part of the subdivision
or land development and may institute appropriate legal or equitable
action to recover the monies necessary to complete the remainder of
the improvements. All of the proceeds, whether resulting from the
security or from any legal equitable action brought against the
developer, or both, shall be used solely for the installation of the
improvements covered by such security and not for any other Borough
purpose.
§ 390-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-31
1:402
ARTICLE VII
Administration
§ 390-32. Enactment of Subdivision and Land Development
Ordinance.154
§ 390-33. Enactment of amendment.155
§ 390-34. Publication, advertisement and availability of
ordinance.156
A. Before voting on the enactment of a proposed Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance, the Borough Council shall hold a public
hearing thereon pursuant to public notice. A brief summary setting
forth the principal provisions of the proposed ordinance and a reference
to the place within the Borough where copies of the proposed ordinance
may be secured or examined shall be incorporated in the public notice.
Unless the proposed Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
shall have been prepared by the Planning Commission, the Borough
Council shall submit the ordinance to the Planning Commission at least
45 days prior to the hearing on such ordinance to provide the Planning
Commission an opportunity to submit recommendations. The Borough
shall submit the proposed ordinance to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission at least 45 days prior to the public hearing on the
ordinance.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of any amendment to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
A. Amendments to this chapter shall become effective only after a public
hearing held pursuant to public notice in the manner prescribed for
enactment of a proposed ordinance by this chapter. In addition, in case
of an amendment other than that prepared by the Planning
Commission, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment
to the Planning Commission for recommendations at least 30 days prior
to the date fixed for the public hearing on such proposed amendment.
The Borough, at least 30 days prior to the hearing on the amendment,
shall submit the proposed amendment to the Lehigh Valley Planning
Commission for recommendations.
B. Within 30 days after adoption, the Borough Council shall forward a
certified copy of any amendment to the Subdivision and Land
Development Ordinance to the Lehigh Valley Planning Commission.
154. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
155. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I);
this ordinance also deleted former § 22-702, Revision and Amendment, amended
9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566.
156. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-34
1:403
§ 390-35. Fees. [Amended 9-17-1990 by Ord. No. 566]
A. Proposed subdivision and land development ordinances and
amendments shall not be enacted unless notice of proposed enactment
is given in the manner set forth in this section and shall include the time
and place of the meeting at which passage will be considered, a
reference to a place within the Borough where copies of the proposed
ordinance or amendment may be examined without charge or obtained
for a charge not greater than the cost thereof. The Borough Council
shall publish the proposed ordinance or amendment once in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough not more than 60 days
nor less than seven days prior to passage. Publication of the proposed
ordinance or amendment shall include either the full text thereof or the
title and a brief summary, prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting
forth all the provisions in reasonable detail. If the full text is not
included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library or other county office designated by the
County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that
necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
B. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment before voting upon enactment, the Borough
Council shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail together with a
summary of the amendments.
C. Subdivision and land development ordinances and amendments may be
incorporated into official ordinance books by reference with the same
force and effect as if duly recorded therein.
A. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a collection
procedure and schedule of fees to be paid by the developer at the time
of filing of the feasibility, preliminary and final plans, to defray the cost
to the Borough of the reasonable and necessary charges by the
Borough's professional consultants and Engineer for review and report
on the plan(s).
B. The Borough Council shall establish, by resolution, a schedule for
reimbursement by the developer of the Borough for the reasonable and
necessary expenses incurred for inspection of improvements in
connection with release of the performance guarantee.
C. No final plan shall be approved unless all fees and charges are paid in
full.
§ 390-34 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-36
1:404
§ 390-36. Water supply.157
Every ordinance adopted pursuant to Article V (Subdivision and Land
Development) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code158 shall
include a provision that, if water is to be provided by means other than by
private wells owned and maintained by the individual owners of lots within
the subdivision and land development, applicants shall present evidence
to the Borough Council or Planning Commission, as the case may be,
that the subdivision or development is to be supplied by a certified public
utility, a bona fide cooperative association of lot owners, or by a municipal
corporation, authority or utility. A copy of the certificate of public
convenience from the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission or an
application for such certificate, a cooperative agreement or a commitment
or agreement to serve the area in question, whichever is appropriate, shall
be acceptable evidence.
§ 390-37. Preventive remedies.159
A. In addition to other remedies, the Borough may institute and maintain
appropriate actions by law or in equity to restrain, correct or abate
violations, to prevent unlawful construction, to recover damages and to
prevent illegal occupancy of a building, structure or premises. The
description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
documents used in the process of selling or transferring shall not
exempt the seller or transferor from such penalties or from the
remedies herein provided.
B. The Borough may refuse to issue any permit or grant any approval
necessary to further improve or develop any real property which has
been developed or which has resulted from a subdivision of real
property in violation of any ordinance adopted pursuant to this chapter.
This authority to deny such a permit or approval shall apply to any of
the following applicants:
(1) The owner of record at the time of such violation.
(2) The vendee or lessee of the owner of record at the time of such
violation, without regard as to whether such vendee or lessee had
actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(3) The current owner of record who acquired the property subsequent
to the time of violation, without regard as to whether such current
owner had actual or constructive knowledge of the violation.
(4) The vendee or lessee of the current owner of record who acquired
the property subsequent to the time of violation, without regard as
to whether such vendee or lessee had actual or constructive
157. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
158. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10501 et seq.
159. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 390-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-37
1:405
§ 390-38. Jurisdiction.160
Magisterial District Judges shall have initial jurisdiction in proceedings
brought under § 390-39, Enforcement remedies.
§ 390-39. Enforcement remedies.161
knowledge of the violation. As an additional condition for issuance
of a permit or the granting of an approval to any such owner,
current owner, vendee or lessee for the development of any such
real property, the Borough may require compliance with the
conditions that would have been applicable to the property at the
time the applicant acquired an interest in such real property.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated the
provisions of any subdivision or land development ordinance enacted
under this chapter or prior enabling laws shall, upon being found liable
therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding commenced by the Borough,
pay a judgment of not more than $500 plus all court costs, including
reasonable attorneys' fees incurred by the Borough as a result thereof.
No judgment shall commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the
date of the determination of the violation by the Magisterial District
Judge. If the defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment,
the Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules
of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem judgment pending a final
adjudication of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
160. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).[??]
161. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I);
this ordinance also deleted former § 22-708, Violations and Penalties, amended 9-17-1990
by Ord. No. 566.
§ 390-37 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-39
1:406
ARTICLE VIII
Appendixes
§ 390-40. Appendix A — Application Forms. (Reserved)
§ 390-41. Appendix B — Storm Drainage Runoff Calculation.
A. Rational formula. The rational formula used in calculating runoff is Q =
CIA. In this equation, Q is the peak runoff in cubic feet per second, C is
the runoff coefficient which depends on the nature of the land cover, I is
the intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for a duration equal to the
time of concentration for the drainage area involved, and A is the
watershed area in acres. The time of concentration is the time required
for runoff from the upper reaches of the watershed to reach the point
for which runoff rates are being calculated.
B. Values of coefficient (C). Runoff coefficients used in the rational formula
shall be based on the guidelines in the following table and acceptable to
the Borough Engineer:
Runoff Coefficients for the Rational Method
Type of Drainage Area Coefficient
Commercial
Downtown (also shopping centers) 0.70 to 0.95
Neighborhood (also mixed residential and
commercial)
0.50 to 0.70
Residential
Urban
Single-family 0.30 to 0.50
Multi units 0.40 to 0.80
Suburban, single-family 0.25 to 0.40
Garden apartments 0.50 to 0.70
Playgrounds 0.20 to 0.70
Industrial 0.50 to 0.90
Railroad yards 0.20 to 0.35
Parks, cemeteries, golf courses 0.15 to 0.30
Unimproved, with vegetation 0.10 to 0.30
Character of Surface Coefficient
Pavement
Concrete or bituminous concrete 0.75 to 0.95
Surface treated roadway 0.65 to 0.80
Gravel, earth, other 0.75 to 0.95
§ 390-40 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-41
1:407
Character of Surface Coefficient
Roofs 0.75 to 0.95
Lawns, sandy soil
Flat, 2% or less 0.05 to 0.10
Average, 2% to 7% 0.10 to 0.15
Steep, 7% or more 0.15 to 0.20
Lawns, heavy soil
Flat, 2% or less 0.13 to 0.17
Average, 2% to 7% 0.18 to 0.22
Steep, 7% or more 0.25 to 0.35
Woods, heavy brush
Gravel 0.15 to 0.35
Sandy soil 0.15 to 0.30
Clay soil 0.25 to 0.60
Bare, cultivated or light growth
Gravel 0.20 to 0.40
Sandy soil 0.15 to 0.30
Clay soil 0.35 to 0.75
NOTE: Lower portions of ranges apply to flat slopes and open soils;
higher portions apply to steeper slopes and tight or shallow soils.
C. Values of rainfall intensity (I). Rainfall intensities to be used in the
rational formula are as follows:
Frequency of Storm
(years)
Time
Concentration
(minutes) 5 10 25 100
5 5.9 6.5 7.4 9.0
10 4.8 5.4 6.0 7.4
15 4.0 4.6 5.2 6.4
20 3.6 4.0 4.5 5.6
25 3.1 3.6 4.0 5.0
30 2.8 3.2 3.6 4.5
35 2.5 2.9 3.3 4.1
40 2.3 2.6 3.0 3.8
45 2.1 2.4 2.8 3.5
§ 390-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-41
1:408
Frequency of Storm
(years)
Time
Concentration
(minutes) 5 10 25 100
50 2.0 2.2 2.6 3.3
55 1.8 2.1 2.5 3.1
60 1.7 2.0 2.4 2.9
D. Average velocities for overland flow. Engineers use several methods to
determine the time of concentration for the drainage area in question.
Seeley's Nomograph is reproduced here. The average velocities for
overland flow presented in PennDOT's Design Manual are also widely
used to determine the time of concentration. Any method acceptable to
the Borough Engineer may be used.
§ 390-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-41
1:409
§ 390-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-41
1:410
NOTES:
The example shown involves a two-hundred-foot flow length over an
average grass surface with a slope of 4%. The time concentration is
found to be 15 minutes.
SOURCE: Elywn e. Seeley, Data Book for Civil Engineers, Volume One:
Design, 3rd Edition, (New York, John Wiley and Sons Inc., 1960)
E. Manning's equation.
(1) Manning's equation to determine the velocity of flow in open
channels and closed drains not under pressure is listed below. The
second equation is used to determine the capacity after the velocity
has been determined.
v = velocity in feet per second
n = coefficient of roughness
a = cross-sectional area of flow in square feet
p = wetter perimeter, the length of the line of contact between
the water and the bottom and sides of the channel of pipe
around the cross section in feet
s = slope of the channel or pipe in feet per foot
q = capacity of the channel or pipe in cubic feet per second
(2) The coefficient of roughness used shall be as follows, unless
different coefficients are approved by the Borough Engineer.
0.015 for concrete pipes and paved channels
0.021 for corrugated metal pipes
0.035 for earth ditches
§ 390-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-41
1:411
0.040 for vegetated channels.
F. Maximum stream velocities in open channels.
Material
Maximum Velocity
(feet per second)
Well-established grass on good soil
Short pliant bladed grass 4 to 5
Bunch grass — soil exposed 2 to 4
Stiff stemmed grass 2 to 3
Earth without vegetation
Fine sand or silt 1 to 2
Ordinary firm loam 2 to 3
Stiff clay 3 to 5
Clay and gravel 4 to 5
Course gravel 4 to 5
Soft shale 5 to 6
Other
Bituminous or cement stabilized
channels
6
Paved channels 10 to 15
§ 390-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 390-41
1:412
Chapter 399
SWIMMING POOLS
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Sewers — See Ch. 338.
Water — See Ch. 438.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
§ 390-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 390-41
1:413

ARTICLE I
Private Swimming Pools
[Adopted 10-2-1962 by Ord. No. 382]
§ 399-1. Requirements for private swimming pools.
It shall be unlawful to construct, maintain, operate and/or use any private
swimming pool within the Borough's limits except in compliance with all
of the provisions of this article and of the Hellertown Zoning Ordinance,
Chapter 450 of the Code.
§ 399-2. Definitions.
For the purposes of this article, certain terms as used herein shall have the
meanings given as follows:
PRIVATE — All pools which are used or intended to be used as swimming
pools in connection with residences and available only to the family of the
householder and his private guests; it shall not include any swimming pool
that is open to the public or that is publicly owned; or that is owned and/or
operated by any organization, partnership, corporation or group, whether
or not formed solely for such ownership and operation; or that is otherwise
regulated by any statutes or by rules and regulations other than those of the
Borough of Hellertown.
PUBLIC or SEMIPUBLIC — Any pool other than a private swimming pool.
SWIMMING POOL — Any receptacle or artificially constructed private pool
for water having a walled depth of two feet or more at any point within
its perimeter, intended or adapted for the purposes of immersion or partial
immersion of human beings therein, and including all appurtenant
equipment.
§ 399-3. Permits required.
A. Before any construction, including structural alterations or partial or
complete relocation, is begun on any swimming pool, a permit shall be
applied for and obtained from the Building Inspector and the Zoning
Administrator of the Borough as provided for in the existing Hellertown
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 450), as amended to the date of such
application or issuance of a permit. Each application for a permit to
construct, erect or place a private swimming pool upon a lot occupied
by a private dwelling shall be accompanied by the following data, in
triplicate:
(1) Plot plan, drawn to a scale of one inch equals 10 feet, showing all
existing structures, including location of proposed pool. Accurate
distances or measurements shall be shown. Scaling of dimensions
is not permitted.
(2) Specifications showing or describing details of construction.
§ 399-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-3
1:415
§ 399-4. Location, construction and maintenance of private
swimming pools; fence or barrier required.
(3) Cross sections showing pool dimensions, including depths and
volume in gallons.
(4) Type and size of filter system, filtration and backwash capacities.
(5) Pool piping and fitting sizes and indicating types of materials to be
used.
(6) Rated capacity of pool pump in gallons per minute, head dimension
and size and type of motor, pressure or head for filtration or backwashing
purposes.
(7) Electric wiring layout.
B. Before any permit shall be issued such plans and specifications shall be
approved as aforesaid by both the Building Inspector and the Zoning
Officer or his designee and also by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer, and before any completed swimming pool is put into use it shall
be subject to final inspection and approval by both the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer.
C. Each application for a permit shall be accompanied by a permit fee in
an amount to be established, from time to time, by resolution of
Borough Council.162
D. All permits issued hereunder shall be issued under and subject to the
same regulations, including time limitations, as govern the issuance of
building permits under said Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 450).
A. Yard requirements.
(1) Front yard. No swimming pool, pool fixture or any portion of either
shall be located within the front yard of any premises, as the term
"front yard" is defined in the prevailing Hellertown Borough Zoning
Ordinance (Chapter 450).
(2) Rear yard. No swimming pool, pool fixture or any portion of either
shall be located less than eight feet from any rear property line.
(3) Side yard(s). No swimming pool, pool fixture or any portion of
either shall be located less than the applicable distance as set forth
in the following table, said minimum side yard setback distances
predicated upon the total width of the premises at which the
swimming pool is proposed to be located: [Amended 7-17-1989
by Ord. No. 562]
162. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 399-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 399-4
1:416
Total Lot Width
(feet)
Minimum Required Distance
(feet)
Less than 25 4, each side
25 to 31 6, each side
More than 31 8, each side
B. The entire water surface area of the completed swimming pool shall be
computed and included as "lot coverage," as the same is defined in the
Hellertown Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 450), as land taken up by
buildings, and the limit of such total building area established in that
Zoning Ordinance (Chapter 450).
C. No exposed electric wires shall be located within five feet of the water's
edge, nor shall any exposed permanently installed electric wires within
a horizontal distance of 25 feet of the water's edge shall be located less
than 10 feet above ground level, nor shall wires of any kind cross or be
located over or above the water surface, except as approved by the
Building Inspector. Underwater lighting shall be accomplished by
methods approved for such purposes. The entire electrical installation
shall comply with and be maintained in accordance with the
requirements of the Uniform Construction Code (Chapter 160).
D. There shall be no cross-connections of the Borough water supply with
any other source of water supply for the swimming pool. The line from
the Borough water supply to the pool shall be connected through a
water meter which has been installed and approved by the Borough of
Hellertown Water Authority and protected against backflow of polluted
water by means of an air gap and shall discharge at least six inches
above the maximum high-water level of the make-up tank or the pool.
E. Swiming pool drain line. The pool drain must be connected to an
available sanitary sewer, subject to the approval of the Borough
Engineer.163
F. The swimming pool shall be constructed in such a manner that all scum,
splash and deck water shall not be permitted to be returned to the pool
except through the filter system.
G. The pool shall be kept free at all times of floating material, sediment
and debris by means of an automatic surface skimmer, scum gutter or
some other method approved by the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer.
H. The recirculating system shall have a capacity sufficient to accomplish
the filtering and recirculating of the entire volume content of the pool
during an eighteen-hour period. The maximum rate of application of
163. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 399-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-4
1:417
§ 399-5. Installation of filtration systems in existing private
swimming pools.
All existing swimming pools which at the present time have no filtration
system shall be required to make installation thereof as provided herein and
to have same approved by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer within 60
days after final passage of this article.
§ 399-6. Inspections.
The Zoning Officer or his designee, Building Inspector and Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall have the right at any reasonable time to inspect
any swimming pool for the purposes of determining that all of the provisions
of this article are fulfilled and complied with.
§ 399-7. Interpretation.
This article is in no way intended to amend or alter any existing Borough
ordinance or state statute the provisions of which are not covered in this
article.
§ 399-8. Violations and penalties; abatement of nuisances.
[Amended 12-30-1964 by Ord. No. 321]
pool water on the filters shall be five gallons per minute per square foot
of filter area.
I. Provision shall be made for positive germicidal or bacterial control by
the use of chlorine, bromine or such other disinfecting agents or
devices as may be approved by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer.
Such disinfecting agents shall be so adjustable as to keep the
germicidal or bacterial protection of the water in the pool equal to a
standard of from 0.5 to 1.0 parts per million of chlorine residual.
Testing devices capable of accurately measuring such residual shall be
provided by the pool owner.
J. All swimming pools to be constructed, or which already have been
constructed, shall be enclosed by a fence which shall be a minimum of
four feet and a maximum of six feet in height and shall be of such type
or construction that is not readily climbed or scaled by small children.
Gates shall be of a self-closing and -latching type, with the latch on the
inside (i.e., pool side) of the gate; provided, however, that, if the entire
yard in which the pool is or is to be located is enclosed by fencing and
gating which meet the above cited requirements, then the pool itself
need not be so fenced/gated. Provided further, however, that should the
pool be of the type that provides an integral fence around the entire
combing (i.e., top rim of the pool wall), together with a ladder or steps
that can be removed or is hinged and can be locked in an upright
position so as to restrict access to the water surface, then neither the
pool perimeter fencing nor the yard fencing shall be required.
[Amended 7-17-1989 by Ord. No. 562]
§ 399-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 399-8
1:418
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this article continues or each section of this article which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.164
B. In addition, any improper or incorrect installation, operation,
maintenance or use in violation of the provisions of this article shall also
constitute a nuisance and the Borough may, in addition to the penal
provisions hereof, cause the abatement of such nuisance by means of
proper court action.
164. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 399-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 399-8
1:419
Chapter 405
TAXATION
§ 399-8 HELLERTOWN CODE § 399-8
1:420
ARTICLE I
Fire Service Appropriations Tax
[Adopted 12-31-1987 by Ord. No. 553]
§ 405-1. Title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Hellertown Borough
Fire Service Appropriations Tax Ordinance."
§ 405-2. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed in them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. Words used in
the present tense include the future; the singular includes the plural and
vice versa; masculine shall include the feminine gender. Use of the term
"shall" indicates a mandate and is directory; "may" implies permissiveness.
PERSON — Every natural individual, partnership, corporation, association,
unincorporated association, firm, enterprise or any other entity whatsoever
which is recognized by law as being subject to the rights and duties of an
individual.
REAL ESTATE —
§ 405-3. Purpose of tax and levy.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough of
Hellertown, including, without limitation, buildings, structures,
fixtures, mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without
upper or lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables
or interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
A. The purpose of this tax shall be for the purchase of fire engines, fire
apparatus and fire hose for the use of the Borough, or for assisting
Dewey Fire Company in the Borough in the purchase, renewal or repair
of any of its fire engines, fire apparatus or fire hose, or for the purposes
of making appropriations to Dewey Fire Company for fire protection
and for the purpose of maintenance of the Dewey Fire Company
firehouse.
B. For the purposes set forth above, a tax is hereby levied on all real estate
located, either in whole or in part, within the corporate boundaries of
the Borough of Hellertown, and to include, without limitation or
reservation, all real estate as is subject to taxation for general Borough
§ 405-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-3
1:421
§ 405-4. Notice of tax liability.
The Borough of Hellertown shall give notice of tax liability to all persons
who own real estate against which this tax is levied at the same time and in
the same manner as notice of tax liability is given with respect to real estate
taxation for general Borough purposes.
§ 405-5. Duplicate constitutes warrant for collection.
The entry of said Fire Service Appropriations Tax in the tax duplicate and
issuance of said duplicate to the Borough Tax Collector shall constitute the
Tax Collector's warrant for the collection of said tax levied and assessed.
§ 405-6. Collection by Borough Tax Collector.
The fire service appropriations tax shall be collected by the duly appointed
Tax Collector of the Borough of Hellertown in the same manner and at the
same time or times as the tax levied against real estate for general Borough
purposes.
§ 405-7. Tax Collector's accounts and records; remittance of taxes
collected to Borough Treasurer.
The Tax Collector shall keep an accurate account of all fire service
appropriation taxes collected by authority of this article. He shall mark the
same "paid" on each duplicate at the name of each taxable and the date
on which payment was made. The Tax Collector shall transmit said taxes
so collected to the Treasurer of the Borough of Hellertown, by separate
statement, at the same time as other taxes are remitted to said Treasurer.
It shall be the duty and responsibility of said Treasurer to ensure that the
taxes so collected are applied only for the purposes for which they are levied
and collected pursuant to the terms of this article; to wit appropriations
to the Dewey Fire Company, to assist said company in its provision of fireprotection
and -suppression services.
§ 405-8. Violations and penalties.
purposes as may exist currently or which may be so subject to taxation
in the future. The rate of this Fire Service Appropriations Tax shall
be 1.50 mills on each dollar of assessed valuation. The tax shall be in
addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore levied by the
Borough of Hellertown. [Amended 12-6-2010]
A. If for any reason the tax is not paid prior to the penalty date, a penalty
of 10% shall be added to the flat rate of said tax for nonpayment
thereof, together with the maximum rate of interest on the unpaid
balance, which shall be accrued from the due date.
B. In the event that any tax due under this article remains due and unpaid
60 days after the penalty date established, the Tax Collector may sue for
the recovery of any such tax due or unpaid under this article, together
§ 405-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-8
1:422
§ 405-9. Effective date of tax; continuation thereof.
with penalty, and interest. Where suit is brought for recovery of this
tax, the person liable therefor shall, in addition to the tax, interest
and penalties, be responsible and liable for all costs of collection and
prosecution.
A. This fire service appropriations tax shall be levied in accordance with
the terms of this article for the calendar year 1988.
B. The Council of the Borough of Hellertown shall have the authority to
continue said tax for additional periods at a rate not to exceed three
mills on each dollar of assessed valuation pursuant to the adoption of a
resolution of said Council.
§ 405-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-9
1:423

ARTICLE II
Realty Transfer Tax
[Adopted 11-20-2006 by Ord. No. 701]
§ 405-10. Short title.
This article shall be known as the "Realty Transfer Tax Ordinance of the
Borough of Hellertown."
§ 405-11. Authority.
A realty transfer tax for general revenue purposes is hereby imposed upon
the transfer of real estate or interest in real estate situated within the
Borough of Hellertown, regardless of where the documents making the
transfer are made, executed or delivered, or where the actual settlements
on such transfer took place as authorized by Article XI-D, Local Real Estate
Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq.
§ 405-12. Definitions.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
ASSOCIATION — A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned or conducted by two or more persons
other than a private trust or decedent's estate.
CORPORATION — A corporation, joint-stock association, business trust,
or banking institution which is organized under the laws of this
commonwealth, the United States, or any other state, territory, foreign
country or dependency.
DOCUMENT — Any deed, instrument or writing which conveys, transfers,
demises, vests, confirms or evidences any transfer or demise of title to
real estate, but does not include wills, mortgages, deeds of trust or other
instruments of like character given as security for a debt and deeds of
release thereof to the debtor, land contracts whereby the legal title does not
pass to the grantee until the total consideration specified in the contract has
been paid or any cancellation thereof unless the consideration is payable
over a period of time exceeding 30 years, or instruments which solely grant,
vest or confirm a public utility easement. "Document" shall also include a
declaration of acquisition required to be presented for recording.
FAMILY FARM CORPORATION — A corporation of which at least 75% of its
assets are devoted to the business of agriculture and at least 75% of each
class of stock of the corporation is continuously owned by members of the
same family. The business or agriculture shall not be deemed to include:
Recreational activities, such as, but not limited to, hunting, fishing,
camping, skiing, show competition or racing;
A.
§ 405-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-12
1:425
LIVING TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust, intended as a will
substitute by the settler which becomes effective during the lifetime of the
settler which becomes effective during the lifetime of the settler, but from
which trust distributions cannot be made to any beneficiaries other than the
settler prior to the death of the settler.
MEMBERS OF THE SAME FAMILY — Any individual, such individual's
brothers and sisters, the brothers and sisters of such individual's parents
and grandparents, the ancestors and lineal descendants of any of the
foregoing, and the estate of any of the foregoing. Individuals related by the
half-blood or legal adoption shall be treated as if they were related by the
whole-blood.
ORDINARY TRUST — Any trust, other than a business trust or a living
trust, which takes effect during the lifetime of the settler and for which
the trustees of the trust take title to property primarily for the purpose
of protecting, managing or conserving it until distribution to the named
beneficiaries of the trust. An ordinary trust does not include a trust that
has an objective to carry on business and divide gains, nor does it either
expressly or impliedly have any of the following features: the treatment of
beneficiaries as associates, the treatment of the interests in the trust as
personal property, the free transferability of beneficial interests in the trust,
centralized management by the trustee or the beneficiaries, or continuity of
life.
PERSON — Every natural person, association or corporation. Whenever
used in any clause prescribing and imposing a fine or imprisonment, or
both. The term "person," as applied to associations, shall include the
responsible members or general partners thereof and, as applied to
corporations, the officers thereof.
REAL ESTATE —
The raising, breeding or training of game animals or game birds, fish,
cats, dogs or pets or animals intended for use in sporting or
recreational activities;
B.
C. Fur farming;
D. Stockyard and slaughterhouse operations; or
E. Manufacturing or processing operations of any kind.
All lands, tenements or hereditaments within this Borough of
Hellertown, including without limitation buildings, structures, fixtures,
mines, minerals, oil, gas, quarries, spaces with or without upper or
lower boundaries, trees and other improvements, immovables or
interests which by custom, usage or law pass with a conveyance or
land, but excluding permanently attached machinery and equipment in
an industrial plant.
A.
B. A condominium unit.
§ 405-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-12
1:426
REAL ESTATE COMPANY — A corporation or association which is primarily
engaged in the business of holding, selling or leasing real estate, 90% or
more of the ownership interest in which is held by 35 or fewer persons, and
which:
TITLE TO REAL ESTATE —
TRANSACTION — The making, executing, delivering, accepting or
presenting for recording of a document.
VALUE —
A tenant-stockholder's interest in a cooperative housing corporation,
trust or association under a proprietary lease or occupancy agreement.
C.
Derives 60% or more of its annual gross receipts from the ownership or
disposition of real estate; or
A.
Holds real estate, the value of which comprises 90% or more of the
value of its entire tangible asset holdings exclusive of tangible assets
which are freely transferable and actively traded on an established
market.
B.
Any interest in real estate which endures for a period of time, the
termination of which is not fixed or ascertained by a specific number of
years, including without limitation an estate in fee simple, life estate, or
perpetual leasehold; or
A.
Any interest in real estate enduring for a fixed period of years but
which, either by reason of the length of the term or the grant of a
right to extend the term by renewal or otherwise, consists of a group
of rights approximating those of an estate in fee simple, life estate or
perpetual leasehold, including without limitation a leasehold interest or
possessory interest under a lease or occupancy agreement for a term of
30 years or more or a leasehold interest or possessory interest in real
estate in which the lessee has equity.
B.
In the case of any bona fide sale of real estate at arm's length for
actual monetary worth, the amount of the actual consideration therefor,
paid or to be paid, including liens or other encumbrances thereon
existing before the transfer and not removed thereby, whether or not
the underlying indebtedness is assumed, and ground rents or a
commensurate part thereof where such liens or other encumbrances
and ground rents also encumber or are charged against other real
estate, provided that where such documents shall set forth a nominal
consideration, the value thereof shall be determined from the price set
forth in or actual consideration — for the contract of sale;
A.
In the case of a gift, sale by execution upon a judgment or upon the
foreclosure of a mortgage by a judicial officer, transactions without
consideration less than the actual monetary worth of the real estate,
a taxable lease, an occupancy agreement, a leasehold or possessory
interest, any exchange of properties, or the real estate of an acquired
B.
§ 405-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-12
1:427
§ 405-13. Imposition of tax; interest.
company, the actual monetary worth of the real estate determined by
adjusting the assessed value of the real estate for local real estate
tax purposes for the common level ratio factor developed by the
Pennsylvania Department of Revenue for Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax base calculations;
In the case of an easement or other interest in real estate, the value of
which is not determinable under Subsection A or B, the actual monetary
worth of such interest; or
C.
The actual consideration for or actual monetary worth of any executory
agreement for the construction of buildings, structures or other
permanent improvements to real estate between the grantor and other
persons existing before the transfer and not removed thereby or
between the grantor, the agent or principal of the grantor of a related
corporation, association or partnership and the grantee existing before
or effective with the transfer.
D.
A. The Borough of Hellertown adopts the provisions of Article XI-D, Local
Real Estate Transfer Tax, 72 P.S. § 8101-D et seq., (Tax Reform Code of
1971) and imposes a realty transfer tax authorized under that article,
subject to the rate limitations therein. The tax imposed under this
section shall be at a rate set forth in Subsection C.
B. The tax imposed under Subsection A and all applicable interest and
penalties shall be administered, collected and enforced under the Act of
December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), as amended, known as "The
Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq., provided that, if the
correct amount is not paid by the last date prescribed in 72 P.S.
§ 8102-C for timely payment, the Borough of Hellertown, pursuant to 72
P.S. § 8102-D of the Local Real Estate Transfer Tax (Tax Reform Code of
1971), authorizes and directs the Department of Revenue of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania to determine, collect and enforce the
tax, interest and penalties. Whenever a declaration is required to be
filed under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., a declaration is also required to be
filed under this article.
C. Every person who makes, executes, delivers, accepts or presents for
recording any document or in whose behalf any document is made,
executed, delivered, accepted or presented for recording shall be
subject to pay for, in respect to the transaction or any part thereof, a tax
at the rate of 1% of the value of the real estate represented by such
document, which tax shall be payable at the earlier of the time the
document is presented for recording or within 30 days of acceptance of
such document or within 30 days of becoming an acquired company.
D. The payment of the tax imposed herein shall be evidenced by the
affixing of an official stamp or writing by the Recorder of Deeds,
§ 405-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-13
1:428
§ 405-14. Exempt parties.
The United States, the commonwealth, or any of their instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions shall be exempt from payment of the tax
imposed by this article. The exemption of such governmental bodies shall
whereon the date of the payment of the tax, amount of the tax and the
signature of the collecting agent shall be set forth.
E. It is the intent of this article that the entire burden of the tax imposed
herein on a person or transfer shall not exceed the limitations
prescribed in the Local Tax Enabling Act, Act of December 31, 1965,
P.L. 1257, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.312, so
that if any other political subdivision shall impose or hereafter shall
impose such tax on the same person or transfer then the tax levied by
the Borough of Hellertown under the authority of that Act shall during
the time such duplication of the tax exists, except as hereinafter
otherwise provided, be 1/2 of the rate and such 1/2 rate shall become
effective without any action on the part of the Borough of Hellertown;
provided, however, that the Borough of Hellertown and any other
political subdivision which impose such tax on the same person or
transfer may agree that, instead of limiting their respective rates to 1/2
of the rate herein provided, they will impose respectively different
rates, the total of which shall not exceed the maximum rate permitted
under "The Local Tax Enabling Act."
F. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate in
effect at the time the tax is due, shall be added and collected. Any tax
imposed under this section that is not paid by the date the tax is due
shall bear interest as prescribed for interest on delinquent municipal
claims under the Act of May 16, 1923 (P.L. 207, No. 153) (53 P.S. § 7101
et seq.), as amended, known as "The Municipal Claims and Tax Liens
Act." The interest rate shall be the lesser of the interest rate imposed
upon delinquent commonwealth taxes as provided in Section 806 of the
Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) (72 P.S. § 806), as amended,
known as "The Fiscal Code," or the maximum interest rate permitted
under the Municipal Claims and Tax Liens Act for tax claims.
G. Disbursements. The tax, interest and penalty that the Department of
Revenue collects under this article shall be remitted in the manner
provided by law to the appropriate recorder of deeds along with the
state tax payment imprint receipt which shall provide sufficient
information for the Recorder of Deeds to determine which political
subdivision are entitled to the collection. The recorder of deeds shall
record the state tax payment imprint receipt whether or not signed and
acknowledged by the Department of Revenue and shall index in the
grantor/grantee index to the original document upon which the tax has
been paid. The Department shall collect from the taxpayer, as part of its
determination process, the county recording fee for the state tax
payment imprint receipt.
§ 405-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-14
1:429
not, however, relieve any other party to a transaction from liability for the
tax.
§ 405-15. Excluded transactions.
The tax imposed by § 405-13 shall not be imposed upon:
A. A transfer to the commonwealth, or to any of its instrumentalities,
agencies or political subdivisions, by gift, dedication or deed in lieu of
condemnation or deed of confirmation in connection with condemnation
proceedings, or a reconveyance by the condemning body of the
property condemned to the owner of record at the time of
condemnation which reconveyance may include property fine
adjustments, provided said reconveyance is made within one year from
the date of condemnation.
B. A document which the Borough of Hellertown is prohibited from taxing
under the Constitution or statutes of the United States.
C. A conveyance to a municipality, township, school district or county
pursuant to acquisition by the municipality, township, school district or
county of a tax delinquent property at sheriff sale or tax claim bureau
sale.
D. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration which corrects or
confirms a transfer previously recorded but which does not extend or
limit existing record legal title or interest.
E. A transfer of division in kind for no or nominal actual consideration of
property passed by testate or intestate succession and held by
cotenants; however, if any of the parties take shares greater in value
than their undivided interest, tax is due on the excess.
F. A transfer between husband and wife; between persons who were
previously husband and wife who have since been divorced, provided
the property or interest therein subject to such transfer was acquired
by the husband and wife or husband or wife prior to the granting of the
final decree in divorce; between parent and child or the spouse of such
child; between brother or sister or spouse of a brother or sister; and
between a grandparent and grandchild or the spouse of such
grandchild, except that a subsequent transfer by the grantee within one
year shall be subject to tax as if the grantor were making such transfer.
G. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration of property passing by
testate or intestate succession from a personal representative of a
decedent to the decedent's devisee or heir.
H. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of an
ordinary trust where the transfer of the same property would be exempt
if the transfer was made directly from the grantor to all of the possible
beneficiaries, whether or not such beneficiaries are contingent or
specifically named. No such exemption shall be granted unless the
§ 405-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-15
1:430
Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the trust instrument that
clearly identifies the grantor and all possible beneficiaries.
I. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration to a trustee of a living
trust from the settler of the living trust. No such exemption shall be
granted unless the Recorder of Deeds is presented with a copy of the
living trust instrument.
J. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of an
ordinary trust to a specifically named beneficiary that is entitled to
receive the property under the recorded trust instrument or to a
contingent beneficiary where the transfer of the same property would
be exempt if the transfer was made by the grantor of the property into
the trust to that beneficiary. However, any transfer of real estate from a
living trust during the settler's lifetime shall be considered for the
purposes of this article as if such transfer were made directly from the
settler to the grantee.
K. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from a trustee of a
living trust after the death of the settler of the trust or from a trustee of
a trust created pursuant to the will of decedent to a beneficiary to
whom the property is devised or bequeathed.
L. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from the trustee of a
living trust to the settler of the living trust if such property was
originally conveyed to the trustee by the settler.
M. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration from trustee to
successor trustee.
N. A transfer for no or nominal actual consideration between principal and
agent or straw party or from or to an agent or straw party where, if the
agent or straw party were his principal, no tax would be imposed under
this article. Where the document by which title is acquired by a grantee
or statement of value fails to set forth that the property was acquired by
the grantee from, or for the benefit of, his principal, there is a
rebuttable presumption that the property is the property of the grantee
in his individual capacity if the grantee claims an exemption from
taxation under this clause.
O. A transfer made pursuant to the statutory merger or consolidation of a
corporation or statutory division of a nonprofit corporation, except
where the Department reasonably determines that the primary intent
for such merger, consolidation or division is avoidance of the tax
imposed by this article.
P. A transfer from a corporation or association of real estate held of record
in the name of the corporation or association where the grantee owns
stock of the corporation or an interest in the association in the same
proportion as his interest in or ownership of the real estate being
conveyed and where the stock of the corporation or the interest in the
association has been held by the grantee for more than two years.
§ 405-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-15
1:431
Q. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee of property conveyed by the grantee to that agency or
authority as security for a debt of the grantee, or a transfer to a
nonprofit industrial development agency or authority.
R. A transfer from a nonprofit industrial development agency or authority
to a grantee purchasing directly from it, but only if: (i) the grantee shall
directly use such real estate for the primary purpose of manufacturing,
fabricating, compounding, processing, publishing, research and
development, transportation, energy conversion, energy production,
pollution control, warehousing or agriculture; and (ii) the agency or
authority has the full ownership interest in the real estate transferred.
S. A transfer by a mortgagor to the holder of a bona fide mortgage in
default in lieu of a foreclosure, or a transfer pursuant to a judicial sale
in which the successful bidder is the bona fide holder of a mortgage,
unless the holder assigns the bid to another person.
T. Any transfer between religious organizations or other bodies or persons
holding title for a religious organization if such real estate is not being
or has not been used by such transferor for commercial purposes.
U. A transfer to a conservancy which possesses a tax-exempt status
pursuant to Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954,
68A Stat. 3, 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3), and which has as its primary purpose
preservation of land for historic, recreational, scenic, agricultural or
open space opportunities,
V. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm corporation by a member of the same family which directly
owns at least 75% of each class of the stock thereof.
W. A transfer of real estate devoted to the business of agriculture to a
family farm partnership by a member of the same family, which family
directly owns at least 75% of the interests in the partnership.
X. A transfer between members of the same family of an ownership
interest in a real estate company or family farm corporation or family
farm partnership which owns real estate.
Y. A transaction wherein the tax due is $1 or less.
Z. Leases for the production or extraction of coal, oil, natural gas or
minerals and assignments thereof. In order to exercise any exclusion
provided in this section, the true, full and complete value of the transfer
shall be shown on the statement of value. A copy of the Pennsylvania
realty transfer tax statement of value may be submitted for this
purpose. For leases of coal, oil, natural gas or minerals, the statement
of value may be limited to an explanation of the reason each document
is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 405-15 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-16
1:432
§ 405-16. Documents relating to associations or corporations and
members, partners, stockholders or shareholders thereof.
Except as otherwise provided in § 405-15, relating to executed transaction,
documents which make, confirm or evidence any transfer or demise of
title to real estate between associations or corporations and the members,
partners, shareholders or stockholders thereof are fully taxable. For the
purposes of this article, corporations and associations are entities separate
from their members, partners, stockholders or shareholders.
§ 405-17. Acquired company.
§ 405-18. Credits against tax.
A. A real estate company is an acquired company upon a change in the
ownership interest in the company, however effected, if the change
does not affect the continuity of the company; and of itself or together
with prior changes has the effect of transferring, directly or indirectly,
90% or more of the total ownership interest in the company within a
period of three years.
B. With respect to real estate acquired after February 16, 1986, a family
farm corporation is an acquired company when, because of voluntary or
involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm corporation or
when, because of issuance or transfer of stock or because of acquisition
or transfer of assets that are devoted to the business of agriculture, it
fails to meet the minimum requirements of a family farm corporation
under this Act.
C. A family farm partnership is an acquired company when, because of
voluntary or involuntary dissolution, it ceases to be a family farm
partnership or when, because of transfer of partnership interests or
because of acquisition or transfer of assets that are devoted to the
business of agriculture, it fails to meet the minimum requirements of a
family farm partnership under this act.
D. Within 30 days after becoming an acquired company, the company shall
present a declaration of acquisition with the recorder of each county in
which it holds real estate for the affixation of documentary stamps and
recording. Such declaration shall set forth the value of real estate
holdings of the acquired company in such county. A copy of the
Pennsylvania Realty Transfer Tax Declaration of Acquisition may be
submitted for this purpose.
A. Where there is a transfer of a residential property by a licensed real
estate broker which property was transferred to him within the
preceding year as consideration for the purchase of other residential
property, a credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the
transfer to him shall be given to him toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
§ 405-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-18
1:433
§ 405-19. Extension of lease.
In determining the term of a lease, it shall be presumed that a right or
option to renew or extend a lease will be exercised if the rental charge
to the lessee is fixed or if a method for calculating the rental charge is
established.
§ 405-20. Proceeds of judicial sale.
The tax herein imposed under this article shall be fully paid and have
priority out of the proceeds of any judicial sale of real estate before any
other obligation, claim, lien, judgment, estate or costs of the sale and of the
writ upon which the sale is made. The Sheriff or other officer conducting
said sale shall pay the tax imposed under this article out of the first moneys
paid to the Sheriff or officer in connection therewith. If the proceeds of the
sale are insufficient to pay the entire tax herein imposed under this article,
the purchaser shall be liable for the remaining tax.
§ 405-21. Duties of Recorder of Deeds.
B. Where there is a transfer by a builder of residential property which was
transferred to the builder within the preceding year as consideration
for the purchase of new, previously unoccupied residential property, a
credit for the amount of the tax paid at the time of the transfer to the
builder shall be given to the builder toward the amount of the tax due
upon the transfer.
C. Where there is a transfer of real estate which is devised by the grantor,
a credit for the amount of tax paid at the time of the devise shall be
given the grantor toward the tax due upon the transfer.
D. Where there is a conveyance by deed of real estate which was
previously sold under a land contract by the grantor, a credit for the
amount of tax paid at the time of the sale shall be given the grantor
toward the tax due upon the deed.
E. If the tax due upon the transfer is greater than the credit given under
this section, the difference shall be paid. If the credit allowed is greater
than the amount or tax due, no refund or carry-over credit shall be
allowed.
A. As provided in 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended by Act of July 7, 1983 (P.L.
40, No. 21), the Recorder of Deeds shall be the collection agent for the
Borough of Hellertown levying a local realty transfer tax under this
article. The Recorder of Deeds shall pay tax, interest and penalties
collected under this article over to the Borough of Hellertown in
accordance with 16 P.S. § 11011-6, as amended, including any amount
payable to the Borough of Hellertown based on a redetermination of the
amount of tax due by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania of the
Pennsylvania realty transfer tax, without compensation from the
Borough of Hellertown.
§ 405-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-21
1:434
§ 405-22. Statement of value.
Every document lodged with or presented to the Recorder of Deeds for
recording shall set forth therein and as a part of such document the true,
full and complete value thereof or shall be accompanied by a statement
of value executed by a responsible person connected with the transaction
showing such connection and setting forth the true, full and complete value
thereof or the reason, if any, why such document is not subject to tax under
this article. A copy of the Pennsylvania realty transfer tax statement of
value may be submitted for this purpose. The provisions of this subsection
shall not apply to any excludable real estate transfers which are exempt
from taxation based on family relationship. Other documents presented
for the affixation of stamps shall be accompanied by a certified copy of
the document and statement of value executed by a responsible person
connected with the transaction showing such connection and setting forth
the true, full and complete value thereof or the reason, if any, why such
document is not subject to tax under this article.
§ 405-23. Civil penalties.
B. In order to ascertain the amount of taxes due when the property is
located in more than one political subdivision, the Recorder shall not
accept for recording such a deed unless it is accompanied by a
statement of value showing what taxes are due each municipality.
C. On or before the 10th of each month, the Recorder of Deeds shall pay
over to the Borough of Hellertown all local realty transfer taxes
collected, less 2% for use of the County, together with a report
containing the information as is required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania in reporting collections of the Pennsylvania realty transfer
tax. The Recorder of Deeds shall pay the 2% withheld to the County. The
County shall obtain and pay the premiums or premiums on any bond or
bonds necessary to cover the performance of the Recorder of Deeds'
duties under this subsection.
D. Upon a redetermination of the amount of realty transfer tax due, the
deed shall be recorded or the additional realty transfer tax form shall be
recorded, at the option of the Recorder of Deeds, but the Recorder of
Deeds shall rerecord the deed or record the additional realty transfer
tax form only when both state and local amounts payable and a fee to
cover the costs of rerecording or recording have been tendered.
A. If any part of any underpayment of tax imposed by this article is due to
fraud, there shall be added to the tax an amount equal to 50% of the
underpayment,
B. In the case of failure to record a declaration required under this article
on the date prescribed thereof, unless it is shown that such failure is
due to reasonable cause, there shall be added to the tax 5% of the
amount of such tax if the failure is for not more than one month, with an
§ 405-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-23
1:435
§ 405-24. Lien.
additional 5% for each additional month or fraction thereof during
which such failure continues, not exceeding 50% in the aggregate.
A. Any tax that the Department of Revenue determines to be due under
this article and remains unpaid after demand for the same, and all
penalties and interest thereon, shall be a lien in favor of the affected
political subdivision upon the property, both real and personal, of the
person but only after the lien has been entered and docketed of record
by the prothonotary of the county where such property is situated.
B. Actions of prothonotaries.
(1) At any time after it makes a determination of additional tax, penalty
or interest under this article, the Department may transmit to the
prothonotaries of the respective counties certified copies of all
liens for the taxes, penalties and interest under this article or
copies of all liens under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., and this article on
a single form.
(2) A prothonotary receiving the lien shall enter and docket the lien on
record in the prothonotary's office, which lien shall be indexed as
judgments are now indexed.
(3) After the Department's determination becomes final, a writ of
execution may directly issue upon the lien without the issuance and
prosecution to judgment of a writ of scire facias, provided that, not
less than 10 days before issuance of any execution of the lien,
notice shall be sent by certified mail to the taxpayer at the
taxpayer's last know post office address. No prothonotary shall
require as a condition precedent to the entry of the liens the
payment of any costs incident thereto.
C. Priority of lien.
(1) The lien imposed under this section shall have priority from the
date of its recording and shall be fully paid and satisfied out of the
proceeds of any judicial sale of property subject thereto before any
other obligation, judgment, claim, lien or estate to which the
property may subsequently become subject, except costs of the sale
and of the writ upon which the sale was made, and real estate taxes
and municipal claims against such property, but shall be
subordinate to mortgages and other liens existing and duly
recorded or entered of record prior to the recording of the tax lien.
(2) In the case of a judicial sale of property subject to a lien imposed
under this section, upon a lien or claim over which the lien has
priority, the sale shall discharge the lien to the extent only that the
proceeds are applied to its payment, and the lien shall continue in
full force and effect as to the balance remaining unpaid.
§ 405-23 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-24
1:436
§ 405-25. Refunds.
§ 405-26. Information.
Notwithstanding the provisions of any other act, the Officer of the Borough
of Hellertown imposing a local real estate transfer tax or the authorized
representative of the Officer may divulge to the Department of Revenue
information concerning the administration or collection of local real estate
transfer tax authorized by this article.
§ 405-27. Regulations.
The Borough of Hellertown is charged with enforcement and collection of
the tax. The regulations which have been promulgated by the Pennsylvania
Department of Revenue under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq., are incorporated into
and made a part of this article.
§ 405-28. Documentary stamps.
§ 405-29. Failure to affix stamps.
No document upon which tax is imposed under this article shall at any
time be made the basis of any action or other legal proceeding, nor shall
D. A lien imposed under this article shall be equal in priority to the lien
imposed under 72 P.S. § 8101-C et seq.
A. Whenever the amount due upon determination, redetermination or
review is less than the amount paid on account thereof, the political
subdivisions shall refund the difference.
B. Where there has been no determination of unpaid tax, application for
refund shall be made to the political subdivision in the manner
prescribed by the Act of December 31, 1965 (P.L. 1257, No. 511), 53 P.S.
§ 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.312, known as "The Local
Tax Enabling Act," and 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8421 et seq. (relating to the Local
Taxpayers Bill of Rights), or as otherwise provided by law.
A. The payment of the tax imposed under this article shall be evidenced by
the affixing of a documentary stamp or stamps to every document by
the person making, executing, delivering or presenting for recording
such document. The stamps shall be affixed in such manner that their
removal will require the continued application of steam or water, and
the person using or affixing the stamps shall write, stamp or cause to be
written or stamped thereon the initials of that person's name and the
date upon which the stamps are affixed or used so that the stamps may
not again be use, provided that the Department of Revenue may
prescribe such other method of cancellation as it may deem expedient.
B. The Department may, in its discretion, use documentary license meter
impressions or similar indicia of payment in lieu of stamps.
§ 405-24 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-29
1:437
proof thereof be offered or received in evidence in any court of this
commonwealth or recorded in the office of any recorder of deeds of any
county of this commonwealth unless a documentary stamp or stamps, as
provided in this article, have been affixed thereto.
§ 405-30. Determination and notice of tax review.
A. If any person fails to pay any tax imposed under this article for which
that person is liable, the Borough of Hellertown may authorize the
Department of Revenue to make a determination of additional tax,
penalty and interest due under this section by the person. The
determination will be based upon any information which is within the
possession or which will come into the possession of the Department.
The determination will be made within three years after the date of the
recording of the document, subject to the following:
(1) If the taxpayer underpays the correct amount of the tax by 25% or
more, the tax may be assessed at any time within six years after the
date of the recording of the document.
(2) If any part of an underpayment of tax is due to fraud or an
undisclosed international disregard of rules and regulations, the
full amount of the tax may be assessed at any time.
B. Notification of determination; petition for redetermination.
(1) Promptly after the date of such determination, the Department
shall send by mail a copy thereof to the person against whom it was
made. Within 90 days after the date upon which the copy of the
determination was mailed, the person may file with the Department
a petition for redetermination of the taxes.
(2) Every petition for redetermination must state specifically the
reasons which the petitioner believes to be entitled to
redetermination and shall be supported by affirmation that it is not
made for the purpose of delay and that the facts set forth therein
are true.
(3) The Department, within six months after the date of filing of a
petition for redetermination, shall dispose of the petition. Notice of
the action taken upon a petition for redetermination shall be given
to the petitioner promptly after the date of redetermination by the
Department.
C. A person shall have the right to review by the Board of Finance and
Revenue and appeal in the same manner and within the same time as
provided by law in the case of capital stock and franchise taxes imposed
upon corporations.
D. Notice of action; rights to appeal.
§ 405-29 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-30
1:438
§ 405-31. Enforcement.
All taxes imposed by this article, together with interest and penalties
prescribed herein, shall be recoverable as other debts of like character are
recovered.
§ 405-32. Savings clause.
The balance of all ordinances and resolutions relating to transfer taxes not
inconsistent herewith are hereby preserved and are incorporated herein by
reference.
(1) Notice of the action of the Board of Finance and Revenue shall be
given by mail to the Borough of Hellertown. The Borough of
Hellertown shall have the right to appeal in the same manner and
within the same time as provided by law for the commonwealth in
the case of capital stock and franchise taxes imposed upon
corporation.
(2) The Borough of Hellertown may request in writing the Office of
General Counsel to render such legal advice and such
representation as are required concerning every matter and issue
arising in connection with an appeal from a decision of the Board of
Finance and Revenue.
§ 405-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-32
1:439

ARTICLE III
Local Services Tax
[Adopted 12-3-2007 by Ord. No. 713]
§ 405-33. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Services Tax."
§ 405-34. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context or
language clearly indicates or requires a different meaning:
BOROUGH MANAGER — The Borough Manger of the Borough of
Hellertown.
BOROUGH OF HELLERTOWN — The area within the corporate limits of the
Borough of Hellertown (hereinafter "Borough" and/or "municipality")
EMPLOYER — Any individual, partnership, association, corporation,
government body, agency or other entity employing one or more persons on
a salary, wage, commission or other compensation basis, including a selfemployed
person.
FISCAL YEAR — The period beginning January 1 and ending December 31
of each year.
HE, HIS or HIM — Indicates the singular and plural number, as well as the
male, female and neuter gender.
INCOME — Includes earned income and net profits from whatever sources
within the political subdivision.
INDIVIDUAL — Any person, male or female, engaged in any occupation,
trade or profession within the corporate limits of the Borough of
Hellertown.
OCCUPATION — Any trade, profession, business or undertaking of any
type, kind or character, including services, domestic or other, carried on
or performed within the corporate limits of the Borough of Hellertown for
which compensation is charged or received, whether by means of salary,
wages, commissions or fees for services rendered.
TAX — Local services tax in the amount of $52 levied by this article.
§ 405-35. Levy.
A. For police, fire or emergency services, road construction or
maintenance or for the reduction of property taxes a tax is hereby
levied upon the privilege of engaging in an occupation within the
corporate limits of the Borough of Hellertown during the fiscal year of
2008 and all proceeding fiscal years. Each natural person who exercises
such privilege for any length of time during the year shall pay a tax in
the amount of $52 in accordance with the provisions of this article. This
§ 405-33 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-35
1:441
§ 405-36. Duty of employers.
Each employer within the Borough of Hellertown, as well as those
employers outside the Borough of Hellertown but who engage in business
within the Borough of Hellertown, is hereby charged with the duty of
collecting from each of his employees engaged by him and performing for
him within the Borough of Hellertown the said tax of $52 per annum and
making a return and payment thereof to the Borough Manager and/or the
Borough's designee authorized to act on behalf of the Borough in obtaining
said tax and forwarding any collected taxes to the Borough. Further, each
employer is hereby authorized to deduct this tax from each employee in his
employ, whether said employee is paid by salary, wages or commission, and
whether or not part or all of such services are performed within the Borough
of Hellertown. All employers shall be required to remit the local services
taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter of the calendar year.
tax is in addition to all other taxes of any kind or nature heretofore
levied by the Borough of Hellertown.
B. Restricted use. Any municipality deriving funds from the local service
tax may only use the funds for:
(1) Emergency services, which shall include emergency medical
services, police services and/or fire services.
(2) Road construction and/or maintenance.
(3) Reduction of property taxes.
(4) Property tax relief through implementation of a homestead and
farmstead exclusion in accordance with 53 Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 85
Subchapter F (relating to homestead property exclusion).
(5) The Borough shall use no less than 25% of the funds derived from
the local services tax for emergency services.
(6) In the event that the Borough decides to implement a homestead
and farmstead exclusion for purposes of providing property tax
relief, the Borough shall comply with the terms and conditions set
forth in Act 7-2007, which terms and conditions are incorporated in
this article by reference and made a part hereof.165
A. A person subject to the local services tax shall be assessed a pro rata
share of the tax for each payroll period in which the person is engaging
in an occupation. The pro rata share of the tax assessed on the person
for a payroll period shall be determined by dividing the combined rate
of the local services tax levied for the calendar year by the number of
payroll periods established by the employer for the calendar year. For
purposes of determining the pro rata share, an employer shall round
down the amount of the tax collected each payroll period to the nearest
165. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.311.
§ 405-35 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-36
1:442
1/100 of a dollar. Collection of the local services tax levied under this
section shall be made on a payroll-period basis for each payroll period
in which the person is engaging in an occupation, except as provided in
Subsection E.
B. If the Saucon Valley School District levied an emergency and municipal
services tax on the effective date of Act 7-2007, the school district may
continue to levy the local services tax in the same amount the Saucon
Valley School District collected on the effective date of Act 7-2007.
However, if the Borough of Hellertown in whole or in part within the
school district subsequently levies the local services tax, the school
district may only collect $5 on persons employed within the
municipality each calendar year. If the school district did not levy an
emergency and municipal services tax on the effective date of Act
7-2007, the school district shall be prohibited from levying the local
services tax within the Borough. If the Saucon Valley School District
and Borough of Hellertown both levy a local services tax at a combined
rate exceeding $10, the school district's pro rata share of the aggregate
local services taxes levied on persons employed within the Borough of
Hellertown shall be collected by the Borough or its tax officer based on
payroll periods as provided under Subsection A and shall be paid to the
school district on a quarterly basis within 60 days of receipt by the
municipality or its tax officer.
C. Except as provided in Subsection B, no person shall be subject to the
payment of the local services tax by more than one political subdivision
during each payroll period as established by § 405-40.
D. In the case of concurrent employment, an employer shall refrain from
withholding the local services tax if the employee provides a recent pay
statement from a principal employer that includes the name of the
employer, the length of the payroll period and the amount of the local
services tax withheld, and a statement from the employee that the pay
statement is from the employee's principal employer and the employee
will notify other employers of a change in the principal place of
employment within two weeks of its occurrence.
E. The local services tax shall be no more than $52 on each person for
each calendar year, irrespective of the number of political subdivisions
within which a person may be employed. The Borough shall provide a
taxpayer a receipt of payment upon request by the taxpayer.
F. The Borough shall adopt regulations for the processing of refund claims
for overpaid local services taxes for any calendar year. The regulations
shall be consistent with 53 Pa.C.S.A. §§ 8425 and 8426. Refunds made
within 75 days of a refund request or 75 days after the last day the
employer is required to remit the local services tax for the last quarter
of the calendar year under § 405-38 of this article, whichever is later,
shall not be subject to interest imposed under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426. The
Borough shall only provide refunds for amounts overpaid in a calendar
year that exceed $1.
§ 405-36 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-36
1:443
§ 405-37. Returns.
Each employer shall prepare and file a return showing a computation of
the tax on forms to be supplied to him by the Borough Manager or the
Borough's designee, as determined by the Borough. Each employer, in filing
this return and making payment of the tax withheld from his employees,
shall be entitled to retain a commission calculated at the rate of 2% of
the gross tax due and payable, provided that such tax is collected and
paid over by the employer on or before the dates hereinafter set forth.
It is further provided that, if the employer fails to file said return and
pay said tax, whether or not he makes collection thereof from the salary,
wages or commissions paid by him to said employee, the employer shall
be responsible for the payment of the tax, in full, without deducting a
commission and as though the tax had already been levied against him. The
Borough shall provide the taxpayer with a receipt to verify payment upon
request of the taxpayer.
§ 405-38. Dates for determining tax liability and payment.
G. For purposes of this section of the article, "combined rate" shall mean
the aggregate annual rate of the local services tax levied by a school
district and a municipality located in whole or in part within the school
district.
H. No employer shall be held liable for failure to withhold the local
services tax or for the payment of the withheld tax money to the
Borough if the failure to withhold taxes arises from incorrect
information submitted by the employee as to the employee's place or
places of employment, the employee's principal office or where the
employee is principally employed; and provided, further, that an
employee shall not be liable for payment of the local services tax in an
amount exceeding the amount withheld by the employer if the employer
complies with the provisions of §§ 405-42 and 405-36 of this article and
remits the amount so withheld in accordance with this section; and
provided, further, that employers shall be required to remit the local
services taxes 30 days after the end of each quarter of a calendar year.
A. Each employer shall use his employment records for the first day of
January to the 31st day of March 2008 for determining the number of
employees from whom said tax shall be deducted and paid over to the
Borough Manager and/or the Borough's designee on or before April 30,
2008.
B. Supplemental reports and payment of tax due thereon shall be made by
each employer on July 31, 2008; October 31, 2008 and January 31, 2009
for new employees as reflected on his employment records from April 1,
2008 to June 30, 2008, July 1, 2008 to September 30, 2008; and October
1, 2008 to December 31, 2008. Payment of tax due on these
supplemental reports shall be made on July 31, 2008; October 31, 2008
§ 405-36 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-38
1:444
§ 405-39. Self-employed individuals.
Each self-employed individual who performs services of any type of kind,
engaged in any occupation or profession within the Borough of Hellertown,
shall be required to comply with this article and pay the tax to the Borough
Manager or the Borough's designee on or before April 30, 2008, or as soon
thereafter as he engages in an occupation.
§ 405-40. Individuals engaged in more than one occupation.
§ 405-41. Employers and self-employed individuals residing beyond
the corporate limits of Borough.
All employers and self-employed individuals residing or having their place
of business outside of the Borough of Hellertown but who perform services
of any type or kind, or engage in any occupation or profession within
the Borough of Hellertown, do, by virtue thereof, agree to be bound by
and subject themselves to the provisions, penalties and regulations as
though they were residents of the Borough of Hellertown. Further, any
and January 31, 2009, respectfully. Thereafter the tax shall continue to
be enforced on a calendar-year basis.
A. Each individual who shall have more than one occupation within the
Borough of Hellertown shall be subject to the payment of this tax on his
principal occupation, and his principal employer shall deduct this tax
and deliver to him evidence of deductions on a form to be furnished to
the employer by the Borough Manager or the Borough's designee,
which form shall be evidence of deduction having been made and, when
presented to any other employer, shall be authority of such employer to
not deduct this tax from the employee's wages but to include such
employee on his return by setting forth his name, address and the name
or account number of the employer who deducted this tax.
B. In the event a person is engaged in more than one occupation, or an
occupation which requires his working in more than one political
subdivision during the calendar year, the priority of claim to collect
such local services tax shall be in the following order: First, the political
subdivision in which a person maintains his principal office or is
principally employed; second, the political subdivision in which the
person resides and works, if such a tax is levied by that political
subdivision; third, the political subdivision in which a person is
employed and which imposes the tax nearest in miles to the person's
home. The place of employment shall be determined as of the day the
taxpayer first becomes subject to the tax during the calendar year. It is
the intent of this provision that no person shall pay more than $52 in
any calendar year. In case of dispute, a tax receipt of the taxing
authority for that calendar year, declaring that the taxpayer has made
prior payment, shall constitute prima facie certification of payment to
all other political subdivisions.
§ 405-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-41
1:445
individual engaged in an occupation within the Borough of Hellertown and
an employee of a nonresident employer may, for the purpose of this article,
be considered a self-employed person, and in the event this tax is not paid,
the Borough shall have the option of proceeding against either the employer
or employee for the collection of this tax as hereinafter provided.
§ 405-42. Exemptions.
A. The Borough of Hellertown levying the local services tax shall exempt
the following person from the local services tax:
(1) Any person who served in any war or armed conflict in which the
United States was engaged and is honorably discharged or
released under honorable circumstances from active service if, as a
result of military service, the person is blind, paraplegic or a double
or quadruple amputee or has a service-connected disability
declared by the United States Veterans Administration or its
successor to be a total one-hundred-percent permanent disability.
(2) Any person who serves as a member of a reserve component of the
armed forces and is called to active duty at any time during the
taxable year.
(3) For purposes of this subsection, "reserve component of the armed
forces" shall mean the United States Army Reserve, United States
Navy Reserve, United States Marine Corps Reserve, United States
Coast Guard Reserve, United States Air Force Reserve, the
Pennsylvania Army National Guard or the Pennsylvania Air
National Guard.
(4) Any individual who derives earned income and net profits from all
sources within the Borough of Hellertown of less than $12,000 per
year from his occupation shall be exempt for the calendar year in
which the local services tax is levied.
B. A person seeking to claim an exemption from the local services tax may
annually file an exemption certificate with the Borough of Hellertown
and with the person's employer affirming that the person reasonably
expects to receive earned income and net profits from all sources within
the Borough of less than $12,000 in the calendar year for which the
exemption certificate is filed. In the event the Borough utilizes a tax
collection officer, the Borough shall provide a copy of the exemption
certificate to that officer. The exemption certificate shall have attached
to it by the employee a copy of all of the employee's last pay stubs or
W-2 forms from employment within the Borough for the year prior to
the fiscal year for which the employee is requesting to be exempted
from the local services tax. Upon receipt of the exemption certificate
and until otherwise instructed by the Borough levying the tax or except
as required Subsection C, the employer shall not withhold the tax from
the person during the calendar year or the remainder of the calendar
year for which the exemption certificate applies. Employers shall
§ 405-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-42
1:446
§ 405-43. Administration of tax.
ensure that the exemption certificate forms are readily available to
employees at all times and shall furnish each new employee with a
form at the time of hiring. The Department of Community and Economic
Development shall develop and make available to the Borough and
employers uniform exemption certificates required by this subsection
pursuant to Act 7-2007.166
C. With respect to a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar
year from the local services tax, upon notification to an employer by the
person or by the political subdivision that the person has received
earned income and net profits from all sources within that political
subdivision equal to or in excess of $12,000 in that calendar year or that
the person is otherwise ineligible for the tax exemption for that
calendar year, or upon an employer's payment to the person of earned
income within the Borough in an amount equal to or in excess of
$12,000 in that calendar year, an employer shall withhold the local
services tax from the person under Subsection D.
D. If a person who claimed an exemption for a given calendar year from
the local services tax becomes subject to the tax for the calendar year
under Subsection C, the employer shall withhold the tax for the
remainder of that calendar year. The employer shall withhold from the
person, for the first payroll period after receipt of the notification under
Subsection C, a lump sum equal to the amount of tax that was not
withheld from the person due to the exemption claimed by the person
under this subsection, plus the per-payroll amount due for that first
payroll period. The amount of tax withheld per payroll period for the
remaining payroll periods in that calendar year shall be the same
amount withheld for other employees. In the event the employment of a
person subject to withholding of the tax under this subsection is
subsequently severed in that calendar year, the person shall be liable
for any outstanding balance of tax due, and the Borough levying the tax
may pursue collection under this article.
E. Except as provided in Subsection C, it is the intent of this subsection
that employers shall not be responsible for investigating exemption
certificates, monitoring tax exemption eligibility or exempting any
employee.
A. It shall be the duty of the Borough Manager or the Borough's designee
to accept and receive payments of this tax and to keep a record thereof
showing the amount received by him from each employer or selfemployed
person, together with the date the tax was received.
B. The Borough Manager or the Borough's designee is hereby charged
with the administration and enforcement of this article and is hereby
charged and empowered to prescribe, adopt and promulgate rules and
166. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6924.311.
§ 405-42 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-43
1:447
regulations relating to any matter pertaining to the administration and
enforcement of this article, including provisions for the examination of
payroll records of any employer subject to this article; the examination
and correction of any return made in compliance with the article;
and any payment alleged or found to be incorrect or as to which
overpayment is claimed or found to have occurred, or any payment
made by a taxpayer who is engaged in a business or occupation or
businesses or occupations from which he derives less than $12,000 per
year. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Borough Manager
shall have the right to appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Northampton County as in other cases provided.
C. The Borough Manager or the Borough's designee is hereby authorized
to examine the books and payroll records of any employer in order to
verify the accuracy of any return made by an employer or, if no return
was made, to ascertain the tax due. Each employer is hereby directed
and required to give the Borough Manager the means, facilities and
opportunity for such examination.
D. The Borough Manager or Borough's designee has the authority to
collect any delinquent and/or unpaid local services tax. The Borough
Manager and/or the Borough designee shall demand, receive and
collect from all corporations, political subdivisions, associations,
companies, firms or individuals employing persons owing delinquent
local services tax or whose spouse owes delinquent local services tax,
or having in possession unpaid commissions or earnings belonging to
any person or persons owing delinquent local services tax or whose
spouse owes delinquent local services tax, upon the presentation of a
written notice and demand certifying that the information contained
therein is true and correct and containing the name of the taxable
person or the spouse thereof and the amount of tax due.
E. Upon the presentation of such written notice and demand, it shall be
the duty of any such corporation, political subdivision, association,
company, firm or individual to deduct from the wages, commissions or
earnings of such individual employees, then owing or that shall within
60 days thereafter become due, or from any unpaid commissions or
earnings of any such taxable income in its or his possession or that shall
within 60 days thereafter come into its or his possession, a sum
sufficient to pay the respective amount of the delinquent local services
tax and costs shown upon the written notice or demand, and to pay the
same to the Borough Manager or the Borough's designee of the taxing
district in which such delinquent tax was levied within 60 days after
such notice shall have been given.
F. No more than 10% of the wages, commissions or earnings of the
delinquent taxpayer or spouse thereof may be deducted at any one time
for delinquent local services tax. Such corporation, political
subdivision, association, firm or individual shall be entitled to deduct
from the moneys collected from each employee the costs incurred from
the extra bookkeeping necessary to record such transactions, not
§ 405-43 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-43
1:448
§ 405-44. Suits for collection.
§ 405-45. Violations and penalties.
Whoever makes any false or untrue statement on any return required by
this article, or who refuses inspection of his books, records or accounts in
his custody and control setting forth the number of employees subject to
this tax who are in his employment, or whoever fails or refuses to file any
return required by this article shall, upon conviction before any Magisterial
District Judge, be sentenced to pay a fine for each offense of not more than
$600 or be imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both. It is further
provided that the action to enforce the fine and penalty herein provided may
be instituted against any person in charge of the business of any employer
who has failed or refuses to file a return required by this article.
§ 405-46. Saving clause.
exceeding 2% of the amount of money so collected and paid over to the
Borough.
G. Upon the failure of any such corporation, political subdivision,
association, company, firm or individual to deduct the amount of such
taxes or to pay the same over to the Tax Collector, less the cost of
bookkeeping involved in such transaction, as herein provided, within
the time hereby required, such corporation, political subdivision,
association, firm or individual shall forfeit and pay the amount of such
tax for each such individual whose taxes are not withheld and paid over
or that are withheld and not paid over together with a penalty of 10%
added thereto, to be recovered by an action of assumpsit in a suit to be
instituted by the Tax Collector or by the proper authorities of the taxing
district as debts of like amount are now by law recoverable, except that
such person shall not have the benefit of any stay of execution or
exemption law. The Tax Collector shall not proceed against a spouse or
his employer until he has pursued collection remedies against the
delinquent taxpayer and his employer under this section.
A. In the event that any tax under this article remains due or unpaid 30
days after the due dates above set forth, the Borough Manager or the
Borough's designee may sue for the recovery of any such tax due or
unpaid under this article, together with interest and penalty.
B. If for any reason the tax is not paid when due, interest at the rate of 6%
per annum on the amount of said tax shall be calculated, beginning with
the due date of said tax, and a penalty of 5% shall be added to the flat
rate of said tax for nonpayment thereof. Where suit is brought for the
recovery of this tax, the individual liable therefor shall, in addition, be
responsible and liable for the costs of collection.
A. Nothing contained in this article shall be constructed to empower the
Borough of Hellertown to levy and collect the tax hereby imposed on
any occupation not within the taxing power of the Borough under the
§ 405-43 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-46
1:449
§ 405-47. Continuation without reenactment.
The tax imposed by this article shall continue in force on a calendar-year
basis without annual reenactment unless the rate of the tax is subsequently
changed.
Constitution of the United States and the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
B. If the tax hereby imposed under the provisions of this article shall be
held by any court of competent jurisdiction to be in violation of the
Constitution of the United States or of the laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania as to any individual, the decision of the court shall not
affect or impair the right to impose or collect said tax or the validity of
the tax so imposed on other persons or individuals as herein provided.
§ 405-46 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-47
1:450
ARTICLE IV
Earned Income Tax
[Adopted 7-5-2010 by Ord. No. 759]
§ 405-48. Definitions.
For purposes of this article, all terms defined in the Local Tax Enabling
Act, 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.312, shall have
the meanings set forth therein. In addition, the following terms shall have
the meanings set forth herein, unless the context shall clearly indicate
otherwise:
EFFECTIVE DATE — January 1, 2012.
LOCAL TAX ENABLING ACT — The Local Tax Enabling Act, 53 P.S. § 6901
et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.312, and as amended in the future,
including any regulations adopted by the Department of Community and
Economic Development thereunder.
TAX — The tax on earned income and net profits imposed by this article.
TAX OFFICER — The person or entity appointed as tax officer pursuant
to the Local Tax Enabling Act to collect the tax in the TCD (tax collection
district).
TAX RETURN — A form or forms prescribed by the Department of
Community and Economic Development, or by the Tax Officer with the
approval of the TCC (tax collection committee), for reporting the amount of
tax or other amount owed or required to be withheld, remitted or reported
under this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TAX YEAR — The period from January 1 to December 31 in a single calendar
year.
TAXPAYER — A person or business required under this article or the Local
Tax Enabling Act to file a tax return or to pay the tax.
TCC — The tax collection committee established to govern and oversee the
collection of income tax within the TCD under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
TCD — The Northampton Tax Collection District or any future tax collection
district to which the Borough or any part of the Borough is assigned under
the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 405-49. Imposition of tax.
A. General purpose resident tax. The Borough hereby imposes a tax for
general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income and net
profits of residents of the Borough.
B. General purpose municipal nonresident tax. The Borough also imposes
a tax for general revenue purposes at the rate of 1% on earned income
and net profits derived by a nonresident from any work, business,
profession or activity of any kind engaged in within the boundaries of
Borough.
§ 405-48 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-49
1:451
§ 405-50. No exemption from tax.
Although credits and deductions against the tax are permitted under certain
circumstances, as provided in applicable law and regulations, no individuals
are exempt from tax based on age, income or other factors.
§ 405-51. Taxpayer tax returns, declarations and payments.
Every taxpayer receiving earned income or earning net profits in any tax
year shall make and file tax returns and declarations and pay tax in
accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer. A taxpayer is required
to file timely an annual tax return even if no tax payment is due and owing.
In addition, even though a resident of the Borough did not have earned
income or net profits in the prior tax year, the resident must file an annual
tax return when requested to do so by the Tax Officer, stating the reason
why there was no income or net profits to report.
§ 405-52. Employer withholding, remittance, tax returns.
Every employer shall register, require employee residency certificates,
withhold and remit tax, and file tax returns and withholding statements
in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and the rules, regulations,
policies and procedures of the TCC and Tax Officer.
§ 405-53. Tax Officer.
C. Ongoing tax. The tax shall continue at the above rates during the
current tax year and each tax year thereafter, without annual
reenactment, until this article is repealed or the rate is changed.
D. Local Tax Enabling Act applicable. The tax is imposed under authority
of the Local Tax Enabling Act, and all provisions thereof that relate to a
tax on earned income or net profits are incorporated into this article.
Any future amendments to the Local Tax Enabling Act that are required
to be applied to the tax will automatically become part of this article
upon the effective date of such amendment, without the need for formal
amendment of this article, to the maximum extent allowed by 1
Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
E. Applicable laws, regulations, policies, and procedures. The tax shall be
collected and administered in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations; and rules, regulations, policies and procedures adopted by
the TCC or by the Tax Officer in conformity with the Local Tax Enabling
Act. This includes any regulations, policies and procedures adopted in
the future to the maximum extent allowed by 1 Pa.C.S.A. § 1937.
A. Collection of tax. The tax will be collected from taxpayers and
employers by the Tax Officer. The Tax Officer is authorized to file an
action in the name of the Borough for the recovery of the tax due to the
Borough and unpaid. Nothing in this section shall affect the authority of
§ 405-49 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-53
1:452
§ 405-54. Interest, penalties, costs and fines.
In the event of violation of this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act
or nonpayment of tax, taxpayers and employers are subject to interest,
penalties, costs and fines in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act,
including costs of collection imposed by the Tax Officer in accordance with
authorization by the TCC. The Tax Officer may retain reasonable costs of
collection in accordance with the Local Tax Enabling Act and as approved
by the TCC.
§ 405-55. Purpose; compliance with Act 32.
The primary purpose of this article is to conform the Borough's currently
existing earned income and net profits tax to the Local Tax Enabling Act,
as amended and restated by Act 32 of 2008, and to do so within the time
frame required by Act 32. Any prior ordinance or part of any prior ordinance
conflicting with the provisions of this article is rescinded insofar as the
conflict exists. To the extent the provisions of this article are the same
as any ordinance in force immediately prior to adoption of this article,
the provisions of this article are intended as a continuation of such prior
ordinance and not as a new ordinance. If this article is declared invalid, any
prior ordinance levying a similar tax shall remain in full force and effect
and shall not be affected in any manner by adoption of this article. The
provisions of this article shall not affect any act done or liability incurred,
nor shall such provisions affect any suit or prosecution pending or to be
initiated to enforce any right or penalty or to punish any offense under the
authority of any ordinance in force prior to adoption of this article. Subject
to the foregoing provisions of this section, this article shall supersede and
repeal, on the effective date, any ordinance levying a tax on earned income
or net profits in force immediately prior to the effective date. The tax
imposed by this article shall not apply to any person as to whom it is beyond
the legal power of the Borough to impose the tax herein provided under
the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and laws of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
§ 405-56. Construction.
This article is intended to be consistent with the Local Tax Enabling Act. The
article is intended to include all necessary authorizations to permit the Tax
Officer to take all actions for the collection, administration, disbursement
and enforcement of the tax and all other actions on behalf of the political
the Borough to file an action in its own name for collection of the tax
under the Local Tax Enabling Act.
B. Criminal complaints for violations. The Tax Officer is authorized to file
criminal complaints on behalf of the Borough for violations of this
article or the Local Tax Enabling Act. Nothing in this section shall affect
the authority of the Borough to file a criminal complaint on its own
behalf for violation of this article or the Local Tax Enabling Act.
§ 405-53 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-56
1:453
subdivisions of the TCD as authorized by the Local Tax Enabling Act, subject
to the policies and procedures of the TCC. To give full force and effect to this
article, the authority of the Tax Officer shall be interpreted in the broadest
permissible sense for the benefit of the Tax Officer's ability to perform its
duties.
§ 405-57. Effective date.
The provisions of this article shall become effective on January 1, 2012, and
shall apply to earned income received or earned and net profits earned or
made by a taxpayer during calendar year 2012 and each year thereafter
without annual reenactment unless the rate of tax is subsequently changed.
Changes in the rate of tax shall become effective on the date specified in the
ordinance imposing such change.
§ 405-56 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-57
1:454
ARTICLE V
Local Taxpayers Bill of Rights
[Adopted at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions,
Art. I)]
§ 405-58. Short title.
This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Local Taxpayers Bill of
Rights Act."
§ 405-59. Definitions.
The following words and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings given to them in this section unless the context clearly indicates
otherwise:
ASSESSMENT — The determination by a Borough of the amount of
underpayment by a taxpayer.
BOARD — A board of local tax appeals established under 53 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 8430 (relating to administrative appeals).
ELIGIBLE TAX — Any of the following, including interest and penalty
provided by law, when levied by a political subdivision:
GOVERNING BODY — A city council, borough council, incorporated town
council, board of township commissioners, board of township supervisors, a
governing council of a home rule municipality or option plan municipality, a
governing council of any similar general purpose unit of government which
may hereafter be created by statute or a board of school directors of a
school district.
LOCAL TAXING AUTHORITY — A political subdivision levying an eligible
tax. The term shall include any officer, agent, agency, clerk, income tax
officer, collector, employee or other person to whom the governing body
Any tax authorized or permitted under the Act of December 31, 1965
(P.L. 1257, No. 511), known as the "Local Tax Enabling Act."167
A.
B. Any per capita tax levied under any act.
Any occupation, occupation assessment or occupation privilege tax
levied under any act.
C.
D. Any tax on income levied under any act.
E. Any tax measured by gross receipts levied under any act.
F. Any tax on a privilege levied under any act.
G. Any tax on amusements or admissions levied under any act.
H. Any tax on earned income and net profits.
167. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 6901 et seq. and 53 P.S. §§ 6924.101 to 6924.312.
§ 405-58 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-59
1:455
has assigned responsibility for the audit, assessment, determination or
administration of an eligible tax. The term shall not include a tax collector
or collection agency who has no authority to audit a taxpayer or determine
the amount of an eligible tax or whose only responsibility is to collect an
eligible tax on behalf of the governing body.
OVERPAYMENT — Any payment of tax which is determined in the manner
provided by law not to be legally due.
TAXPAYER — An individual, partnership, association, corporation, limited
liability company, estate, trust, trustee, fiduciary or any other entity subject
to or claiming exemption from any eligible tax or under a duty to perform
an act for itself or for another under or pursuant to the authority of an act
providing for an eligible tax.
UNDERPAYMENT — The amount or portion of any tax determined to be
legally due in the manner provided by law for which payment or remittance
has not been made.
VOLUNTARY PAYMENT — A payment of an eligible tax made pursuant to
the free will of the taxpayer. The term does not include a payment made as
a result of distraint or levy or pursuant to a legal proceeding in which the
Borough is seeking to collect its delinquent taxes or file a claim therefor.
§ 405-60. Disclosure statement.
A. Contents. The Borough shall prepare a statement which sets forth the
following in simple and nontechnical terms:
(1) The rights of a taxpayer and the obligations of the Borough during
an audit or an administrative review of the taxpayer's books or
records.
(2) The administration and judicial procedures by which a taxpayer
may appeal or seek review of any adverse decision of the Borough.
(3) The procedure for filing and processing refund claim and taxpayer
complaints.
(4) The enforcement procedures.
B. Distribution. The Borough shall notify any taxpayer contacted
regarding the assessment, audit, determination, review or collection of
an eligible tax of the availability of the statement under Subsection A.
The Borough shall make copies of the statement available to taxpayers
upon request at no charge to the taxpayer, including mailing costs. The
notification shall be stated as follows:
"You are entitled to receive a written explanation of your rights with
regard to the audit, appeal, enforcement, refund and collection of
local taxes by calling the Borough of Hellertown during the hours of
__________.
§ 405-59 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-61
1:456
§ 405-61. Requirements for requests.
§ 405-62. Refunds of overpayment.
A. Minimum time period for taxpayer response.
(1) The taxpayer shall have at least 30 calendar days from the mailing
date to respond to a request for information by the Borough. The
Borough shall grant additional reasonable extensions upon
application for good cause.
(2) The Borough shall notify the taxpayer of the procedures to obtain
an extension in its initial request.
(3) The Borough shall take no lawful action against a taxpayer for the
tax year in question until the expiration of the applicable response
period, including extensions.
B. Requests for prior year returns.
(1) Except as provided in Subsection B(2), an initial inquiry by the
Borough regarding a taxpayer's compliance with any eligible tax
may include taxes required to be paid or tax returns required to be
filed no more than three years prior to the mailing date of the
notice.
(2) The Borough may make a subsequent request for a tax return or
supporting information if, after the initial request, the Borough
determines that the taxpayer failed to file a tax return, underreported
income or failed to pay a tax for one or more of the tax
periods covered by the initial request.
(3) This subsection shall not apply if the Borough has sufficient
information to indicate that the taxpayer failed to file a required
return or pay an eligible tax which was due more than three years
prior to the date of the notice.
C. Use of federal tax information. The Borough may require a taxpayer to
provide copies of the taxpayer's federal individual income tax return if
the Borough can demonstrate that the federal tax information is
reasonably necessary for the enforcement or collection of an eligible
tax and the information is not available from other available sources or
the Department of Revenue.
A. General rule. A taxpayer who has paid an eligible tax to the Borough
may file a written request with the Borough for refund or credit of the
eligible tax. A request for refund shall be made within three years of the
due date for filing the report, as extended, or one year after actual
payment of the eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required,
the request shall be made within three years after the due date for
payment of the eligible tax or within one year after actual payment of
the eligible tax, whichever is later.
§ 405-61 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-62
1:457
§ 405-63. Interest on overpayment.
(1) For purposes of this section, a tax return filed by the taxpayer with
the Borough showing an overpayment of tax shall be deemed to be
a written request for a cash refund unless otherwise indicated on
the tax return.
(2) A request for refund under this section shall not be considered a
petition under 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8430 (relating to petitions).
B. Notice of underpayment. For amounts paid as a result of a notice
asserting or informing a taxpayer of an underpayment, a written
request for refund shall be filed with the Borough within one year of the
date of the payment.
A. General rule. All overpayments of tax due the Borough, including taxes
on real property, shall bear simple interest from the date of
overpayment until the date of resolution.
B. Interest rate. Interest on overpayments shall be allowed and paid at the
same rate as the commonwealth is required to pay pursuant to § 806.1
of the Act of April 9, 1929 (P.L. 343, No. 176) known as the "Fiscal
Code."168
C. Exceptions.
(1) No interest shall be allowed if an overpayment is refunded or
applied against any other tax, interest or penalty due the Borough
within 75 days after the last date prescribed for filing the report of
the tax liability or within 75 days after the date the return or report
of the liability due is filed, whichever is later.
(2) Overpayments of interest or penalty shall not bear any interest.
D. Acceptance of refund check. The taxpayer's acceptance of the Borough
check shall not prejudice any right of the taxpayer to claim any
additional overpayment and interest thereon. Tender of a refund check
by the Borough shall be deemed to be acceptance of the check by the
taxpayer for purposes of this section.
E. Definitions. As used in this section, the following words and phrases
shall have the meaning given to them in this section:
DATE OF OVERPAYMENT — The later of the date paid or the date tax
is deemed to have been overpaid as follows:
Any tax actually deducted and withheld at the source shall be
deemed to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the report
for the tax period, determined without regard to any extension of
time for filing.
(1)
168. Editor's Note: See 72 P.S. § 806.1.
§ 405-62 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-63
1:458
§ 405-64. Notice of basis of underpayment.
The Borough shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the basis for any
underpayment that the Borough has determined to exist. The notification
shall include:
DATE OF RESOLUTION — The date the overpayment is refunded or
credited, as follows:
Any amount overpaid as estimated tax for the tax period shall
be deemed to have been overpaid on the last day for filing the
final report for the tax period, determined without regard to any
extension of time for filing.
(2)
An overpayment made before the last day prescribed for payment
shall be deemed to have been paid on the last day.
(3)
Any amount claimed to be overpaid with respect to which a lawful
administrative review or appellate procedure is initiated shall be
deemed to have been overpaid 60 days following the date of
initiation of the review or procedure.
(4)
Any amount shown not to be due on an amended income or earned
income and net profits tax return shall be deemed to have been
overpaid 60 days following the date of filing of the amended income
tax return.
(5)
For a cash refund, a date preceding the date of the Borough's
refund check by not more than 30 days.
(1)
For a credit for an overpayment:
The date of the Borough's notice to the taxpayer of the
determination of the credit; or
(a)
The due date for payment of the tax against which the credit
is applied, whichever first occurs. For a cash refund of a
previously determined credit, interest shall be paid on the
amount of the credit from a date 90 days after the filing of
a request to convert the credit to a cash refund to a date
preceding the date of the refund check by not more than 30
days, whether or not the refund check is accepted by the
taxpayer after tender.
(b)
(2)
A. The tax period or periods for which the underpayment is asserted.
B. The amount of the underpayment detailed by tax period.
C. The legal basis upon which the Borough has relied to determine that an
underpayment exists.
D. An itemization of the revisions made by the Borough to a return or
report filed by the taxpayer that results in the determination that an
underpayment exists.
§ 405-63 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-65
1:459
§ 405-65. Abatement of certain interest and penalty.
§ 405-66. Application of payments.
Unless otherwise specified by the taxpayer, all voluntary payments of an
eligible tax shall be prioritized by the Borough, as follows:
A. Errors and delays. In the case of any underpayment, the Borough may
abate all or any part of interest for any period for the following:
(1) Any underpayment or tax finally determined to be due attributable
in whole or in part to any error or delay by the Borough in the
performance of a ministerial act. For purposes of this subsection,
an error or delay shall be taken into account only if no significant
aspect of the error or delay can be attributed to the taxpayer and
after the Borough has contacted the taxpayer, in writing, with
respect to the underpayment of tax finally determined to be due or
payable.
(2) Any payment of a tax to the extent that any error in delay in the
payment is attributable to an officer, employee or agent of the
Borough being erroneous or dilatory in performance of a
ministerial act. The Borough shall determine what constitutes
timely performance of ministerial acts performed under this
subsection.
B. Abatement due to erroneous written advice by the Borough.
(1) The Borough shall abate any portion of any penalty or excess
interest attributable to erroneous advice furnished to the taxpayer
in writing by an officer, employee or agent of the Borough acting in
the officer's, employee's or agent's official capacity, if:
(a) The written advice was reasonably relied upon by the taxpayer
and was in response to specific written request of the taxpayer;
and
(b) The portion of the penalty or addition to tax or excess interest
did not result from a failure by the taxpayer to provide
adequate or accurate information.
(2) This subsection shall not be construed to require the Borough to
provide written advice to taxpayers.
A. Tax.
B. Interest.
C. Penalty.
D. Any other fees or charges.
§ 405-65 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-67
1:460
§ 405-67. Administrative appeals.
A political subdivision levying an eligible tax shall establish an
administrative process to receive and make determinations on petitions
from taxpayers relating to the assessment, determination or refund of an
eligible tax. The administrative process shall consist of any one of the
following:
§ 405-68. Petitions.
§ 405-69. Practice and procedure.
Practice and procedure under this section shall not be governed by 2
Pa.C.S.A. Chapter 5 Subchapter B (relating to practice and procedure of
local agencies) and Chapter 7 Subchapter B (relating to judicial review
A. Review and decision or hearing and decision by the Borough Tax
Appeals Board appointed by the Borough Council. The Board shall
consist of at least three but not more than seven members.
Qualifications for service on the Board and compensation, if any, of the
members shall be determined by the Borough Council. The Borough
Council may enter into agreements with other political subdivisions to
establish a joint local tax appeal board.
B. Review and decision by the Borough Council in executive session.
C. A hearing and decision by a hearing officer appointed by the Borough
Council. The Borough Council shall determine the qualifications and
compensation, if any, of the hearing officer.
D. An administrative review or appeal process existing on the effective
date of this article that is substantially similar to the procedures in
Subsection A, B or C.
A. Filing. A petition is timely filed if the letter transmitting the petition is
postmarked by the United States Postal Service on or before the final
day on which the petition is required to be filed. Deadlines for filing
petitions are as follows:
(1) Refund petitions shall be filed within three years after the due date
for filing the report, as extended, or one year after actual payment
of an eligible tax, whichever is later. If no report is required, the
petition shall be filed within three years after the due date for
payment of an eligible tax or within one year after actual payment,
whichever is later.
(2) Petitions for reassessment of an eligible tax shall be filed within 90
days of the date of the assessment notice.
B. Contents. The Borough Council shall adopt regulations specifying the
form and content of petitions, including the process and deadlines.
§ 405-67 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-69
1:461
of local agency action).169 The Borough Council shall adopt regulations
governing practice and procedure under this section.
§ 405-70. Decisions.
Decisions on petitions submitted under this section shall be issued within
60 days of the date a complete and accurate petition is received. Failure to
act within 60 days shall result in the petition being deemed approved.
§ 405-71. Appeals.
Any person aggrieved by a decision under this article who has a direct
interest in the decision shall have the right to appeal to the court vested
with the jurisdiction of local tax appeals by or pursuant to 42 Pa.C.S.A.
(relating to judiciary and judicial procedure).
§ 405-72. Equitable and legal principles to apply.
Decisions under this article may be made according to principles of law and
equity.
§ 405-73. Installment agreements.
A. Authorization. The Borough may enter into written agreements with
any taxpayer under which the taxpayer is allowed to satisfy liability for
any eligible tax in installment payments if the Borough determines that
the agreement will facilitate collection.
B. Extent to which agreements remain in effect.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any agreement
entered into by the Borough under Subsection A shall remain in
effect for the term of the agreement.
(2) The Borough may terminate any prior agreement entered into
under Subsection A, if:
(a) Information which the taxpayer provided to the Borough prior
to the date of the agreement was inaccurate or incomplete; or
(b) The Borough believes that collection of any eligible tax under
the agreement is in jeopardy.
(3) If the Borough finds that the financial condition of the taxpayer has
significantly changed, the Borough may alter, modify or terminate
the agreement, but only if:
(a) Notice of the Borough's finding is provided to the taxpayer no
later than 30 days prior to the date of such action; and
169. Editor's Note: See 2 Pa.C.S.A. § 551 et seq. and § 751 et seq.
§ 405-69 HELLERTOWN CODE § 405-73
1:462
§ 405-74. Confidentiality of tax information.
§ 405-75. Taxes on real property.
Except as provided in 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 8426 (relating to interest on
overpayment) this section shall not apply to any tax on real property.
(b) The notice contains the reasons why the Borough believes a
significant change has occurred.
(4) The Borough may alter, modify or terminate an agreement entered
into by the Borough under Subsection A if the taxpayer fails to do
any of the following:
(a) Pay any installment at the time the installment is due under
such agreement.
(b) Pay any other tax liability at the time liability is due.
(c) Provide a financial condition update as requested by the
Borough.
C. Prepayment permitted. Nothing in this section shall prevent a taxpayer
from prepaying in whole or in part any eligible tax under any agreement
with the Borough.
A. Any information gained by the Borough as a result of any audit, return,
report, investigation, hearing or verification shall be confidential tax
information. It shall be unlawful, except for official purposes or as
provided by law, for the Borough to:
(1) Divulge or make known in any manner any confidential information
gained in any return, investigation, hearing or verification to any
person.
(2) Permit confidential tax information or any book containing any
abstract or particulars thereof to be seen or examined by any
person.
(3) Print public or make known in any manner any confidential tax
information.
B. An offense under this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree and,
upon conviction thereof, a fine of not more than $2,500 and costs, or a
term of imprisonment for not more than one year, or both, may be
imposed. If the offender is an officer or employee of the Borough, the
officer or employee shall be dismissed from office or discharged from
employment.
§ 405-73 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 405-75
1:463
Chapter 411
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESSES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Registration of temporary businesses — See
Ch. 140, Art. I.
§ 411-1. Definitions.
A. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning
indicated, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BUSINESS PLAN — A formal statement of a set of business goals,
the reasons they are believed attainable, and the plan for reaching
these goals, background information about the organization operating
the business and, if a legal entity, proof of approval of the creating
of the legal entity by the commonwealth or state of creation.[Added
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
FOOD ESTABLISHMENT — Business operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human
consumption as set forth in the Food Code issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Agriculture, 7 Pa. Code § 46.1 et seq., as amended from
time to time.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
FOOD PRODUCTS — Includes and shall be limited to such foods
intended for immediate consumption following sale without threat or
danger to public health.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
HEALTH OFFICER — The Health Officer shall be the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer has the
authority to enforce the permitting, license and regulations of the
chapter.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
LEGAL HOLIDAY — New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day,
Labor Day, Thanksgiving Day and Christmas.
MOBILE FOOD COMMISSARY — A licensed food establishment in
which food, containers, or supplies are stored, kept, handled, prepared
and packaged and directly from which mobile food vehicle operations
are serviced and where mobile food trucks report to for all food and
supplies for all cleaning and sanitizing of units and equipment.[Added
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
MOBILE FOOD PREPARER — Any person who, by traveling from place
to place upon the public streets of the Borough, prepares and serves
food from a mobile food truck.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
MOBILE FOOD TRUCK — A mobile food truck is a transient retail
business.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
§ 405-75 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-1
1:464
§ 411-2. License required; conditions of issuance; fee.
No person shall engage in any transient retail business within the Borough
without first having obtained from the Borough Code Enforcement Officer
a license, for which a fee, which shall be for the use of the Borough, shall
be charged, said fee to be in such amount established, from time to time, by
resolution of the Borough Council.
§ 411-3. Mobile food trucks. [Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810170]
MOBILE FOOD VEHICLE — A food establishment that is located on a
minimum four-wheeled self-contained motorized vehicle where food or
beverage is cooked and/or prepared and served for individual portion
service, such as a mobile food kitchen. Food establishments that are not
self-contained and must be pulled by another vehicle are not considered
a mobile food vehicle.[Added 8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
PERSON — Any natural person, partnership, association, corporation
or other legal entity.
PUBLIC PROPERTY — The public right-of-way, Borough-owned
property and the Borough of Hellertown established right-of-way,
including sidewalks.
RESTAURANT — Any public place at a fixed location kept, used,
maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where food
and drink is prepared and served for the public for consumption on
or off the premises pursuant to the required licenses of the Borough
of Hellertown and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania. Such
establishments may include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafes,
coffee shops, cafeterias, dining rooms, eating houses, short-order cafes,
luncheonettes, grills, pubs, tea rooms and sandwich shops.
TRANSIENT RETAIL BUSINESS —
Engaging in peddling, soliciting or taking orders, either by sample
or otherwise, for any goods, wares or merchandise upon any street,
alley, sidewalk or public ground, or from house to house within the
Borough of Hellertown.
(1)
Selling, soliciting or taking orders for any goods, wares or
merchandise from a fixed location within the Borough on a
temporary basis, which shall include, but not be limited to, such
activities conducted at the time of special occasions or
celebrations, for seasonal purposes or for yearly holidays.
(2)
B. The singular shall include the plural, the plural shall include the
singular, and the masculine shall include the feminine and the neuter.
A. Scope.
170. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former §§ 411-3 through 411-9 as §§ 411-4
through 411-10, respectively.
§ 411-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-3
1:465
(1) The provisions of § 411-3 shall apply to mobile food operations
engaged in the business of cooking, preparing, and distributing
food or beverage with or without charge from mobile food trucks on
or in public, private or restricted spaces.
(2) This section shall not apply to canteen, coffee, or ice cream trucks
that move from place to place and are stationary in the same
location for no more than 30 minutes at a time or food vending push
carts and stands which are governed under other sections of
Chapter 411. Further this section does not apply to private parties
where the food truck is parked and servicing a private property.
B. Mobile food truck health license and permit required.
(1) No person or business entity, including a religious or charitable
organization, shall operate a mobile food truck in any public,
private or restricted space without a permit issued by the Borough.
(2) A separate mobile food truck permit is required for each and every
mobile food truck operated within the Borough by an individual,
partnership, corporation or limited-liability company.
(3) In addition to the Borough permit, an operator of a mobile food
truck must have the required health licenses and any other
required approvals from the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or
any Pennsylvania departments which regulate mobile food trucks.
Copies of all approvals required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or its agencies shall be provided to the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer at the time the permit application is
submitted to the Borough.
(4) The operator of a food truck shall be exempt from the requirements
of this section if a food truck operator is hired by an organization
which is conducting business within the Borough of Hellertown if
that organization is required to obtain a permit from the Borough
to conduct its operation.
C. Application for a permit.
(1) Application. There shall be made available by the Borough a permit
application form to apply for each mobile food truck permit. The
permit application shall provide the following:
(a) A description of necessary inspections and fees;
(b) A description of areas of the Borough where the operation of
mobile food trucks is limited or prohibited.
(2) Submission of materials. Each application shall indicate on its face,
in addition to other requirements as may be determined by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer, the below following materials
which shall be submitted by the applicant:
§ 411-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-3
1:466
(a) The name of the business and its owner or owners and the
mailing address of the business.
(b) For a mobile food truck applying for a permit for the first time,
a business plan for the mobile food truck operation must be
submitted.
(c) If the operator intends to establish a predetermined route, the
proposed service route and hours of operation, along with a
detailed schedule of times and locations where the mobile food
truck will be stationary and serving food.
(d) Certification that the mobile food truck has passed all the
necessary inspections required by the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania and/or designated state agencies.
(e) For all excess food that cannot be prepared or stored in the
mobile food truck, proof that the food is prepared or stored in a
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania approved kitchen and storage
facility. The address of the kitchen where the mobile food truck
and food must be stored shall be provided.
(f) Proof of access to restroom facilities for the use of the mobile
food truck employees. Access shall be within 150 feet from the
mobile food truck.
(g) Mobile food truck interior design showing all features,
locations of required handwashing sink for employees, location
of propane tanks or generators, etc. The design and final
mobile food truck must comply with all applicable provisions of
the Pennsylvania Department of Agriculture Retail Food Code,
Title 7, Agriculture, Chapter 46.
(h) A certificate of insurance providing general liability insurance
of not less than $350,000 per occurrence, listing the Borough
as additionally insured. A mobile food truck permit shall be
issued only for the explicit time covered by the effective date of
the general liability insurance policy. The owner shall
indemnify the Borough of Hellertown against any and all such
claims, losses, injuries or damages to person or property,
including attorneys fees and court costs, whether incurred as a
result of the negligence of the Borough, the owner or their
employees, agents.
(3) Approval process. Any application must be submitted to the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer for review.
(4) The Borough Code Enforcement Officer may work with the
applicant or permit holder to modify a service route at any time
before the issuance of a permit or after the issuance of the permit,
if the grant of a permit or approval of a service route has led to the
§ 411-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-3
1:467
creation of a nuisance or otherwise endangers the public health,
safety, or welfare or by request of the permit holder.
(5) Within 20 days of the submission of a completed application, the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall either issue or deny the
application for a permit.
(6) If the application is denied in whole or in part, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall state in writing the specific reasons for
the denial. Any applicant who has been denied a permit may appeal
such denial by submitting a written request for a hearing to
Borough Council within 10 days of denial. Such hearing shall be
conducted within 30 days of receipt of the appeal. The decision
resulting therefrom shall be final and subject only to additional
review under Pennsylvania law.
D. Rules and regulations and inspections.
(1) General rules and regulations.
(a) No mobile food trucks will be permitted to operate on a public
street or public property in the Residential 1 (R-1) and
Residential 2 (R-2) Zoning Districts.
(b) In the Conservation District (C) the applicant shall obtain
written approval and coordinate with other community
activities or organizations or special events as required by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer. No mobile food truck shall
operate in the Conservation District between the hours of
10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. The applicant will obtain additional
approvals from other organizations as required by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer.
(c) In all other zoning districts no mobile food truck shall operate
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m.
(d) No mobile food truck is permitted to park or stop to serve
customers within 250 feet of any principal customer entrance
to any restaurant or food establishment within the Borough of
Hellertown.
(e) Any operator of a mobile food truck shall provide the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer 24 hours' advanced written notice
when the operator will be operating the food truck within the
Borough limits pursuant to a validly issued permit. The date or
dates of operation for that specific time period of operation
shall be provided. Notice is required each time the operator of
a food truck shall conduct business within the Borough
jurisdictional limits.
§ 411-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-3
1:468
(f) No operator of a mobile food truck shall park, stand, or move a
vehicle and conduct business within areas of the Borough
where the permit holder has not been authorized to operate.
(g) Mobile food trucks are permitted to park and serve customers
on private property within the R-1 and R-2 Zoning Districts, if
given express written consent of the property owner and such
written consent is kept in the mobile food truck at all times
when the vehicle is operating on the private property.
(h) Mobile food trucks operating on private property in all other
zoning districts shall be governed by the requirements of this
section.
(i) On school days from 7:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. no food truck may
operate within 500 feet of the grounds of any building used as
a public kindergarten, elementary school or secondary school.
(j) A permitted mobile food truck may obtain a permit for a oneday
period.
(k) No mobile food truck will provide or allow any dining area,
including but not limited to tables, chairs, booths, bar stools,
benches, and standup counters.
(l) Borough trash receptacles may not be used by mobile food
truck vendors.
(m) Consumers shall be provided with single service articles, such
as plastic forks and paper plates, and a waste container for
their disposal. All mobile food trucks shall offer a waste
container for public use that the operator shall empty at his
own expense.
(n) Mobile food truck vendors are required to keep all areas within
20 feet of the mobile food truck clean of grease, trash, paper,
cups or cans associated with the vending operation.
(o) The permit holder must keep an accurate log indicating that
the mobile food truck is serviced daily by a mobile food
commissary or approved kitchen for all food, water and
supplies and for all cleaning and servicing operations,
including the emptying and cleaning of waste containers.
(p) No mobile food truck shall make or cause to be made any
unreasonable or excessive noise so as to disturb or annoy the
public near or upon any street, lane, alley, park, square,
common or in any public building, public place or business
place, or private building or private place within the Borough.
(q) A mobile food truck may not operate on property owned by the
Borough unless the Borough Code Enforcement Officer has
§ 411-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-3
1:469
granted approval on the permit application for its operation at
a particular location during specific times.
(r) For mobile food trucks on public property, the Borough
reserves the right to temporarily move a mobile food truck to a
nearby location if the approved location needs to be used for
emergency purposes, snow removal, construction, or other
public benefit or if the location is required for a Boroughsponsored
event.
(s) No more than two mobile food trucks may operate in the same
Borough block.
(2) Inspections. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall ensure
compliance with all applicable food and sanitary codes of the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and/or any agencies which
regulate food trucks.
(3) The Borough Fire Chief shall promulgate rules and regulations for
the inspection of mobile food trucks to ensure compliance with all
applicable federal, state, and local firesafety statutes, regulations,
ordinances, and codes.
E. Limitation on the number of permits held by one vendor.
(1) Borough Council shall from time to time set the limit on the number
of total permits that may be issued or renewed per year; provided,
however, that no more than 10% of total permits or three permits,
whichever is greater, may be issued to a single person or business
entity or both. The limit may be established by Borough Council
from time to time by resolution.
(2) Upon receipt of an application, the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer shall advise the applicant whether or not the limitation has
been met.
F. Food truck permit.
(1) Every mobile food truck permit, unless suspended or revoked by
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer for a violation of any
provision of this section or other rule or regulation promulgated for
the implementation of this section, shall be renewed annually
provided that a renewal fee is paid prior to 30 days before its oneyear
expiration. If said fee is not paid within this time frame
provided, the license and permit holder shall forfeit the right to
renew. If forfeited, the permit may be made available to another
applicant for a new permit if the limitation on the number of
permits has not been reached.
(2) The permit application fee and permit fee shall be determined and
be modified from time to time by resolution of Borough Council.
§ 411-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-3
1:470
(3) The renewal of a permit does not also guarantee the renewal of any
previously approved route. The Borough Code Enforcement Officer
has the right to terminate and or determine any route.
G. Transfer of permit prohibited.
(1) Transfers "for value" are prohibited. No person holding a permit for
a mobile food truck shall sell, lend, lease or in any manner transfer
a mobile food truck permit for value.
(2) Transfers "not for value." Transfers as part of the sale of a business
are permitted as part of the sale of a majority of the stock in a
corporation holding such permits, as part of the sale of the majority
of the membership interests of the limited-liability company
holding such permit, or as part of the sale of a business or
substantially all of its assets, provided that there shall be no
allocated or actual value for the transfer of the permit.
(a) Prior to any such transfer, the transferor shall notify the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer in writing, and the
transferee shall submit a food truck permit application for
approval to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer pursuant to
the process established under § 411-3, Subsection C.
(b) Any such transfer shall be subject to the terms and conditions
of the original permit.
(3) Unauthorized transfer voids permit. Any unauthorized transfer or
attempt to transfer a permit shall automatically void such permit.
Violations of this provision shall be subject to a fine of $500 each
for the transferor and the transferee, pursuant to § 411-3I. The
unauthorized transfer or attempt to transfer of each permit shall
constitute a separate violation.
H. Operation of mobile food trucks.
(1) Each mobile food truck shall post its permit, or a copy of the
permit, in a conspicuous place to which the public has access by
sight.
(2) Operation without a permit. Any mobile food truck being operated
without a valid mobile food truck permit issued by the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer shall be deemed a public safety hazard,
shall be cited in accordance with existing Borough ordinances and
may be impounded.
(3) Unattended vehicles prohibited. No mobile food truck shall be
parked on the street overnight or left unattended and unsecured at
any time. Any mobile food truck which is found to be unattended
shall be considered a public safety hazard, shall be cited in
accordance with existing Borough ordinances and may be
impounded.
§ 411-3 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-3
1:471
§ 411-4. Exceptions.
(4) A mobile food truck operating outside of an approved route, at an
unauthorized location, or beyond the hours for which the operation
has been permitted shall be deemed operating without a permit in
violation of this section and shall be subject to enforcement under
§ 411-3, Subsection I, entitled "Enforcement; violations and
penalties" below.
I. Enforcement; violations and penalties.
(1) Fine for violation. Any permit holder operating a mobile food truck
in violation of any provision of this section shall be subject to a fine
of not less than $300 and not more than $1,000 for each day the
violation continues to exist or a term of imprisonment not
exceeding 90 days, or both. Each day a violation continues to exist
shall constitute a separate and distinct violation of this section.
(2) Revocation, suspension, modification. Once a permit has been
issued it may be revoked, suspended, modified, or not renewed by
the Borough Code Enforcement Officer for failure to comply with
the provisions of this section.
(a) Decisions by the Borough Code Enforcement Officer to revoke,
suspend, modify, or not renew a permit may be appealed and a
hearing held as set forth in § 411-3, Subsection C(6), above and
titled "Application for a permit."
(3) In addition to prosecution of persons in violation of this section, the
Borough Code Officer, police officers or any duly authorized agent
of the Borough may seek such civil or equitable remedies, including
injunctive relief and other measures to enforce the provisions of
this section in any court of record in the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania, against any person or property, real or personal, to
enforce the provisions of this section.
(4) Removal. Any permit holder found in violation of this section shall
be issued a citation for a violation in accordance with existing
Borough ordinances, and the mobile food truck may be impounded
in accordance with Chapter 425 of the Borough Code of
Ordinances.
(5) Enforcement. The provisions of this section promulgated
hereunder shall be independent, nonmutually exclusive, separate
remedies, all of which are available to the Borough as may be
deemed appropriate and all of which may be enforced by the
Borough Code Enforcement Officer, Hellertown Police or any other
designated officials of the Borough of Hellertown.
A. No license fee shall be charged:
(1) To farmers selling their own produce.
§ 411-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-4
1:472
§ 411-5. License application.
Every person desiring a license under this chapter shall first make
application to the Borough Code Enforcement Officer for such license. He
shall, when making such application, exhibit a valid license from any state
or county officer if such license is also required. The applicant shall state:
(2) For the sale of goods, wares and merchandise donated by the
owners thereof, the proceeds whereof are to be applied to any
charitable or philanthropic purpose.
(3) To any manufacturer or producer in the sale of bread and bakery
products, meat and meat products or milk and milk products.
(4) To children under the age of 18 years who take orders for and
deliver newspapers, greeting cards, candy, bakery products and the
like, or who represent the Boy Scouts or Girl Scouts or similar
organizations.
(5) To the seeking or taking of orders by insurance agents or brokers
licensed under the insurance laws of the Commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.
(6) To a person who has complied with the provisions of the Solicitation
of Funds for Charitable Purposes Act, 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq., as
hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or reenacted by the
General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
(7) For taking orders for merchandise, by sample, from dealers or
merchants for individuals or companies who pay a license or
business privilege tax at their chief place of business.
B. All persons exempted hereby from the payment of the license fee shall
be required to register with the Borough Code Enforcement Officer and
obtain a license without fee, provided any person dealing in or more of
the above-mentioned exempted categories and dealing with other
goods, wares or merchandise not so exempted shall be subject to the
payment of the license fee fixed by this section for his activities in
connection with the sale of goods, wares and merchandise not in such
exempted categories; provided, further, the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer may similarly exempt from payment of the license fee, but not
from registering with him, persons working without compensation and
selling goods, wares or merchandise for the sole benefit of a nonprofit
corporation; provided, further, every license issued under the
provisions of this chapter shall be issued on an individual basis to any
person or persons engaging in such business; every individual shall
obtain a separate license, issued to him in his name; and the license fee
hereby imposed shall be applicable to every such individual license,
except that a representative of a charitable organization may obtain
licenses for the applicants.
A. His criminal record, if any.
§ 411-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-5
1:473
§ 411-6. Issuance of license; custody, display and exhibit.
Upon receipt of such application and the prescribed fee, the Borough Code
Enforcement Officer, if he shall find such application in order, shall issue
the license required under this chapter. Such license shall contain the
information required to be given out on the application therefor. Every
license holder shall carry such license upon his person if engaged in
transient retail business from house to house or upon any of the streets,
alleys, sidewalks or public grounds, or shall display such license at the
location where he shall engage in such business if doing so at a fixed
location. He shall exhibit such license, upon request, to all police officers,
Borough officials and citizens or residents of the Borough.
§ 411-7. Prohibited act.
No person in any transient retail business shall:
§ 411-8. Supervision; records and reports.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall supervise the activities of all
persons holding licenses under this chapter. He shall keep a record of all
licenses issued hereunder and shall make a report thereof each month to
the Borough Council.
B. Name and address of the person by whom he is employed.
C. Type of goods, wares and merchandise he wishes to deal with in such
transient retail business.
D. Length of time for which the license is to be issued.
A. Sell any product or type of product not mentioned in his license.
B. Hawk or cry his wares upon any of the streets, alleys, sidewalks or
public grounds in the Borough.
C. When operating from a vehicle, stop or park such vehicle upon any of
the streets or alleys in the Borough for longer than necessary in order
to sell therefrom to persons residing or working in the immediate
vicinity.
D. Park a vehicle upon any of the streets or alleys in the Borough for the
purpose of sorting, rearranging or cleaning any of his goods, wares or
merchandise or of disposing of any carton, wrapping material or stock,
wares or foodstuffs which have become unsalable through handling,
age or otherwise.
E. Engage in any business activity, except by prior appointment, at any
time on a Sunday or legal holiday or at any time before 9:00 a.m. or
after 5:00 p.m. on any day of the week other than a Sunday or legal
holiday.
§ 411-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 411-9
1:474
§ 411-9. Denial, suspension and revocation of license; appeal.
The Borough Code Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized to deny,
suspend or revoke any license issued under this chapter when he deems
such denial, suspension or revocation to be beneficial to the public health,
safety or morals, or for violation of any provision of this chapter, or for
giving false information upon any application for a license hereunder.
Appeals from any suspension, revocation or denial of a license may be made
to the Borough Council at any time within 10 days after such suspension,
revocation or denial, and a hearing shall be held within 30 days of the
petition for appeal. No part of a license fee shall be refunded to any person
whose license shall have been suspended or revoked.
§ 411-10. Violations and penalties (except for § 411-3). [Amended
8-1-2016 by Ord. No. 810]
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that a
violation of this chapter continues or each section of this chapter which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
Chapter 416
TREES
GENERAL REFERENCES
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Tampering with public property — See Ch.
314.
Streets and sidewalks — See Ch. 385.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390, § 390-25.
§ 411-9 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 411-10
1:475

ARTICLE I
Shade Trees
[Adopted 5-6-1985 by Ord. No. 531]
§ 416-1. Title and short title.
§ 416-2. Authority and jurisdiction.
§ 416-3. Purpose.
The purpose of this article is to provide a uniform set of rules and
regulations governing the care and control of the shade trees located along
and within the various public ways of the Borough of Hellertown in order to
promote the general welfare and safety of the community.
§ 416-4. General terms.
The following terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them as set forth below, except in those instances
where the context already indicates a different meaning. All terms of the
singular shall include those of the plural, and vice versa. The masculine
shall include the feminine, and vice versa. The term "may" is permissible;
"shall" is mandatory.
A. Title. An ordinance establishing rules, regulations and standards
governing the planting, replanting, removal, care of shade trees located
along the various public ways of the Borough of Hellertown; the
procedures to be followed relative to the administration of, and
compliance with, these rules, regulations and standards; and setting
forth the penalties for the violation thereof.
B. Short title. This article shall be known and may be cited as the
"Borough of Hellertown Shade Tree Ordinance of 1985."
A. Authority. The Borough Council is empowered to adopt, by ordinance,
rules, regulations and standards regarding the custody and control of
shade trees in the Borough pursuant to Article XXVI of the Borough
Code, Act of February 1, 1966 (1965 P.L., No. 581), as amended.171
B. Jurisdiction. The Borough Council shall have the exclusive custody and
control of the shade trees along and within the rights-of-way of the
highways, streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public ways of the
Borough of Hellertown, and may plant, remove, trim, maintain and
protect said shade trees, and may require the planting, removal,
trimming and/or maintenance of said shade trees. This jurisdiction shall
also apply with respect to the trimming of any shade tree, the branches
of which extend over and above any such public rights-of-way, as above
enumerated, or to any shade tree, the continued existence of which
shall be deemed a hazard to the public welfare.
171. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 45101 et seq.
§ 416-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-5
1:477
§ 416-5. Specific terms.
As used in this article, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
PERMIT — That written document issued by the Borough of Hellertown
pursuant to the various terms of this article.
PERSON — Any individual, firm, association, partnership or corporation.
RIGHT-OF-WAY — The entire width between the boundary lines of every
way publicly maintained when any part thereof is open to the use of the
public for purposes of vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
ROADWAY — That portion of a highway improved, designed or ordinarily
used for vehicular traffic.
SHADE TREE — Any tree, shrub or woody plant along or within the rightsof-
way of the Borough of Hellertown, or that part of any tree, shrub or
woody plant which extends within the public rights-of-way of the said
Borough.
SIDEWALK — That portion of a street between curblines or the lateral
lines of a roadway and the adjacent property lines intended for use by
pedestrians.
SUBSTANTIAL TRIMMING — The pruning of a tree in such a manner and
to the extent that said tree may be permanently damaged or destroyed.
§ 416-6. Trimming of shade trees.
A. Property owners responsible. It shall be the responsibility of every
person owning property in the Borough of Hellertown to trim and to
keep trimmed all shade trees growing on such property, and which also
are located within the public rights-of-way and/or the branches of which
extend over said rights-of-way and/or the public sidewalks, so that:
(1) There shall be a minimum clearance of the branches thereof of 14
feet above the roadway and nine feet above the public sidewalk.
(2) There shall be no obstruction of any parking or traffic control and
regulatory signs as may be present.
(3) There shall be sufficient line-of-sight distances afforded to the
operators of vehicles upon the public roadways within the Borough.
(4) There shall be no excessive obstruction of the illumination of the
public streetlights of the Borough.
B. Authority of Borough to intercede. Should any person, responsible
under Subsection A fail, neglect, or refuse to trim or cause to be
trimmed any shade tree as required thereby, within 10 days after notice
from said Borough to do so, the Borough shall have the authority to
cause said work to be accomplished in the manner in which it deems to
be most expedient and to collect the cost thereof, together with an
§ 416-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 416-6
1:478
§ 416-7. Removal of shade trees.
additional amount of 10% of said cost, from such property owner in
default.
A. Damaged or diseased shade trees presenting imminent hazards. When
any shade tree, which is located within the public rights-of-way and/or
the branches of which extend over said public rights-of-way and/or the
public sidewalks, shall become damaged by storm and/or are affected
by any contagious disease or insect infestation, to the point where said
shade tree endangers the life, health, safety or property of the general
public, and said shade tree should be removed or substantially trimmed
to mitigate the aforesaid hazards, it shall be within the discretion of the
Borough of Hellertown to determine the degree of the remedy
necessary to correct the identified hazard. In these instances, the
following procedure shall prevail:
(1) The owner of the property, upon which the diseased/damaged
shade tree is located, shall be notified, in writing, of the deficiency
and of the required remedy.
(2) Said notification shall include:
(a) A permit, issued by the Borough, as required pursuant to
§§ 416-12 and 416-13 of this article.
(b) The specified number of days in which the property owner shall
be required to have completed, or to have caused to be
completed, the specific remedy.
(c) Any other conditions as may be imposed pursuant to the terms
of this article.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner upon whose
property said identified shade tree is located to ensure compliance
with this notification.
(4) In the event that the property owner should fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with said notification within the required time period or
should the Borough be unable to identify the subject property
owner, the Borough then shall have the authority to cause the
remedy to be accomplished in the manner in which it deems most
expedient and to collect the cost thereof, together with an
additional amount of 10%, from such property owner once he has
been identified.
B. Damaged or diseased shade trees not presenting an imminent hazard.
Should any property owner or person desire to remove or substantially
trim a shade tree, as protected pursuant to the terms of this article,
whether because it is believed that said shade tree is diseased or
damaged or for any other reason, that property owner first shall make
written application to the Borough for permission to effect the proposed
§ 416-6 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-7
1:479
§ 416-8. Planting of shade trees.172
removal, in accordance with the permit procedures as provided in
§ 416-13 of this article. It shall be the responsibility of the property
owner or person so applying for a permit to document the justification
for the proposed removal of the shade tree. Included among examples
of justification for removal or substantial trimming are: a statement
from a person engaged in the business of tree surgery, arboriculture
or tree service, relative to damage and/or disease; or a statement
from a registered plumber or the Hellertown Borough Authority which
documents a history of sanitary sewer line infiltration by the roots of a
protected shade tree.
C. Treatment of stumps. Any stump which remains subsequent to the
felling of a protected shade tree shall be excised so that, at a minimum,
the topmost portion of any remaining stump is level with or below the
surrounding surface of the ground.
D. Coordination of efforts. Any property owner or person who has received
the requisite permission to proceed with the removal or substantial
trimming of a shade tree shall coordinate the proposed efforts with the
Hellertown Borough Public Works and/or Police Department prior to
the commencement of efforts. This coordination is to determine if the
proposed efforts will require the closure or partial closure of any of the
various public ways of the Borough, and to ensure that measures
satisfactory to the Borough will be taken to protect the general welfare
and safety of the public.
A. Property owners responsible. It should be the responsibility of every
person, upon request by the Borough, to plant and pay for the cost of
planting and/or transplanting any shade tree in and along the streets
and highways in the Borough.
B. The cost of planting and/or transplanting:
(1) The costs of purchasing and planting a shade tree; the necessary
and suitable guards, curbing or grading for the protection thereof;
and the replacing of any pavement or sidewalk necessarily
disturbed in the execution of such work shall be paid by the owner
of the real estate abutting where the work is done.
(2) The amount each owner is to pay shall be ascertained and certified
by the Shade Tree Commission to Borough Council and to the
Borough Treasurer.
C. Notice.
(1) The owner of the property upon which the planting or replacement
of a shade tree is located shall be notified, in writing, of the
deficiency and of the required remedy.
172. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 416-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 416-8
1:480
§ 416-9. Approved shade trees.
(2) Said notification shall include:
(a) A permit, issued by the Borough, as required pursuant to
§§ 416-12 and 416-13 of this article.
(b) The specified number of days in which the property owner shall
be required to have completed, or to have caused to be
completed, the specific remedy.
(c) Any other conditions as may be imposed pursuant to the terms
of this article.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the property owner upon whose
property said identified shade tree is located to ensure compliance
with this notification.
(4) In the event that the property owner should fail, neglect or refuse
to comply with said notification within the required time period or
should the Borough be unable to identify the subject property
owner, the Borough then shall have the authority to cause the
remedy to be accomplished in the manner in which it deems most
expedient and to collect the cost thereof, together with an
additional amount of 10%, from such property owner once he has
been identified.
A. Preferred tree species.173
(1) Small trees, smaller than 30 feet. Suitable for narrow street tree
lawns/pits (less than six feet wide), and low overhead utility lines.
Trees should be planted at thirty-foot to thirty-five-foot intervals.
Acer buergerianum Trident maple
Acer campestre (cultivars Queen
Elizabeth 'Evelyn' or 'Schichtel's
Upright')
Hedge maple
Carpinus caroliniana Ironwood, Musclewood or
American hornbeam
Cercis canadensis (single leader) Eastern redbud
Cornus mas Cornelian-cherry
Pyrus betulaefolia 'Southworth'
Dancer™
Ornamental birch-leaf pear
Pyrus calleryana 'Jaczam,' 'Jilzam' Jack™, Jill™ callery pear
Syringa reticulata 'Ivory Silk' Japanese tree lilac
Tilia cordata 'Halka' Summer Sprite® littleleaf
linden
173. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 416-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-9
1:481
Zelkova serrata 'Schmidtlow' Wireless® zelkova
(2) Medium to large trees, larger than 30 feet. Suitable for wide tree
lawns/pits (greater than six feet wide) or park settings without
overhead utility lines. Trees should be planted at thirty-five-foot to
forty-foot intervals.
Acer x freemanii 'Armstrong' Columnar red maple
Acer rubrum Red maple
Carpinus betulus European hornbeam
Cercidiphyllum japonicum Katsura tree
Celtis occidentalis Common hackberry
Ginkgo biloba (male only) Ginkgo, sometimes called
"Maidenhair Tree"
Gleditsia triacanthos var. inermis
(nonfruiting cultivars)
Thornless common
honeylocust
Gymnocladus dioicus (male only) Kentucky coffeetree
Phellodendron amurense (male
only)
Amur cork tree
Platanus x aceriflolia London planetree
Prunus sargentii Sargent cherry
Quercus acutissima Sawtooth oak
Quercus coccinea Scarlet oak
Quercus imbricaria Shingle oak
Quercus macrocarpa Bur oak or mossycup oak
Quercus muehlenbergii Chinkapin oak, sometimes
called "Yellow chestnut oak"
Quercus phellos Willow oak
Quercus rubra Northern red oak
Quercus robur English oak
Quercus shumardii Shumard oak
Robinia pseudoacacia Black locust
Tilia cordata 'Greenspire' Littleleaf linden
Tilia tomentosa 'Green Mountain' Silver linden
Ulmus carpinifolia (Dutch-elmdisease-
resistant cultivars)
Elm hybrids
Zelkova serrata Japanese zelkova
B. Any shade tree not included on this list, and as may be proposed as a
replacement tree, is subject to approval of the Borough. This list may be
amended, from time to time, at the discretion of the Council of the
Borough, by resolution of said Council.
§ 416-9 HELLERTOWN CODE § 416-10
1:482
§ 416-10. Permit required.
No person shall plant or cause to be planted any tree within the public
rights-of-way of the Borough without first having secured a permit from the
Borough pursuant to §§ 416-12 and 416-13 of this article.
§ 416-11. Type and location subject to approval.
The Borough may specify the type and location of any new shade tree
proposed to be planted within the public rights-of-way of the Borough. Such
a stipulation shall be made as part of any permit that may be issued.
§ 416-12. Permits required.
No person shall remove, substantially trim or plant any shade tree located
or to be located within the public rights-of-way without first having made
application for and having received a permit as issued by the Borough of
Hellertown.
§ 416-13. Permit procedure.
§ 416-14. Unlawful acts.
It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, replant, remove, substantially
trim, or fail to maintain any protected shade tree in a manner contrary to
the provisions of this article.
§ 416-15. Violations and penalties.174
A. Application. A shade tree permit application shall be secured from the
Borough of Hellertown. Said application shall be completed in its
entirety and returned to the Borough, together with five-dollar
nonrefundable filing fee.
B. Borough review. The Borough Secretary or his designated
representative shall review the application and the actual site of the
proposed work as may be necessary and proper. All reasonable efforts
shall be made to complete this review within 10 working days of receipt
of the application.
C. Permit issuance. Upon finding the application complete and being
satisfied that the proposed work will be conducted in full compliance
with the terms of this article, the Borough Secretary or his designated
representative shall issue a shade tree permit, together with any
conditions or stipulations as may be necessary given the circumstances
of the application, the site involved, and/or to ensure compliance with
the terms of this article.
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate an provision of this
article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
174. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 416-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-15
1:483
more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment of said fine and
costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days. Each day that
a violation of this article continues or each section of this article which
shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate offense.
B. Penalties imposed under the provisions of this article shall be a lien
upon the real estate of the offender and may be collected as municipal
claims are collected. All penalties and assessments imposed under this
article shall be paid to the Treasurer of the Borough of Hellertown, to
be placed to the credit of the Borough, subject to being drawn upon by
the Borough for the purposes of the preceding sections of this article.
§ 416-15 HELLERTOWN CODE § 416-15
1:484
Chapter 425
VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
GENERAL REFERENCES
Bicycles and skateboards — See Ch. 119.
Temporary businesses — See Ch. 140, Art. I.
Parks and recreation — See Ch. 291.
Snow and ice removal from streets and
sidewalks — See Ch. 385, Art. I.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 411.
Abandoned vehicles — See Ch. 430.
§ 416-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 416-15
1:485

ARTICLE I
General Regulations
§ 425-1. Definitions and interpretation.
§ 425-2. Manner of adopting permanent traffic and parking
regulations.
All traffic and parking regulations of a permanent nature shall be enacted
as ordinances, as parts of ordinances, as amendments to ordinances, or as
amendments to this chapter, except where the law specifically authorizes
less formal action.
§ 425-3. Provisions to be continuation of existing regulations.
The provisions of this chapter, so far as they are the same as those of
ordinances and regulations in force immediately before the enactment of
this chapter, are intended as a continuation of those earlier ordinances and
regulations and not as new enactments. Nothing in this chapter shall affect
any act done or liability incurred or any suit or prosecution pending or
to be instituted under any of those repealed or superseded ordinances or
regulations.
§ 425-4. Temporary and emergency regulations.
A. Words and phrases, when used in this chapter, except for sections or
articles to which different or additional definitions apply, shall have the
meanings ascribed to them in the Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et
seq., except that, in this chapter, the word "street" may be used
interchangeably with the word "highway" and shall have the same
meaning as the word "highway" as defined in the Vehicle Code.
B. The term "legal holidays," as used in this chapter, shall mean and
include New Year's Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day,
Thanksgiving Day and Christmas Day.
C. In this chapter, the singular shall include the plural; the plural shall
include the singular; and the masculine shall include the feminine.
A. The Mayor or Chief of Police shall have the following powers to regulate
traffic and parking temporarily and in time of emergency:
(1) In the case of fire, flood, storm or other emergency, to establish
temporary traffic and/or parking regulations.
(2) In the case of emergency or to facilitate public works or in the
conduct of parades, processions or public events, to restrict or
prohibit traffic and/or parking in limited areas for periods of not
more than 72 hours.
B. Such temporary and emergency regulations shall be enforced by the
Police Department in the same manner as permanent regulations. Any
§ 425-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-4
1:487
§ 425-5. Experimental regulations.
The Borough may, from time to time by resolution, designate places upon
and along the highways in the Borough where, for a period of not more
than 90 days, specific traffic and/or parking regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be in force and effect, and shall designate such locations
by proper signs and markings. Such regulations, prohibitions and
restrictions shall be effective as if they had been specified in this chapter.
No person shall operate and no person shall move, remove, destroy or
deface any sign or marking erected, posted or made by authority of this
section. Any person who shall violate any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set forth in the law or
elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such nature and, in case of a
violation for which no specific penalty is set forth in the law or elsewhere
in this chapter, to a fine of not more than $25 together with costs of
prosecution, provided the purpose of this section is to allow for test and
experimental determination of the feasibility and desirability of permanent
changes in the ordinances of the Borough relative to traffic and parking.
§ 425-6. Traffic on streets closed or restricted for construction,
maintenance or special events.
§ 425-7. Use of streets by processions and assemblages.
person who shall operate or park a vehicle or tractor in violation of any
such regulation or who shall move, remove, destroy, injure or deface
any sign or marking erected, posted or made to give notice of any such
regulation shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to the penalty set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter for a violation of such
nature and, in case of a violation for which no specific penalty is set
forth in the law or elsewhere in this chapter, to a fine of not more than
$25 together with costs of prosecution.
A. The Borough shall have authority to close any street or specific part of a
street to vehicular traffic and to place barriers or station police officers
at each end of the closed portion while construction or maintenance
work is under way or a special event is being conducted on the closed
portion. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any
such closed portion.
B. The Borough shall have authority to establish a restricted traffic area
upon any street where construction or maintenance work is under way
and to station flagmen at each end of the restricted portion. It shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any such restricted
traffic area at any time when the flagman is displaying a sign directing
that vehicle to stop or is signaling that vehicle, by a flag or other device,
not to proceed.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-4 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-7
1:488
§ 425-8. Authority of police officers.
The police officers of the Borough are hereby authorized to direct traffic on
the highways of the Borough and at intersections thereof and to otherwise
enforce the provisions of this chapter.
A. For the purpose of this section, the words "assemblage" and
"procession" shall have the following meanings:
ASSEMBLAGE — A gathering of people without vehicles which
interferes with the movement of pedestrian or vehicular traffic on any
street.
PROCESSION — A group of individuals, vehicles, animals and/or
objects moving along a street in a way that interferes with the normal
movement of traffic. A procession shall not include a funeral caravan or
military convoy.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
assemblage unless the person organizing or conducting the assemblage
first obtains a permit from the Mayor or Chief of Police, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least one
week in advance of the day on which the assemblage is proposed to be
held, but in any case where a state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall state the place where and the date
when the assemblage is to be held, the hour when the assemblage may
convene and the hour by which it shall have been completely dispersed.
It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any
assemblage unless the permit has been granted or at any time or place
other than that authorized by the permit.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to hold or participate in any
procession unless the person organizing or conducting the procession
first obtains a permit from the Mayor or Chief of Police, which shall be
issued without fee. Application for the permit shall be made at least two
weeks in advance of the day when the procession is proposed to be
held, but in any case where the state-designated highway is proposed to
be used, application shall be made at least three weeks in advance of
the proposed date. The permit shall specify the date on which the
procession is to be held, the route to be followed by the procession, the
hour when and place where participants may commence to assemble
and form before the procession is under way, the time when the
procession may commence to move along its route, and the time by
which the end of the procession shall have been disbanded. It shall be
unlawful for any person to hold or to participate in any procession
unless the permit shall have been granted or under any conditions as to
time or route or otherwise than those stated in the permit.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-9
1:489
§ 425-9. Authorization for use of speed-timing devices.
A. The Police Department is hereby authorized to use all speed-timing
devices for the determination of speed of a motor vehicle as are
approved or will be approved by the Department of Transportation of
the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in accordance with 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3368.
B. This section authorizes the use of said devices upon all highways within
the Borough be they Borough, county or state highways, and does also
hereby elect to exercise all powers granted to local authorities under
the Vehicle Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 6101 et seq., as hereafter amended, supplemented, modified or
reenacted by the General Assembly of Pennsylvania.
§ 425-9 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-9
1:490
ARTICLE II
Traffic Regulations
§ 425-10. Maximum speed limits established on certain streets.
A. The following speed limits are hereby established.
(1) Unless otherwise listed in this section, all highways 15 feet wide or
less have a speed limit of 15 miles per hour.
(2) Unless otherwise listed in this section, all highways wider than 15
feet, except Easton Road and Main Street, have a speed limit of 25
miles per hour.
Highway Portion
Speed Limit
(mph)
Cherry Lane Entire extent 40
Easton Road Between East High Street and
the intersection with Main
Street
25
Easton Road Between High Street and
Cherry Lane
25
Easton Road Between north Borough line
and East High Street
25
Furnace Street Entire extent 15
Main Street Between north Borough line,
and the intersection of Main
Street with Kiernan Avenue
and Cherry Lane
35
Main Street Between the intersection of
Main and Walnut Streets, and
the south Borough line
35
Main Street Between the intersection of
Main Street with Kiernan
Avenue and Cherry Lane, and
the intersection of Main and
Walnut Streets
30
Water Street Between Main Street and the
Borough line east and west
30
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle or tractor at a speed in excess of
that established therefor upon any highway or portion thereof specified
in this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine
in accordance with the applicable penalty provisions of the
Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 425-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-11
1:491
§ 425-11. Maximum speed limits established on certain bridges and
elevated structures.
§ 425-12. Maximum speed limits established for certain vehicles on
hazardous grades.
§ 425-13. Maximum speed limits established in parks.
A. Maximum speed limits are established, as follows, on certain bridges
and elevated structures, and it shall be unlawful for any person to drive
a vehicle on any such bridge or elevated structure at a higher speed
than the maximum prescribed for that bridge or elevated structure:
Bridge or Elevated
Structure Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. The following are declared to be hazardous grades and, upon any such
hazardous grade, no person shall drive a vehicle having a gross weight
in excess of that referred to for that grade, in the direction stated for
that grade, at a speed in excess of that established in this section for
that grade, and if so stated for a particular grade, the driver of every
such vehicle shall stop the vehicle before proceeding downhill:
Street Between
Direction
of Travel
Maximum
Gross
Weight
Maximum
Speed
Limit
Required to
Stop Before
Proceeding
Downhill
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 for each mile in excess of five miles per
hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. A speed limit of 10 miles per hour is established on all streets and
roadways in the public parks maintained and operated by the Borough,
except in the following locations, where the lower maximums, as
specified, shall apply:
Park Street Location
Maximum
Speed Limit
(Reserved)
§ 425-11 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-13
1:492
§ 425-14. Traffic signals at certain locations.
§ 425-15. Intersections where turn prohibited on red signal.
§ 425-16. One-way roadways established.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $35 and costs. Any person
exceeding the maximum speed limit by more than five miles per hour
shall pay an additional fine of $2 per mile for each mile in excess of five
miles per hour over the maximum speed limit.
A. At the following locations, traffic signals as indicated below shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected), and traffic at those
locations shall be directed by those signals:
Location Type of Signal
Main Street and High Street Traffic
Main Street and Kichline Avenue Traffic
Main Street and Kiernan Avenue Traffic
Main Street and Penn Street Traffic
Main Street and Walnut Street Traffic
Main Street and Water Street Traffic
B. Any driver of a vehicle who disobeys the directions of any traffic signal
shall, upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as intersections where drivers of vehicles
headed in the direction or directions indicated are prohibited from
making a right turn (or a left turn from a one-way street into another
one-way street) on a steady red signal:
Intersection
Vehicles Traveling
On Facing
Main Street and High
Street
High Street East and West
Main Street and Water
Street
Water Street East
Main Street and Cherry
Lane
Main Street North
Main Street and High
Street
Main Street North
B. Any driver of a vehicle who violates any provision of this section shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-16
1:493
A. The following are established as one-way roadways, and it shall be
unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle on any one-way street other
than in the direction established for traffic on that street:
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Bachman Street Main Street Furnace Street West
Chestnut Street Easton Road Main Street West
Church Street Main Street A point 300 feet
east of Main
Street
East
Clarke Street Main Street First Avenue East
Clarke Street Main Street Washington
Street
West
Coke Street Bleyler Street Zimpfer Lane East
Depot Street Main Street Easton Road East
Division Street
[Added
8-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 800]
Harwi Street Front Street West
Division Street Main Street Harwi Avenue West
Durham Street Main Street Penn Street East
Easton Road Main Street Northampton
Street
North
Fehr Street Easton Road Main Street West
Hampton
Avenue
Main Street Front Street West
Madison Street Wagner Avenue High Street South
Magnolia Road Main Street Front Street West
Oak Street Division Street Hampton Avenue North
Oak Street
[Added
8-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 800]
Hampton
Avenue
Division Street South
Oliver Street Plaza Lane Fehr Street North
Plaza Lane Main Street Oliver Street East
Rohn Street
[Added
8-17-2015 by
Ord. No. 800]
Constitution
Avenue
Juniper Street North
Saucon Street
(East)
Northampton
Street
Rentzheimer
Drive
East
§ 425-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-16
1:494
§ 425-17. Turning at certain intersections prohibited or restricted.
§ 425-18. Right turns prohibited at certain intersections.
§ 425-19. U-turns prohibited at certain locations.
Street From To
Direction of
Travel
Spruce Street Cherry Street Main Street West
Sycamore Street Main Street Front Street West
Zimpfer Lane Coke Street Wagner Avenue North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle of the type indicated
traveling upon the first-named street at any of the following
intersections, in the direction or directions indicated in each case, to
make a left turn and/or a right turn into the second-named street, as
indicated, at any time when such a turn is prohibited by this section:
Vehicles
Traveling
on
Direction
of Travel
At
Intersection
of
Prohibited
Turn Days Hours
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon the firstnamed
street at any of the following intersections, in the direction or
directions indicated in each case, to make other than a left turn at any
time stated, both right turns and straight-across traffic being
prohibited:
Vehicles
Traveling On
Direction of
Travel Times
Not To Make Right
Turn Into or Travel
Straight Across
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for the driver of any vehicle traveling upon any of
the following portions of streets, in the direction or directions indicated
for that street, to make a U-turn:
Street Between
(Reserved)
§ 425-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-19
1:495
§ 425-20. No-passing zones established.
§ 425-21. Through highways established.
§ 425-22. Stop intersections established.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following are established as no-passing zones, and it shall be
unlawful for the driver of any vehicle to overtake or pass another
vehicle or to drive on the left side of the roadway in any no-passing
zone: All roadways within the Borough marked with the double yellow
center line.
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following highways are established as through highways, thus
authorizing stop or yield signs to be erected facing traffic approaching
every intersection with the through highway, except for those
intersections with traffic signals or with exceptions or modifications as
indicated below. Every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop or yield
sign authorized by this section shall stop the vehicle or yield right-ofway
as required by 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b) or (c), as the case may be,
and shall not proceed into or across the through highway until he has
followed all applicable requirements of that section of the Vehicle Code:
Highway Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 425-21) are established as stop
intersections, and official stop signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the intersecting or through street) on the firstnamed
street (the stop street) in the direction or directions indicated
for that intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the
intersection on the first-named or stop street, in the direction indicated
in each case, shall stop the vehicle as required by the Vehicle Code, 75
Pa.C.S.A. § 3323(b), and shall not proceed into or across the secondnamed
or intersecting or through street until he has followed all
applicable requirements of that section of the law.
§ 425-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-22
1:496
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Ackerman Street Main Street East
Ackerman Street Whitaker Street West
Apple Street Easton Road West
Bachman Street
[Added 4-3-2017 by
Ord. No. 818]
Between Main Street and
Whitaker Street
North
Beech Circle Willow Road West
Birch Road Willow Road East
Birch Road Juniper Road North and South
Birch Road Magnolia Road South
Bleyler Street Cherry Lane North
Bleyler Street Wagner Avenue North and South
Bleyler Street High Street South
Burkhart Street Cherry Lane North
Burkhart Street Wagner Avenue North and South
Burkhart Street High Street South
Cedar Road Magnolia Road North
Cedar Road Walnut Street South
Center Street Easton Road West
Center Street Detweiler Avenue East and West
Center Street New Jersey Avenue East
Cherry Lane Easton Road East
Cherry Street Durham Street North
Cherry Street Magnolia Road North
Cherry Street Water Street North and South
Cherry Street Saucon Street South
Cherry Street Walnut Street South
Chestnut Street Main Street East and West
Chestnut Street New Jersey Avenue East and West
Chestnut Street Easton Road West
Chestnut Street Front Street West
Clarke Street Second Avenue East
Clarke Street First Avenue East and West
Clarke Street Washington Street East and West
Clauser Street Kichline Avenue North
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-22
1:497
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Clauser Street Kiernan Avenue North
Clauser Street High Street South
Clauser Street Kiernan Avenue South
Coke Street Bleyler Street West
Coke Street Main Street West
Constitution Avenue Durham Street North
Constitution Avenue Magnolia Road North and South
Constitution Avenue Walnut Street South
Courtright Street High Street North
Courtright Street Leonard Street South
Delaware Avenue Durham Street North and South
Delaware Avenue Penn Street North and South
Delaware Avenue Saucon Street South
Depot Street Easton Road East and West
Depot Street Main Street East
Depot Street Durham Street South
Depot Street Front Street West
Detweiler Avenue Apple Street North and South
Detweiler Avenue Chestnut Street North and South
Detweiler Avenue Depot Street North and South
Detweiler Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
Detweiler Avenue Miller Street North and South
Detweiler Avenue Northampton Street South
Detweiler Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
Detweiler Avenue Water Street North and South
Division Street Front Street West
Durham Street Northampton Street East
Durham Street Penn Street North
Durham Street Constitution Avenue West
Easton Road Northampton Street North
Ellen Street Tobias Drive East
Ellen Street Rentzheimer Drive East and West
Ellen Street Cherry Street West
Elm Road South Willow South
Fehr Street Main Street West
§ 425-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-22
1:498
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
First Avenue Chestnut Street South
First Avenue High Street North
First Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
First Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
First Avenue Wilson Avenue North and South
Foundry Street Easton Road East
Fox Depot Street North and South
Fox Delaware Avenue South
Franklin Street Kichline Avenue South
Front Street Depot Street North and South
Front Street Saucon Street North and South
Front Street Water Street North and South
Front Street Walnut Street South
Front Street (3-way) From Front Street to
Sycamore Street
North and South
Furnace Street Bachman Street North
Furnace Street Thomas Avenue South
Hampton Avenue Front Street West
Harris Street Water Street North
Harris Street Magnolia Road (West) North and South
Harris Street Saucon Street (West) North and South
Harwi Street Division Street North and South
Harwi Street Water Street South
Hemlock Street Williams Street East and West
Henry Street Tobias Drive East
Henry Street Rentzheimer Drive East and West
Henry Street Cherry Street West
Hess Avenue Main Street East
Hess Avenue Clauser Street West
High Street Easton Road East
High Street Riegel and High Streets East and West
Jefferson Street High Street North
Jefferson Street Clarke Street South
Juniper Road Constitution Avenue West
Juniper Road Maple Road West
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-22
1:499
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Keilman Avenue High Street North
Keilman Avenue Leonard Street South
Leonard Street Easton Road East
Linden Avenue Easton Road East and West
Linden Avenue Main Street West
Locust Road Juniper Road North
Locust Road Magnolia Road South
Lois Street Easton Road East
Magnolia Road Northampton Street East and West
Magnolia Road Rentzheimer Drive East and West
Magnolia Road Tobias Drive East and West
Magnolia Road Constitution Avenue East and West
Magnolia Road Front Street West
Magnolia Road Main Street West
Maple Road Juniper Road North
Maple Road Magnolia Road North and South
Maple Road Constitution Avenue West and East
McAdoo Avenue Main Street West
Miller Street Easton Road East and West
Miller Street New Jersey Avenue East
Miller Street Third Avenue West
Milton Street Depot Street North and South
Morris Street Cherry Lane North
New Jersey Avenue Apple Street North
New Jersey Avenue Depot Street North and South
New Jersey Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
New Jersey Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
New Jersey Avenue Delaware Avenue South
New Street Spruce Street North
New Street Walnut Street South
New York Avenue Depot Street North and South
New York Avenue Linden Avenue South
Northampton Street Easton Road North
Northampton Street Magnolia Road North and South
Northampton Street Penn Street North and South
§ 425-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-22
1:500
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Northampton Street Saucon Street North and South
Northampton Street Water Street North and South
Northampton Street Walnut Street South
Oak Street Hess Avenue North and South
Oak Street High Street (West) North and South
Oak Street Thomas Avenue South
Oliver Street Clarke Street North and South
Oliver Street Fehr Street North
Oliver Street High Street (East) North
Oliver Street Linden Avenue North and South
Oliver Street Thomas Avenue North and South
Oliver Street Wilson Avenue North and South
Park Avenue Wilson Avenue North
Park Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
Park Avenue Miller Street North and South
Park Avenue Phillips Street North and South
Park Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
Paul Street Spruce Street North
Paul Street Walnut Street (East) South
Phillips Street Detweiler Avenue East and West
Phillips Street Easton Road East and West
Phillips Street New Jersey Avenue East and West
Phillips Street Third Avenue West
Pine Street Main Street East
Poplar Road Magnolia Road North
Poplar Road Constitution Avenue West
Preston Street Depot Street North and South
Quintus Street Wilson Avenue North
Quintus Street Clarke Street North and South
Quintus Street Linden Avenue North and South
Quintus Street Thomas Avenue North and South
Rentzheimer Drive New York Avenue North
Rentzheimer Drive Magnolia Road North and South
Rentzheimer Drive Saucon Street North and South
Rentzheimer Drive Durham Street South and North
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-22
1:501
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Rentzheimer Drive Walnut Street South
Riegel Street Cherry Lane North
Riegel Street Wagner Avenue North and South
Riegel Street High Street South
Riegel Street Riegel and High Streets South
Roth Avenue Main Street East
Roth Avenue Clauser Street West
Ruch Street Linden Avenue North and South
Ruch Street Thomas Avenue North and South
Ruch Street Wilson Avenue North and South
Ruch Street Lois Street South
Saucon Street Tobias Drive East
Saucon Street Rentzheimer Drive East and West
Saucon Street Front Street West
Saucon Street Main Street East and West
Scott Street Depot Street North and South
Second Avenue High Street North
Second Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
Second Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
Second Avenue Wilson Avenue North and South
Spruce Street Tobias Drive East
Spruce Street Rentzheimer Drive East and West
Spruce Street Cherry Street West
Spruce Street Main Street West
Spruce Street Northampton Street West
Sterling Street Walnut Street (East) South
Strauss Street Magnolia Road North
Strauss Street Walnut Street (East) South
Sycamore Street
(3-way)
From Front Street to
Sycamore Street
Westbound
Third Avenue Wilson Avenue North
Third Avenue Linden Avenue North and South
Third Avenue Thomas Avenue North and South
Third Avenue Easton Road South
Thomas Avenue Easton Road East and West
§ 425-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-22
1:502
§ 425-23. Yield intersections established.
Stop Street
Intersecting or
Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Thomas Avenue Main Street East and West
Tobias Drive Durham Street North
Tobias Drive Magnolia Road North and South
Tobias Drive Walnut Street South
Wagner Avenue Zimpfer Lane East
Wagner Avenue Main Street West
Washington Street Roth Avenue North
Washington Street High Street North and South
Washington Street Ackerman Street South
Whitaker Street High Street North
Whitaker Street Clarke Street North and South
Willow Road Durham Street North
Willow Road Elm Road (North) North
Willow Road Juniper Road North and South
Willow Road Magnolia Road North and South
Willow Road Constitution Avenue West
Wilson Avenue Detweiler Avenue East and West
Wilson Avenue Easton Road East and West
Wilson Avenue Main Street West
Wilson Avenue New Jersey Avenue East
Zimpfer Lane Cherry Lane North
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The following intersections (in addition to intersections with the
through highways established by § 245-21) are established as yield
intersections, and official yield signs shall be erected (or are ratified if
previously erected) in such a position as to face traffic approaching the
second-named street (the through street) on the first-named street (the
yield street) in the direction or directions indicated for that
intersection. Every driver of a vehicle approaching the intersection on
the first-named or yield street, in the direction indicated in each case,
shall slow down or stop the vehicle as required by 75 Pa.C.S.A.
§ 3323(c), and then yield the right-of-way as required by that subsection
of the Vehicle Code.
§ 425-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-23
1:503
§ 425-24. School safety zones established; traffic speeds reduced
certain days and hours.
§ 425-25. Operation of motor vehicles restricted on public lands.
Yield Street Through Street
Direction of
Travel
Elm Road Willow Road North
New York Avenue Chestnut Street North
Second Avenue Lois Street South
Thomas Avenue New York Avenue East
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. To reduce traffic speeds within said school safety zones to 15 miles per
hour during certain days and times, as follows:
School Zone Speed Limit
Reduction in Effect
Location
Highways
Affected Days Times
St. Theresa's
School
Easton Road,
Wilson Avenue,
Leonard Street,
Apple Street
School days 8:00 a.m. to 9:15
a.m.; 11:15 a.m. to
1:00 p.m.; 2:45
p.m. to 3:30 p.m.
Saucon Valley
School District
Campus
Walnut Street,
Tobias Drive,
Cedar Road
School days 7:00 a.m. to 9:00
a.m.; 11:00 a.m. to
12:30 p.m.; 2:00
p.m. to 4:00 p.m.
B. Any person who shall operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of that
established therefor upon any highway or portion thereof specified in
this section commits a summary offense and shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine in accordance with the Pennsylvania
Motor Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 3365, for school zones, as amended,
and costs of prosecution and, in default of payment of such fine and
costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than 90 days.
A. No motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, pedalcycle or minibike, shall
be operated on any property owned by the Borough or any other public
agency or instrumentality within the Borough.
B. Any person who violates a provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-23 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-26
1:504
§ 425-26. Motor vehicles not to be driven on sidewalks.
No person shall operate a motor vehicle or tractor upon any sidewalk in
the Borough, nor shall any person operate a motor vehicle upon or across
any sidewalk except in order to gain access to or egress from a driveway
or alley at such locations where the curb, if such sidewalk is curbed, shall
have been properly cut down for the purpose. Any person who shall violate
any provision of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to
pay a fine of not more than $50 and costs of prosecution and, in default of
payment of such fine and costs, to undergo imprisonment for not more than
10 days.
§ 425-26.1. Weight-restricted streets. [Added 10-19-2015 by Ord.
No. 802]
The following are established as weight-restricted streets:
Street From To
Weight
Restriction
East High Street SR0412 (Main
Street)
Easton Road 6 tons
Kichline Avenue
[Added
1-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 828]
SR0412 (Main
Street)
Clauser Street 6 tons
Kiernan Avenue
[Added
1-7-2019 by
Ord. No. 828]
SR0412 (Main
Street)
Clauser Street 6 tons
Linden Avenue SR0412 (Main
Street)
Easton Road 6 tons
Northampton
Street
SR2006 (Easton
Road)
Walnut Street 6 tons
§ 425-26.2. Truck-restricted local streets. [Added 6-5-2017 by Ord.
No. 819]
The following are established as truck-restricted/local traffic only streets:
Street From To Restriction
Durham Street Main Street Laubach Street No through truck
traffic/local traffic
only
§ 425-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-26.2
1:505

ARTICLE III
General Parking Regulations
§ 425-27. Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces.
Wherever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual
vehicle, every vehicle parked there shall be parked wholly within the lines
bounding that space, and it shall be a violation of this article for any person
to park a vehicle or allow it to remain parked otherwise.
§ 425-28. Parking prohibited at all times in certain locations.
Parking shall be prohibited at all times in the following locations:
Street Side Between
Ackerman Street South Main Street and Washington Street
Apple Street
[Added
6-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 791]
North 20 feet east from the intersection of Apple
Street and Easton Road
Apple Street
[Added
6-16-2014 by
Ord. No. 791]
South 60 feet east from the intersection of Apple
Street and Easton Road
Bachman Street North From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 68 feet west thereof
Bachman Street South Main Street and Whitaker Street
Cherry Street West Henry Street and Magnolia Road
Chestnut Street South Main Street and Oak Street
Clarke Street South First Avenue and Washington Street/at
Main/Main to Whitaker
Clarke Street North Main Street and First Avenue
Constitution
Avenue
Both South curbline of Willow Road and a point
100 feet south thereof
Constitution
Avenue
East Between Durham Street and Magnolia
Road
Depot Street Both Durham Street and Milton Street
Depot Street Both Easton Road and Scott Street
Depot Street North From the east curbline of Main Street to a
point 30 feet east thereof
Depot Street North From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 30 feet west thereof
Depot Street South From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 30 feet west thereof
§ 425-27 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-28
1:507
Street Side Between
Division Street Both Main Street and Front Street
Durham Street North Constitution Avenue to a point 50 feet west
of Rentzheimer Drive
Durham Street South Along side of Dimmick Park and the
parking lot
Durham Street South East curbline of Delaware Avenue and a
point 15 feet east thereof along the south
curbline of Durham Street
Durham Street South Rentzheimer Drive and a point 126 feet
west of Rentzheimer Drive north
Durham Street South Stop sign controlling eastbound traffic on
Durham Street at its intersection with Penn
Street and the west curbline of Delaware
Avenue
Durham Street South Tobias Drive and Rentzheimer Drive
Easton Road East On Easton Road, between East High Street
and Cherry Lane
Easton Road West On Easton Road, between East High Street
and Cherry Lane, parking prohibited
except as follows: along the west curbline
of Easton Road, 545 feet from the
intersection of the north curbline of East
High Street and the west curbline of
Easton Road, one twenty-foot parking
space shall be permitted, and thereafter
continuing along the same west curbline of
Easton Road at a point 595 feet northward
of said intersection, seven twenty-foot
parking spaces shall be permitted, with a
terminus 695 feet from said intersection
Easton Road East From Linden Avenue a distance of 75 feet
south
Easton Road West From Linden Avenue a distance of 90 feet
north
Easton Road West A distance of 20 feet north of Depot
Easton Road West Alongside Gregory Park Playground
between Lois Street and Thomas Avenue
Franklin Street East From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 40 feet south thereof
§ 425-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-28
1:508
Street Side Between
Front Street West Beginning 47 feet northward of a point
made by the intersection of a line extended
along and parallel to the north curbline of
Division Street intersecting the west
curbline of Front Street, thence to a point
148 feet north thereof, along the west
curbline of Front Street, in total being 101
feet. The location is in front of 780 Front
Street (Hellertown Borough Authority
Garage).
Furnace Street East Thomas Avenue and the northern terminus
of Furnace Street
Hampton Avenue North Main Street and Front Street
Harris Street West Saucon Street (West) and Magnolia Road
Harris Street West Water Street south to the Harris Street
Bridge
High Street Both Oliver Street and Oak Street
High Street Both West curbline of Main Street and east
curbline of Washington Street
High Street North For a distance of 15 feet west of
Washington Street
High Street North Main Street and Easton Road
High Street South A distance of 25 feet east of Oliver Street
High Street South Oak Alley and the Borough-City of
Bethlehem boundary at the High Street
Bridge
Jefferson Street East Clarke Street and High Street (West)
Juniper Road South Constitution Avenue and Locust Road
Keilman Avenue West Leonard Street and High Street
Kichline Avenue North From the west curbline of Main Street west
to the east line of Oak Alley
Kiernan Avenue North From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 40 feet west thereof
Kiernan Avenue South From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 40 feet west thereof
Leonard Street North Easton Road and Ruch Street
Linden Avenue Both A point 50 feet east of Easton Road and a
point 50 feet west of Easton Road
Linden Avenue North Between the east curbline of Main Street
and a point 166 feet east thereof
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-28
1:509
Street Side Between
Linden Avenue North The east curbline of Main Street and a
point 70 feet east thereof
Linden Avenue South Between Main Street and First Avenue
Linden Avenue South Main Street and Oliver Street
Magnolia Road North From the west curbline of Main Street to
the east curbline of Harris Street
Magnolia Road North Harris Street and Front Street
Magnolia Road North Just east of Laubach
Magnolia Road North Main Street and Harris Street
Magnolia Road North Northampton Street and Rentzheimer
Drive
Magnolia Road South From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 38 feet west thereof
Magnolia Road South From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point on the south curbline of Magnolia
Road, 54 feet west of the west line of
Harris Street
Magnolia Road South Northampton Street and Strauss Alley
Main Street Both East side for a distance of 32 feet south of
Depot Street and on the west side for a
distance of 46 feet north of Depot Street
Main Street Both North curbline of Chestnut Street and a
point 36 feet north thereof
Main Street Both Walnut Street and McAdoo Avenue
Main Street East Church Street and Water Street
Main Street East For a distance of 323 feet northward from
the point of intersection of the north
curbline of East Walnut Street extended
with the east curbline of Main Street
extended
Main Street
[Added
5-5-2016 by
Ord. No. 807]
East High Street and Wagner Avenue
Main Street East A distance of 167 feet south of Linden
Avenue and for a distance of 54 feet north
of Linden Avenue
Main Street
[Added
4-15-2013 by
Ord. No. 781]
East Linden Avenue and a point 192 feet north
§ 425-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-28
1:510
Street Side Between
Main Street East Linden Avenue and a point 120 feet south
thereof
Main Street East A distance of 58 feet south of Magnolia
Road
Main Street East For a distance of 137 feet northward from
the intersection of lines formed by the
extension of the north curbline of Magnolia
Road with the east curbline of Main Street
Main Street East A distance of 70.8 feet north from the north
curbline of Penn Street
Main Street East A distance of 72 feet south from the south
curbline of Penn Street
Main Street East South curbline of Thomas Avenue and a
point 100 feet south thereof
Main Street East The first parking space along the east
curbline located north of Thomas Avenue
north of the existing bus stop and to the
front of 1105 Main Street
Main Street East A distance of 119 feet north of Water Street
in front of Borough Hall
Main Street East A distance of 98 feet south of Wilson
Avenue
Main Street West A point 41 feet north of Ackerman Street
and a point 39 feet south of Ackerman
Drive
Main Street West North line of the Borough and Kiernan
Avenue
Main Street West North curbline of Division Street and a
point 39 feet north thereof
Main Street West Gum Street and Kiernan Avenue
Main Street West A point 36 feet north of Hampton Avenue
and a point 39 feet south of Hampton
Avenue
Main Street West Hess Avenue and Roth Avenue
Main Street West A distance of 48 feet north of Magnolia
Road
Main Street West The parking space along the west curbline
to the front of 1100 Main Street
Main Street West The parking space along the west curbline
to the front of 1120 Main Street
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-28
1:511
Street Side Between
Main Street West The parking space along the west curbline
to the front of 1130 Main Street
Main Street
[Added
7-16-2018 by
Ord. No. 823]
West From the intersection of Main Street and
Saucon Street to a point 30 feet north
Main Street West A distance of 47.8 feet north from the north
curbline of Penn Street if extended to
intersect with the west curbline of Main
Street
Main Street West A distance of 85.5 feet south from the
north curbline of Penn Street if extended to
intersect with the west curbline of Main
Street
Main Street West Between the south curbline of Pine Street
and a point 214 feet south thereof
Main Street West Roth Avenue and High Street
Main Street West Water Street and Division Street
Main Street West For a distance of 335 feet northward from
the point of intersection of the north
curbline of West Walnut Street extended
with the west curbline of Main Street
extended
Main Street
[Repealed
4-21-2014 by
Ord. No. 790]
Milton Street Both Depot Street and New York Avenue
New Jersey
Avenue
East Wilson to Miller
New Jersey
Avenue
West Apple Street to Miller
New York
Avenue
West Rentzheimer Drive and Milton Street
New York
Avenue
North Rentzheimer Drive and Delaware Avenue
Northampton
Street
East North curbline of Magnolia Road, north a
distance of 25 feet
Oak Street Both Depot Street and Chestnut Street
Oliver Street Both Saucon Street and Durham Street
§ 425-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-28
1:512
Street Side Between
Park Avenue Both For a distance of 175 feet southward from
the points of intersection of the south
curbline of Wilson Avenue extended with
the east and west curblines of Park Avenue
extended
Penn Street Between Northampton and Durham Street
Plaza Lane North Oliver Street east to Easton Road
Reigel Street East High Street and a point 210 feet north
thereof at the driveway serving the rear of
Wolf School
Rentzheimer
Drive
Both Durham Street and New York Avenue
Rentzheimer
Drive
West East Saucon Street and Magnolia Road
Roth Avenue North From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 40 feet west thereof
Roth Avenue South From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 40 feet west thereof
Saucon Street North A distance of 47 feet east of Main Street
Saucon Street South A distance of 47 feet east of Main Street
Spruce Street North A distance of 20 feet west from the west
line of Laubach Street
Spruce Street South Main Street and Cherry Street
Sycamore Street North Main Street and Front Street
Sycamore Street South Main Street and Oak Street
Third Avenue East Along playground at Easton Road
Thomas Avenue Both From the west curbline of Main Street to a
point 300 feet west thereof
Thomas Avenue Both Main Street and Oliver Street
Thomas Avenue Both Oak Street and a point 85 feet west thereof
Thomas Avenue North A distance of 50 feet east from the
intersection of the east curbline of Main
Street with the curbline of Thomas Avenue
Tobias Drive Both A distance of 232 feet south of Durham
Street at the Dewey Fire Company
Tobias Drive East Magnolia Road and Durham Street
Wagner Avenue South From the east curbline of Main Street to a
point 30 feet east thereof
Walnut Street Both A distance of 25 feet west of Main Street
§ 425-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-28
1:513
Street Side Between
Walnut Street Both On West Walnut Street, from Main to
Parson Streets
Walnut Street North Constitution Avenue and Cedar Road
Walnut Street North On East Walnut Street, for a distance of
113 feet eastward from the point of
intersection of the east curbline of Main
Street extended with the north curbline of
East Walnut Street extended
Walnut Street South Main Street to the Borough-Lower Saucon
Township boundary, opposite the
intersection of Walnut Street and Laubach
Street
Walnut Street South Between Main Street and Constitution
Avenue
Washington
Street
East Ackerman Street and High Street (West)
Washington
Street
East For a distance of 15 feet south of West
High Street
Washington
Street
West Between Roth Avenue and West High
Street
Water Street Both Saucon Creek and the Reading Railroad
Water Street North A distance of 283.8 feet east of Main Street
Water Street North Main Street and Harris Street
Water Street South Main Street and Front Street
Water Street South Main Street and Northampton Street
Water Street Both West curbline of Delaware Avenue and a
point 45 feet west thereof
Whitaker Street Both Clarke Street and Ackerman Street
Whitaker Street West High Street and Clarke Street
Wilson Avenue North A distance of 50 feet east from the
intersection of the east curbline of Main
Street with the north curbline of Wilson
Avenue
Wilson Avenue North Easton Road and Third Avenue
Wilson Avenue North From the east line of Oliver Alley to the
west line of First Avenue
Wilson Avenue South Main Street and Oliver Street
Wilson Avenue South Oliver Street and First Avenue
Zimpfer Lane West Cherry Lane and Coke Alley
§ 425-28 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-29
1:514
§ 425-29. Parking prohibited in certain locations, certain days and
hours.
§ 425-30. Parking time limited in certain locations, certain days
and hours.
Highway Side Location Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Chestnut
Street
North Between Main
Street and Oak
Street
Every day
except
Sundays and
legal holidays
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
15
minutes
Clarke
Street
North Between Main
Street and
Washington
Street
Every day At all
times
1 hour
Durham
Street
[Repealed
10-16-2017
by Ord.
No. 820]
Durham
Street
[Repealed
10-16-2017
by Ord.
No. 820]
A. Parking shall be prohibited in the following locations at all times on the
days and between the hours indicated in this section, as follows:
Street Side Between Days Hours
Main Street East Walnut Street to
Cherry Lane
Thursday 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Main Street West Kichline Avenue
to Walnut Street
Wednesday 7:00 a.m. to
9:00 a.m.
Thomas
Avenue
North Oak Street and a
point 85 feet
west thereof
Weekdays 8:00 a.m. to
6:00 p.m.
B. There shall be no ten-, fifteen- or thirty-minute parking time limit on
Main Street in the Borough of Hellertown. All parking spaces on Main
Street shall be two-hour parking between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m.
§ 425-29 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-30
1:515
Highway Side Location Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Easton
Road
East Between Main
Street and the
entrance to
Borough
garage
Every day 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Easton
Road
West Between Main
Street and
Easton Road
entrance to
Plaza Service
Station
Every day 8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Kichline
Avenue
North Between Main
Street and Oak
Street
Every day No
parking
Kichline
Avenue
South Between Main
Street and Oak
Street
Every day At all
times
1 hour
Linden
Avenue
[Repealed
4-15-2013
by Ord.
No. 781]
Linden
Avenue
[Repealed
4-15-2013
by Ord.
No. 781]
Main
Street
Both Between
Saucon Street
and Clarke
Street
Every day
except
Sundays and
legal holidays
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Main
Street
Both South of Clarke
Street to
Saucon Street
Every day 9:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Main
Street
East First parking
space north of
Durham Street
Every day At all
times
2 hours
Main
Street
East In front of 1418
Main Street
2 hours
§ 425-30 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-30
1:516
Highway Side Location Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Main
Street
East Two spaces in
front of 1575
Main Street
Monday
through Friday
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Main
Street
[Added
4-21-2014
by Ord.
No. 790]
West A distance of
93 feet in front
of movie
theater
Every day At all
times
2 hours
Main
Street
West At Pine Street Every day
except
Sundays and
legal holidays
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
15
minutes
Main
Street
West Between
Saucon Street
and Clarke
Street
Every day
except
Sundays and
legal holidays
8:00
a.m. to
6:00
p.m.
2 hours
Main
Street
West One parking
space in front
of 326 Main
Street
Every day At all
times
15
minutes
Main
Street
West Two spaces to
the front of
1236 Main
Street
Every day At all
times
30
minutes
Northampton
Street
North Between Main
Street and
Harris Street
along the south
side of 202
Main Street
Every day At all
times
15
minutes
Northampton
Street
West One parking
space directly
to the front of
650
Northampton
Street
Every day At all
times
15
minutes
§ 425-30 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-30
1:517
Highway Side Location Days Hours
Parking
Time
Limit
Water
Street
North Between
entrance to
Borough
garage and
Northampton
Street
Every day At all
times
2 hours
Not
applicable
Not
applicable
Delaware
Avenue parking
lot, as more
fully identified
at Tax Parcel
Q7SW2C-7-9
[Added
4-7-2014 by
Ord. No. 789]
Every day At all
times
24 hours
§ 425-31. Handicapped parking zones established; parking
otherwise prohibited.
A. The following are established as special purpose parking zones, and it
shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow it to
remain parked in any such zone except as specifically provided for that
zone.
(1) The following areas upon the highways in the Borough of
Hellertown shall remain as "parking for handicapped" unless
removed or modified by formal action of Borough Council:
Highway Location
Chestnut Street One parking space located along the south
curbline of Chestnut Street, adjacent to 935
Main Street (American Legion), beginning
95 feet east of the intersection of the east
curbline of Main Street and the south
curbline of Chestnut Street, and extending
22 feet eastward
Constitution Avenue Two parking spaces located along the east
curbline of Constitution Avenue, in front of
331 Constitution Avenue (Mountainview
Moravian Church)
Delaware Avenue Three parking spaces located along the
west curbline adjacent to 735 Delaware
Avenue (St. George's Episcopal Church)
§ 425-30 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-31
1:518
Highway Location
Durham Street Two parking spaces located along the south
curbline adjacent to 502 Durham Street
(Dewey Fire Company)
Easton Road One parking space located along the east
curbline, adjacent to Borough Hall
Leonard Street Two parking spaces located along the south
curbline of Leonard Street, in front of 310
Leonard Street (St. Theresa's School)
Main Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 924 Main Street (Feet
First)
Northampton Street One parking space located along the east
curbline of Northampton Street, beginning
80.75 feet south of East Saucon Street, and
extending 22 feet southward (Saucon Valley
Community Center)
Penn Street Two parking spaces located along the south
curbline adjacent to the property of First
United Church of Christ
Ruch Street One parking space located along the east
curbline adjacent to St. Theresa's Convent
Third Avenue Two parking spaces located along the east
curbline adjacent to 1375 Third Avenue
(Lower Saucon United Church of Christ)
(2) The following areas upon the highways in the Borough of
Hellertown shall remain as "parking for handicapped" and subject
to annual renewal in accordance with the terms of Subsections B
through F of this section and annual revision by formal
Councilmanic action:
Highway Location
Bachman Street One parking space located along the north
curbline adjacent to 17 Bachman Street
Cherry Lane One parking space located along the south
curbline adjacent to 1671 Burkhardt Street
East Chestnut Street One parking space located along the south
curbline adjacent to 112 East Chestnut
Street
East High Street One parking space located along the south
curbline in front of 216 East High Street
East High Street One parking space located along the south
curbline in front of 306 East High Street
§ 425-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-31
1:519
Highway Location
East Thomas Street One parking space located along the south
curbline in front of 64 East Thomas Street
First Avenue One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 1416 First Avenue
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 116 Front Street
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 188 Front Street
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 206 Front Street
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 208 Front Street
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 210 Front Street
Front Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 742 Front Street
Hess Avenue One parking space located along the north
curbline in front of 23 Hess Avenue
Keilman Avenue One parking space located along the east
curbline of Keilman Avenue at its
intersection with Leonard Street, to the
rear of 1400 Easton Road
Main Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 216 Main Street
Main Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in the vicinity of the residence at
170 Main Street
Miller Street One parking space located along the south
curbline in front of 322 Miller Street
Northampton Street One parking space located along the east
curbline in front of 775 Northampton Street
Riegel Street One parking space located along the east
curbline in front of 1625 Riegel Street
Riegel Street One parking space located along the east
curbline in front of 1637 Riegel Street
Riegel Street One parking space located along the west
curbline in front of 1618 Riegel Street
Riegel Street One parking space located along the west
curbline, near the intersection East High
Street, for the resident of 209 East High
Street
§ 425-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-31
1:520
Highway Location
Second Avenue One parking space located along the east
curbline in front of 1141 Second Avenue
West Saucon Street One parking space located along the south
curbline adjacent to 338 Main Street
West Saucon Street One parking space located along the south
curbline in front of 44 West Saucon Street
(3) The following special purpose parking zones are established to
allow for handicapped parking in parks: [Added 10-5-2015 by
Ord. No. 801]
(a) Four handicapped parking spaces at the Dimmick Park parking
lot.
(b) Four handicapped parking spaces at the Water Street Park
parking lot.
B. An applicant who wishes to apply for a handicapped parking space shall
apply to the Hellertown Police Department. Prior to the granting of a
handicapped parking space, the Borough of Hellertown shall review the
current status of all off-street parking of the applicant to determine
whether or not the applicant's request meets the Borough's
handicapped parking space policy. The Borough shall determine
whether or not the applicant's request meets the Borough Handicapped
Parking Space Policy.175 The Borough shall determine whether or not to
grant, in its sole and absolute discretion, a handicapped parking space.
C. An applicant who has been granted a handicapped parking space shall
be required to renew the handicapped parking space by January 31 of
each subsequent year by submitting a written request for renewal of
the handicapped parking space to the Borough of Hellertown. The
Borough shall renew said application under the criteria set forth in the
Borough Handicapped Parking Space Policy and determine, in its sole
and absolute discretion, whether to grant the applicant's renewal
request.
D. A failure by the applicant to reapply by January 31 of each subsequent
year shall render the applicant's present handicapped parking space
void and the space shall be removed by the Borough. Should an
applicant wish to reestablish the handicapped parking space after it has
been removed by the Borough, the applicant shall be required to
reapply to the Hellertown Police Department as if this were the first
request for a handicapped parking space.
E. In the event that applicant no longer needs to have the handicapped
parking space, the applicant shall, within 30 days, notify the Borough
175. Editor's Note: A copy of the Borough Handicapped Parking Space Policy is on file in the
Borough office.
§ 425-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-31
1:521
§ 425-32. Loading and unloading zones established; blocking
prohibited.
Police Department in writing and request that the parking space and
signs be removed by the Borough.
F. Pursuant to this section, any Borough resident presently having a
handicapped parking space shall, no later than January 31, 2004,
register the applicant's handicapped parking space with the Hellertown
Police Department by submitting a written statement to the Borough
confirming the possession of a handicapped parking space and the
location of the handicapped parking space. The applicant shall request
that the handicapped parking space be renewed. A failure to comply
shall render the applicant's space void, and the space shall be removed
by the Borough. Should an applicant wish to reestablish the
handicapped parking space after it has been removed by the Borough,
the applicant shall be required to reapply to the Hellertown Police
Department as if this were the first request for a handicapped parking
space.
G. The Borough may amend the handicapped parking policy at any time by
resolution.
H. All established handicapped parking spaces shall be designated by a
sign displaying the international symbol for access for persons with
disabilities and a sign stating the penalty amount and that the vehicle in
violation may be towed at the owner's expense.
I. Any person in violation of § 425-31A may be subject to towing and shall,
upon conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of not less than $50 but not
more than $200 plus costs.
A. The following are hereby established as loading and unloading zones,
and no vehicle shall be parked in any such loading and unloading zone:
Highway Side Location
Durham Street North One 15-minute space between Main
Street and Laubach Street
Front Street West Along the west curbline to the front of
950 Front Street
Main Street West One 15-minute loading space in front of
1418 Main Street (Falk Funeral Home)
Main Street West One 15-minute loading space in front of
326 Main Street
Main Street West One 15-minute loading space in front of
520 Main Street
Saucon Street South Two 15-minute zones, Monday through
Friday, in front of Saucon Valley
Community Center
§ 425-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-32
1:522
§ 425-33. Angle parking.
§ 425-34. Residential permit parking.
B. The Borough may consider written requests for additional loading and
unloading zones on Main Street, at its sole discretion. Any additional
loading and unloading zones shall be added by amending the section to
include any new loading and unloading zones.
C. All controls and regulations created hereinunder shall become effective
and enforceable according to law upon the enactment and adoption of
this section.
A. Only angle parking shall be permitted on the following portions of
streets:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. On all streets where angle parking is required, every vehicle parked at
the angle shall be parked with its front nearest the curb.
A. Findings and purpose. The Borough finds that:
(1) Certain residential areas in the Borough are subjected to commuter
vehicle parking, therefore depriving the residents of those areas of
spaces in which to park their own vehicles.
(2) Those residential streets are also subjected to a high degree of
commuter traffic which substantially reduces the quality of the
ambient air level.
(3) The establishment of a parking permit program for certain affected
areas should facilitate efficient movement of traffic by providing for
parking preference during certain hours of the day and days of the
week. Therefore, the Borough considers it to be in the interest of
the people of the Borough to provide for the establishment of a
residential permit parking program to ensure primary access to
available parking spaces by neighborhood residents and also to
provide a cleaner ambient air level.
B. Definitions. For the purpose of this section, words and terms listed in
this subsection, as follows, shall have the following meanings:
COMMUTER VEHICLE — A motor vehicle parked in a residential area
by a person not a resident of that residential area.
PROPRIETOR — A person who owns or leases real estate within a
residential area of which he is not a resident but who owns or manages
a business enterprise or professional office maintained at that address.
For the purpose of this section, a proprietor shall be entitled to one
parking permit for that business or professional office address.
§ 425-32 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-34
1:523
RESIDENT — A person who owns or leases real property within a
residential area and who maintains either a voting residence or bona
fide occupancy, or both, at that address.
RESIDENTIAL AREA — A contiguous area containing public highways
or parts of public highways primarily abutted by residential property or
residential and nonbusiness property (such as schools, parks, places of
worship, hospitals and nursing homes).
C. Criteria. The residential areas designated in Subsection D of this
section are those deemed impacted and hence eligible for residential
parking on the basis of the following criteria:
(1) During any period between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:30 p.m.,
Monday through Saturday, except legal holidays, the number of
vehicles parked (or standing), legally or illegally, on the streets in
the area is equal to 70% or more of the legal on-street parking
capacity of the area. For the purpose of this criterion, a legal
parking space shall be 20 linear feet.
(2) During the same period as specified in Subsection C(1) above, 10%
or more of the vehicles parked (or standing) on the streets in the
area are not registered in the name of a person residing in the area.
For the purpose of this criterion, the latest available information
from the Pennsylvania Department of Transportation regarding
registration of motor vehicles shall be used, provided that, in
determining that a specific area identified as impacted and eligible
for residential permit parking is designated as a residential permit
parking area, the following factors are taken into consideration:
(a) The local and metropolitan needs with respect to clean air and
environment.
(b) The possibility of a reduction in total vehicle miles driven in the
Borough.
(c) The likelihood of alleviating traffic congestion, illegal parking
and related health and safety hazards.
(d) The proximity of public transportation to the residential area.
(e) The desire and need of the residents for residential permit
parking and their willingness to bear the administrative costs
in connection with it.
(f) The need for parking in excess of the residential permit
parking program in proximity to establishments located in the
residential permit parking area and used by the general public
for religious, health or educational purposes.
D. Designation of residential permit parking areas.
(1) The following are designated as residential permit parking areas:
§ 425-34 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-34
1:524
Area Bounded by and Including
(Reserved)
(2) Signs shall be erected along the streets in each residential permit
parking area, indicating the days, hours, locations and conditions
under which parking shall be by permit only.
E. Application for permit. Application for a residential parking permit shall
be made to the Chief of Police or his designee by the person desiring the
permit, who shall be only the owner or the driver of a motor vehicle who
resides on or is a proprietor of property immediately adjacent to a
street or other location within a residential parking permit area. A
separate application shall be required for each motor vehicle, and each
application shall be accompanied by a permit fee, in an amount as
established by resolution of the Borough, which shall be for the use of
the Borough, to be applied to the cost of administering the residential
permit parking program. Each application shall contain the following
information: the name of the owner or the driver, as the case may be, of
the motor vehicle; the address of the resident or the proprietor, as the
case may be; the make, model and registration number of the motor
vehicle; and the driver number as taken from the applicant's current
driver's license. At the discretion of the Chief of Police or his designee,
the applicant shall be required, at the time of making application, to
present his driver's license and the vehicle registration card.
F. Issuance of permit. Upon receipt of the application and the permit fee,
and determination by him that the information upon the application
shows that the applicant is entitled to a residential parking permit, the
Chief of Police or his designee shall issue to the applicant a residential
parking permit, which shall be valid for the remainder of the calendar
year. The permit shall display the serial and registration numbers of the
motor vehicle, the residential parking area number and the expiration
date. The permit shall be renewable annually before the expiration date
upon making application for renewal and payment of the permit fee. It
shall be unlawful and a violation of this section for any person to display
other than the current and valid permit while standing or parking in a
residential permit parking area at any time when those permits are to
be displayed.
G. Temporary and exemption parking permits. Temporary parking permits
may be issued by the Chief of Police or his designee, upon payment of a
fee in an amount as established by resolution of the Borough Council, to
bona fide visitors of residents of a designated residential permit
parking area, and exemption parking permits may be issued, without
payment of a fee, to handicapped persons.
H. Responsibility of permit holder.
(1) Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, the
holder of a residential parking permit shall be permitted to stand or
§ 425-34 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-34
1:525
§ 425-35. Parking prohibited during street sweeping hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle or to allow the same to
remain parked, at any time established on any of the following portions of
the highways of the Borough on the days hereby respectively designated for
street sweeping purposes:
park a motor vehicle operated by him in any designated residential
parking area during those times when parking of motor vehicles
is permitted in that area. While a vehicle for which a residential
parking permit has been issued is so parked, that permit shall be
displayed so as to be clearly visible through the windshield of the
vehicle. A residential parking permit shall not guarantee or reserve
to the holder a parking space within a designated residential
permit parking area.
(2) A residential parking permit shall not authorize its holder to stand
or park a motor vehicle in any place where or at any time when
stopping, standing or parking of motor vehicles is prohibited or set
aside for other specified types of vehicles, nor shall the permit
exempt its holder from the observance of any traffic or parking
regulation other than residential permit parking regulation or
restriction.
(3) No person other than the permit holder whose name appears on the
permit shall use a residential parking permit or display it on a
vehicle operated; any such use or display by a person other than
the permit holder shall constitute a violation of this section by the
permit holder and by the person who so used or displayed the
parking permit.
(4) It shall constitute a violation of this section for any person falsely to
represent himself as eligible for a residential parking permit or to
furnish false information in an application to the Chief of Police or
his designee in order to obtain a residential parking permit.
I. Revocation of permits. The Chief of Police or his designee shall have
authority to revoke the residential parking permit of any permit holder
found to be in violation of any provision of this section. Upon written
notification to the present holder of the revocation, the permit holder
shall surrender the permit to the Chief of Police or his designee. Failure
to do so, when so requested, shall constitute a violation of this section,
provided that any person receiving such a notice may, within 10 days
after the date of the notice, appeal to the Borough for a hearing on the
revocation, and the decision of the Borough shall be final.
§ 425-34 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-35
1:526
Street Between Day Direction Time Period
Main Street Cherry Lane
and Polk Valley
Road
Wednesday South 7:00 to 9:00
a.m.
Main Street Cherry Lane
and Polk Valley
Road
Thursday North 7:00 to 9:00
a.m.
§ 425-36. Parking without lights authorized.
The boundary limits of the Borough of Hellertown are hereby established as
a zone in which motor vehicles may remain standing without lights, and all
highways within such boundary limits are hereby designated as highways
where motor vehicles may remain standing without lights.
§ 425-37. Commercial parking; parking for storage purposes
prohibited.
A. Definitions. As used in this section, the following terms shall have the
meanings indicated:
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE — A motor vehicle designed or used
to transport passengers or property:
If the vehicle has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more
pounds or such lesser rating as the Department shall adopt under
the provisions of Section 6103(c) (relating to promulgation of rules
and regulations by Department), as determined by federal
regulation and published by the Department as a notice in the
Pennsylvania Bulletin;
(1)
If the vehicle is designed to transport 16 or more passengers,
including the driver;
(2)
(3) If the vehicle is a school bus; or
If the vehicle is transporting hazardous materials and is required
to be placarded in accordance with Department regulations.
(4)
Any motor vehicle designed for carrying freight or merchandise
which has more than four wheels and tires, or a body removable
or otherwise, designed as a mobile home for travel or camping.
Trailers, irrespective of the number of wheels or the designed
use, be it for the transportation of personal property, recreational
equipment boats, snowmobiles, motorcycles, etc.) shall be
considered "commercial motor vehicle."
(5)
Any motor vehicle, the operation of which requires a commercial
driver's license.
(6)
Any motor vehicle which is utilized for a commercial purpose
regardless of the vehicle's license designation.
(7)
§ 425-35 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-37
1:527
§ 425-38. Bus stops established; parking prohibited.
The following areas upon the highways in the Borough are hereby
established as "bus stops" and no vehicle, other than a bus engaged in
loading, unloading or awaiting passengers, shall be parked in any such area
at any time:
Highway Location
Magnolia Road Along the north side between Northampton Street
and Rentzheimer Drive, school buses only.
Main Street At Cherry Lane
Main Street At Chestnut Street
Main Street At Depot Street
Main Street At Easton Road
Main Street At High Street
Main Street At Kichline Avenue
COMMERCIAL PURPOSE — Use of an automobile for commerce or
business to obtain a profit.
B. Unless specifically permitted by law or ordinance, it shall be prohibited
to park any commercial vehicle upon any highway in the Borough or to
allow the same to be parked for any commercial purpose, or for the sale
or exhibition of any commercial purpose, or for the sale of the vehicle
itself or for any property therein, or for any commercial purpose,
regardless of the vehicle's license designation, wherein the parking of
the vehicle becomes a means whereby the transaction becomes affected
or effected. Provided that nothing herein shall apply to the delivery of
goods, wares or merchandise or the loading or unloading thereof over
brief periods of time, or the parking of a vehicle for purposes of
providing business services to a residential or commercial building,
provided that said vehicle shall not be parked in one place upon the
public right-of-way continuously for a period of 12 hours, unless
permitted to remain at the site pursuant to a permit obtained from the
Borough to conduct the underlying work to the premises.
C. Parking for trailer storage. No trailer, with or without a load, to include
a house trailer, recreational trailer, camping trailer, truck trailer, boat
trailer, equipment trailer, vehicle trailer, horse trailer, commercial
trailer and utility trailer, shall be parked upon any public right-of-way
without having attached thereto a means of mechanical motorized
traction constructed, designed or adopted for the purpose of pulling or
drawing said trailer. Any trailer that has attached thereto a means of
mechanical, motorized traction constructed, designed or adopted for
the purpose of pulling or drawing said trailer shall be permitted to park
in the Industrial Zoning District but shall not remain upon the public
right-of-way continuously in the Industrial Zoning District for a period
in excess of 72 hours.
§ 425-37 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-38
1:528
Highway Location
Main Street At Kiernan Avenue
Main Street At Linden Avenue
Main Street At Magnolia Road
Main Street At Penn Street
Main Street At Plaza Lane
Main Street At Roth Avenue
Main Street At Saucon Street
Main Street At Spruce Street
Main Street At the southwest corner of Main and Clarke Streets
to the front of 1322 Main Street
Main Street At Thomas Avenue
Main Street At Wagner Avenue
Main Street At Walnut Street
Main Street At Wilson Avenue
§ 425-39. Parking prohibited for certain types of vehicles in certain
locations.
The following area is hereby established as a no-parking zone for tractortrailer
vehicles, except for those instances when the purpose is the delivery
of goods, wares or merchandise or the loading or unloading thereof.
Highway Side Location
Cherry Lane South Between Main Street and Easton Road
§ 425-39.1. Parking prohibited in specified spaces. [Added
4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 822]
General rule: Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or
to protect the safety of any person or vehicle or in compliance with law or
the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall:
A. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
(1) On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge
or curb of a street.
(2) On a sidewalk.
(3) Within an intersection.
(4) On a crosswalk.
(5) Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
§ 425-38 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-39.1
1:529
unless a different length is indicated by official traffic control
devices.
(6) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when
stopping, standing or parking would obstruct traffic.
(7) Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or
within a highway tunnel.
(8) On any railroad tracks.
(9) In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including
crossovers.
(10) At any place where official signs prohibit stopping.
B. Stand or park any vehicle:
(1) In front of a public or private driveway.
(2) Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant.
(3) Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection.
(4) Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign,
yield sign or traffic control signal located at the side of a roadway.
(5) Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or, when
properly sign-posted, on the side of a street opposite the entrance
to any fire station within 75 feet of the entrance.
(6) Where the vehicle would prevent the free movement of a streetcar.
(7) On a limited access highway unless authorized by official traffic
control devices.
(8) At any place where official signs prohibit standing.
(9) In the front yard of any property, except in accordance with the
following requirements:
(a) The vehicle is parked on a solid surface parking pad
constructed of either macadam or concrete;
(b) The vehicle must be parked in such a way so as to not obstruct
other driveways, sidewalks, or the right-of-way; and
(c) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle may be temporarily
parked in a front yard of a residence found within a residential
zoning district for the purpose of loading and unloading items
for a period not to exceed one hour per week, as measured
from Sunday, 12:01 a.m. through Saturday, 11:59 p.m.
(d) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle may be temporarily
parked in a front yard of a residence found within a residential
§ 425-39.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-39.1
1:530
§ 425-40. Violations and penalties.
Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction,
be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $25 and costs, provided that it
shall be the duty of the police officers and of parking enforcement personnel
of the Borough to report to the appropriate official all violations of any
provision of this article, indicating, in each case, the section violated; the
license number of the vehicle involved in the violation; the location where
the violation took place; and any other facts that might be necessary in
order to secure a clear understanding of the circumstances attending the
violation. The police officer or other person making the report shall also
attach to or place upon every such vehicle a notice stating that the vehicle
was parked in violation of this article. The notice shall contain instructions
to the owner or driver of the vehicle that if he will report to the office of the
Chief of Police or his designee and pay the sum of $25 within 72 hours after
the time of the notice, or if he will place the sum of $25 enclosed within
the envelope provided in any of the special parking fine boxes installed at
various locations within the Borough, that act will save the violator from
prosecution and from payment of the fine and costs prescribed in the first
sentence of this section.
zoning district in the event of a Borough-declared snow
emergency for a period not to exceed 24 hours.
(e) Notwithstanding the foregoing, a vehicle may be temporarily
parked on Borough park property or other Borough-owned
property as permitted by Borough ordinance and/or by special
permit, which shall be deemed to supersede this section as it
relates to Borough-owned park property.
C. Park a vehicle:
(1) Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing.
(2) At any place where official signs prohibit parking.
D. No person shall park or leave on the streets, highway or public property
of the Borough of Hellertown any mechanically inoperable vehicles or
vehicles without current registration plates or current inspection
stickers.
§ 425-39.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-40
1:531

ARTICLE IV
Removal and Impoundment of Illegally Parked Vehicles
§ 425-41. Applicability and scope.
This article is enacted under authority of Section 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the Borough to
remove and impound those vehicles which are parked in a tow-away zone
and in violation of parking regulations of this chapter. Vehicles which have
been abandoned (as defined by the Vehicle Code) or which are parked in
such a manner as to interfere with traffic or pose a hazard to others may be
towed under the provisions of the Pennsylvania Vehicle Code.
§ 425-42. Authority to remove and impound.
The Borough shall have authority to remove and impound or to order
the removal and impounding of any vehicle parked overtime or otherwise
illegally, provided that the circumstances of its parking were within the
conditions stated in § 425-41 of this article, and provided that no such
vehicle shall be removed or impounded except in strict adherence to the
provisions of this chapter or the provisions of the Vehicle Code.
§ 425-43. Tow-away zones.
The following designated streets and/or parking lots are hereby established
as tow-away zones. Signs shall be posted to place the public on notice that
their vehicles may be towed for violation of Borough parking regulations:
Street Side Between Parking Lot
(Reserved)
§ 425-44. Designation of approved storage garages; bonding;
towing and storage.
Removal and impounding of vehicles under this chapter shall be done only
by approved storage garages that shall be designated from time to time by
the Borough. Every such garage shall submit evidence to the Borough that
it is bonded or has acquired liability insurance in an amount satisfactory
to the Borough as sufficient to indemnify owners of impounded vehicles
against loss or damage to those vehicles while in the custody of the garage
keeper for the purpose of towing or storage. The approved storage garage
shall submit to the Borough its schedule of charges for towing and storage
of vehicles under this chapter and, when the schedule is approved by
the Borough, those charges shall be adhered to by the approved storage
garage; no different schedule of charges shall be demanded of or collected
from any person whose vehicle is removed or impounded under this chapter
by any approved storage garage. The Borough shall delete from its list of
approved storage garages any garage that makes any unapproved charge in
connection with any vehicle removed or impounded under this chapter.
§ 425-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-45
1:533
§ 425-45. Payment of towing and storage charges.
The payment of towing and storage charges shall not relieve the owner or
driver of any vehicle from liability for any fine or penalty for the violation
of the provision of this chapter for which the vehicle was removed or
impounded.
§ 425-46. Reclamation costs.
In order to reclaim his vehicle, the owner shall pay towing and storage
costs plus a $25 fee, of which $10 shall be transferred to the Pennsylvania
Department of Transportation by the garage to which the vehicle was taken.
§ 425-47. Records of vehicles removed and impounded.
The Borough shall cause a record to be kept of all vehicles impounded under
this chapter and shall be able at all reasonable times to furnish the owners
or the agents of the owners of those vehicles with information as to the
place of storage of the vehicle.
§ 425-48. Restrictions upon removal of vehicles.
No vehicle shall be removed under the authority of this chapter or the
Vehicle Code if, at the time of the intended removal, the owner or the
person for the time being in charge of the vehicle is present and expresses
a willingness and intention to remove the vehicle immediately.
§ 425-49. Violations and penalties.
Any person who shall violate any provision of this chapter shall, upon
conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of $50 together with all costs
of disposing of the vehicle under the provisions of the Vehicle Code, 75 P.S.
§ 7301 et seq.
§ 425-50. Reports and disposition of unclaimed vehicles.
If after a period of 15 days the vehicle in storage remains unclaimed, a
report shall be filed with PennDOT in accordance with Section 7311 of the
Vehicle Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7311, by the person having legal custody of
the vehicle. If the vehicle has not been claimed after 30 days, the vehicle
may be transferred to a licensed salvor who will then be responsible for
filing the proper reports and disposing of the vehicle in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 73 of the Vehicle Code (75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.).
§ 425-45 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-50
1:534
ARTICLE V
Snow and Ice Emergency
§ 425-51. Declaration of snow and ice emergency.
In order to facilitate the movement of traffic and to combat the hazards
of snow and ice on the snow emergency routes named in § 425-53 of this
article, the Mayor, in his discretion, may declare a snow and ice emergency
(designated in this article as a "snow emergency"). Information on the
existence of a snow emergency shall be given by the Borough through radio,
newspaper or other available media, and information on the termination of
the emergency may be given by use of the same media.
§ 425-52. Parking prohibited, driving motor vehicles restricted on
snow emergency routes during emergency.
After any snow emergency is declared, it shall be unlawful at any time
during the continuance of the emergency for any person:
§ 425-53. Snow emergency routes designated.
The following are designated as snow emergency routes:
Street Between
Cherry Lane Main Street and Easton Road
Constitution Avenue Durham Street and Walnut Street
Depot Street Easton Road and Durham Street
Depot Street Front Street and Main Street
Durham Street Delaware Avenue and Borough limits
Easton Road Cherry Lane and Main Street
Front Street Sycamore Street and Walnut Street
High Street Railroad Bridge and Easton Road
Linden Avenue Main Street and Silver Creek C.C.
Magnolia Road Front Street and Willow Road
Main Street I-78 and Polk Valley Road
Northampton Street Easton Road and Walnut Street
Penn Street Main Street and Delaware Avenue
Rentzheimer Drive New York Avenue and Walnut Street
Sycamore Street Front Street and Main Street
A. To park a motor vehicle or to allow that vehicle to remain parked
anywhere on any snow emergency route designated in § 425-53 of this
article.
B. To drive any motor vehicle on any such snow emergency route unless
that vehicle is equipped with snow tires or chains.
§ 425-51 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-53
1:535
Street Between
Tobias Drive Durham Street and Walnut Street
Wagner Avenue Main Street and Zimpfer Lane
Walnut Street Borough limits and Constitution Avenue
Water Street Borough limits and Rentzheimer Drive
Willow Road Durham Street and Constitution Avenue
§ 425-54. Placement of signs; information on existence of
emergency.
§ 425-55. Violations and penalties.
A. In order to assist the operators of motor vehicles and tractors in
determining the highways affected by this article, the Mayor or the
Chief of Police or his designee shall place around utility poles on the
highways or portions thereof designated in § 425-53 of this article,
signs reading as follows:
SNOW
EMERGENCY
ROUTE
SNOW TIRES OR CHAINS REQUIRED
NO PARKING
DURING EMERGENCY
VEHICLES TOWED AWAY
B. The Mayor or the Chief of Police or his designee shall also, through
radio, newspaper or other available media, disseminate information as
to the existence of such an emergency.
A. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 425-51 of this article a person shall park a motor vehicle or allow a
motor vehicle to remain parked anywhere upon a snow emergency
route, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and, upon
conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $15 and
costs.
B. If at any time during a period of snow emergency declared under
§ 425-51 of this article a person shall drive a motor vehicle upon a snow
emergency route without having that vehicle equipped with snow tires
or chains, that person shall be guilty of a violation of this article and,
upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-53 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-55
1:536
ARTICLE VI
Regulation of Pedalcycles and Nonmotorized Vehicles
§ 425-56. Riding and parking of pedalcycles on sidewalks along
certain streets prohibited.
§ 425-57. Restrictions on use of pushcarts.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or to park a pedalcycle on the
sidewalk along the following portions of the streets in the Borough:
Street Side Between
(Reserved)
B. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. The word "pushcart," as used in this section, shall mean a vehicle,
including a pedalcycle, propelled solely by human power, and used or
intended for use for the display, transport, exhibit or sale of goods,
wares or merchandise.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to propel a pushcart upon any
sidewalk in any business district except as necessary to move the
pushcart to a location from which it is to be loaded or unloaded or from
which goods, wares or merchandise are to be sold or dispensed under
permit from the Borough, as provided in Subsection C below.
C. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a pushcart upon any sidewalk
except for the purpose of selling or dispensing from that pushcart
goods, wares or merchandise to passersby under permit from the
Borough. Every such permit shall be issued to the person making
application for the permit, upon payment of a fee, which shall be for the
use of the Borough set by the Borough by resolution. The permit shall
be granted to the applicant, upon payment of the fee, and upon the
applicant signing an agreement with the Borough that he shall be
bound by the conditions imposed by Borough and made a part of the
permit dealing with the following matters:
(1) Restricting or limiting the parking of the pushcart to one or more
stated locations upon the sidewalk and to stated days and hours at
each location.
(2) Stating requirements to be adhered to in connection with the
disposal of garbage and refuse resulting from the operations
carried on.
(3) Requiring that there be no violation of any law, ordinance or
regulation pertaining to health, sanitation and the handling of food
or drink.
§ 425-56 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-57
1:537
§ 425-58. Skates, skateboards, coasters, sleds and other toy
vehicles.
D. Any person who violates any provision of this section, or any condition
of any permit granted under this section, upon conviction, shall be
sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
A. It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on a sled upon any sidewalk in
the Borough or upon any roadway. Nothing in this subsection shall
prevent a pedestrian from pulling a sled, with or without a rider, upon a
sidewalk.
B. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in roller-skating,
skateboarding or to ride upon or propel any coaster or other toy vehicle
upon:
(1) Any street except in order to cross the roadway.
(2) Any sidewalk located in a business district; except that nothing in
this subsection shall prevent a pedestrian from pulling a coaster or
other toy vehicle, with or without a rider, upon a sidewalk.
C. Any person who violates any provision of this section shall, upon
conviction, be sentenced to pay a fine of $25 and costs.
§ 425-57 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-58
1:538
ARTICLE VII
Pedestrian Regulations
§ 425-59. Pedestrians to obey traffic-control signs.
At all locations in the Borough where official traffic control signals are
installed, pedestrians, except where directed otherwise by pedestrian
control signals installed under § 425-60 of this article, shall obey the
directions of those traffic control signals, as follows:
§ 425-60. Pedestrian-control signal locations established.
§ 425-61. Pedestrians crossing at other than crosswalks.
A. When facing a green signal, a pedestrian may proceed across the
roadway within a crosswalk.
B. When facing a steady yellow signal, a pedestrian shall not start to cross
the roadway.
C. When facing a steady red signal, a pedestrian shall not enter the
roadway.
A. At the following locations, official pedestrian-control signals shall be
erected (or are ratified if previously erected):
Location
Main Street and Walnut Street
Main Street and Water Street
B. Every pedestrian facing a steady or flashing "Don't Walk" signal shall
obey the directions of that signal, as follows:
(1) When facing a steady "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partially completed his crossing on the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone while the "Don't
Walk" signal is showing.
(2) When facing a flashing "Don't Walk" signal, a pedestrian shall not
start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal, but any
pedestrian who has partly completed crossing during the "Walk"
signal should proceed to a sidewalk or safety zone. Any pedestrian
who fails to obey the directions of a "Don't Walk" signal, as
indicated above, shall be guilty of an offense and a violation of this
chapter.
A. Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
crosswalk at any intersection or any marked crosswalk shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
§ 425-59 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 425-61
1:539
§ 425-62. Locations where pedestrians may cross only in crosswalk.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 425-63. Pedestrians soliciting rides or business.
It shall be unlawful for any pedestrian:
§ 425-64. Violations and penalties.
Any pedestrian who violates any provision of this article shall be guilty of a
summary offense and, upon conviction, shall be sentenced to pay a fine of
$25 and costs.
B. No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic-control devices or at the direction of a
police officer or other appropriately attired person authorized to direct,
control or regulate traffic. When authorized to cross diagonally,
pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the signal pertaining to
the crossing movements.
A. To cross any roadway in a business district within the Borough except in
a crosswalk.
B. To cross the roadway in any of the following portions of streets in the
Borough except in a crosswalk.
Street Between
Front Street Sycamore Street to Walnut Street
Main Street McAdoo Avenue and north
Borough line
C. Provided that nothing in this section shall permit any pedestrian to
cross in a crosswalk at any location where that crossing is prohibited by
§425-60 of this article.
A. To stand on roadway for the purpose of soliciting a ride.
B. To stand on a roadway for the purpose of soliciting employment,
business or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
§ 425-61 HELLERTOWN CODE § 425-64
1:540
Chapter 430
VEHICLES, JUNKED AND ABANDONED
GENERAL REFERENCES
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Nuisances — See Ch. 278.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Vehicles and traffic — See Ch. 425.
§ 430-1. Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the meanings
indicated:
NUISANCE — It shall be unlawful for any person, owner or lessee to
maintain a motor vehicle nuisance outside of an enclosed structure on
the private grounds of such person, owner or lessee within the Borough
of Hellertown or upon any public grounds owned by the Borough of
Hellertown. A motor vehicle nuisance shall include, but is not limited to, any
vehicle which is unable to move under its own power and has any of the
following physical defects:[Added 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 694]
A. Broken windshields, mirrors, or other glass with sharp edges.
One or more flat or open tires or tubes which would permit vermin
harborage.
B.
Missing doors, windows, hood, trunk, or other body parts which could
permit animal harborage.
C.
D. Any body part with sharp edges, including holes resulting from rust.
E. Missing tires resulting in unsafe suspension of the motor vehicle.
Upholstery which is torn or open which could permit animal and/or
vermin harborage.
F.
G. Broken headlamps or taillamps with sharp edges.
Disassembled chassis parts apart from the motor vehicle, stored in a
disorderly fashion or loose in or on the vehicle.
H.
I. Protruding sharp objects from the chassis.
Broken vehicle frame suspended from the ground in an unstable
manner.
J.
Leaking or damaged oil pan or gas tank which could cause fire or
explosion.
K.
L. Exposed battery containing acid.
§ 425-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-1
1:541
VEHICLE — An article designed for travel by the use of wheels, treads,
runners, propellers or slides, the principal purpose of which is to transport
persons, property and/or goods on or through a medium and shall include,
without limitation, automobiles, trucks, trailers, motorcycles, tractors,
snowmobiles and boats or other items of mechanical conveyance.
VEHICLE, ABANDONED — A vehicle (other than a pedalcycle) shall be
deemed to be abandoned under any of the following circumstances:[Added
3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 817; amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 822]
M. Inoperable locking mechanisms for doors or trunk.
N. Open or damaged floorboards, including trunk and fire wall.
O. Damaged bumpers pulled away from the perimeter for the vehicle.
P. Broken grill with protruding edges.
Q. Loose or damaged metal trim and clips.
R. Broken communications equipment antenna.
S. Suspended or unstable supports.
Such other defects which could threaten the health, safety and welfare
of the citizens of the Borough of Hellertown.
T.
Given its current state of repair, is not capable of being used for
the principal purpose(s) for which it is constructed or maintained and
which condition would permit vermin harboring and/or such other
condition to constitute a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of
any person. [Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 817]
U.
Be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the process of being
stripped, dismantled or restored, which shall include any portions of
disassembled vehicles and/or assembled or disassembled vehicle parts
and which condition would permit vermin harboring or other such
condition to constitute a detriment to the health, safety and welfare of
any person. [Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 817]
V.
The vehicle is physically inoperable and or is left unattended on a
highway or other public property or private property for more than 48
hours.
A.
The vehicle has remained illegally on a highway or other public
property or private property for a period of more than 48 hours.
B.
The vehicle is left unattended on or along a highway or other public
property for more than 48 hours and does not bear all of the following:
(1) A valid registration plate.
(2) A current certificate of inspection.
(3) An ascertainable vehicle identification number.
C.
§ 430-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 430-1
1:542
VEHICLE, JUNKED — A vehicle, as defined in this chapter, which meets
the definition of "nuisance" and which has been stored on the premises
outside of an enclosed structure, which shall be defined as having four
walls and a roof, or covered by an opaque tarp, for a period in excess of
15 days.[Amended 8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 694; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No.
817]
§ 430-2. Storage of junked vehicles prohibited. [Amended
8-21-2006 by Ord. No. 694; 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775; 3-20-2017 by
Ord. No. 817]
The vehicle has remained on private property without the consent of
the owner or person in control of the property.
D.
A. It shall be deemed a violation of this chapter for the owner or legal
tenant of any property or premises to park or store (in the open) outside
of an enclosed structure, defined as having four walls and a roof or
covered by an approved opaque covering, any junked vehicle or
vehicles or to permit another to park or store in the open any junked
vehicle or vehicles or to permit another to park or store in the open any
junked vehicle or vehicle when such use constitutes a nuisance and/or
poses a threat to the health, safety or welfare of the public.
B. When a law enforcement officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer of the
Borough shall determine that a junked vehicle (as defined in § 430-1 of
this chapter) is being maintained on a property in violation of the terms
of this chapter, said officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall notify
the owner of the subject property by certified mail and shall order said
owner to abate the violation and come into full compliance with the
terms of this chapter within 15 days from the receipt of the notification.
Should the certified mail be returned or unclaimed the law enforcement
officer and/or Code Enforcement Officer shall notify the owner by
regular first class mail.
C. If the owner of a junked motor vehicle cannot be located or does not
remove the vehicle, the Borough Code Enforcement Officer shall
contact the Hellertown Police Department, which is authorized to
remove said vehicle under Transportation, 67 Pa. Code Chapter 253,
titled "Salvors," and Vehicles, Title 75, Chapter 73, the Abandoned
Vehicles and Cargos Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.176
[Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 822]
D. The Borough of Hellertown shall have the right to forgo the fifteen-day
waiting period and immediately remove any vehicle that violates this
chapter and poses an immediate threat to the general public or
property. All costs incurred by this removal shall be done at the owner's
expense. The Borough of Hellertown shall have sole discretion of what
is deemed to be an immediate threat to the general public or property.
[Added 4-16-2018 by Ord. No. 822]
176. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ 430-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-3
1:543
§ 430-3. Abandoned vehicles on public streets or on private
property without consent. [Added 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 817177]
§ 430-4. Violations and penalties. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775; 3-20-2017 by Ord. No. 817]
A. This section is enacted under authority of § 6109(a)(22) of the Vehicle
Code, 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 6109(a)(22), and gives authority to the Borough to
remove and impound those abandoned vehicles which are parked on a
public street, or private property without the consent of the property
owner.
B. When a law enforcement officer of the Borough and/or Borough Code
Enforcement Officer shall determine that an abandoned vehicle, as
defined in § 430-1, is being maintained on public property or upon
private property in violation of the terms of this chapter, said officer
shall notify the owner of the vehicle by certified mail. The notice shall
order said owner to remove the vehicle from the public street or private
property, and to come into full compliance with the terms of this
chapter within 72 hours from receipt of notification that the vehicle is in
violation of this chapter. Should the certified mail be returned
unclaimed, the law enforcement officer shall notify the owner of the
vehicle by regular first-class mail. Upon notification or upon the regular
mail not being returned within 15 days the law enforcement officer
shall cause to be affixed to the vehicle a notice setting forth the
registration or VIN number, state, location of the vehicle, date and time
of placement of the notice of violation and maximum fine, and of the
right of the Borough to impound the vehicle at the owner's expense if
the abandoned vehicle is not moved within 72 hours from receipt of
notice as set forth in this section. [Amended 4-16-2018 by Ord. No.
822]
C. In the event the owner of the abandoned vehicle cannot be located or
shall not comply with the requirements of this chapter, the Borough
Code Enforcement Officer shall contact the Hellertown Police
Department, which is authorized to remove and impound an abandoned
vehicle under Transportation, 67 Pa. Code Chapter 253, titled "Salvors"
and Vehicles, Title 75, Chapter 73, the Abandoned Vehicles and Cargos
Code of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.178 [Amended 4-16-2018
by Ord. No. 822]
A. Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any provision of this
chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not
less than $50 but not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of
payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed
30 days. Each day that a violation of this chapter continues or each
section of this chapter which shall be found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
177. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former § 430-3 as § 430-4.
178. Editor's Note: See 75 Pa.C.S.A. § 7301 et seq.
§ 430-3 HELLERTOWN CODE § 430-4
1:544
Chapter 438
WATER
GENERAL REFERENCES
Hellertown Borough Authority — See Ch. 7,
Art. I.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Property maintenance — See Ch. 310.
Sewers — See Ch. 338.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Zoning — See Ch. 450.
B. It shall be deemed a continuous violation of this chapter should any
owner of a junked and/or abandoned vehicle or vehicles attempt to
avoid the intent of the chapter by removing the junked and/or
abandoned vehicle or vehicles from the property and placing said
vehicle or vehicles in an enclosed structure, as defined in this chapter,
during the fifteen-day notice period only to return the same or another
vehicle or vehicles owned by the aggrieved property owner to an area of
the property outside an enclosed structure that would meet the
definition of a junked and/or abandoned vehicle or vehicles, as defined
in this chapter, within six months of receiving the initial notice of
violation.
C. The Borough of Hellertown shall have the right to forgo the fifteen-day
waiting period and immediately remove any vehicle that violates this
chapter and poses an immediate threat to the general public or
property. All costs incurred by this removal shall be done at the owner's
expense. The Borough of Hellertown shall have sole discretion of what
is deemed to be an immediate threat to the general public or property.
§ 430-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 430-4
1:545

ARTICLE I
Water System Rules
[Adopted 3-16-1987 by Ord. No. 547]
§ 438-1. Short title.
This article shall be known and cited as the "Water System Rules and
Regulations Ordinance of the Borough of Hellertown."
§ 438-2. Adoption of water system rules and regulations.179
There hereby is adopted by and under the authority of the Council of the
Borough of Hellertown, for the purpose of providing rules and regulations
governing the use of the Hellertown Water System, as owned, operated and
controlled by the Hellertown Borough Authority, the Rules and Regulations
of the Hellertown Borough Authority for Use of Water System, as adopted
by said Authority on December 10, 1986, as amended from time to time.
The aforesaid rules and regulations hereby are adopted and incorporated as
fully as if set out at length herein and, from the date on which this article
shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling upon all users of
the Hellertown Water System.
§ 438-3. Responsibility for payment of fees, etc.
The legal and/or equitable owner(s) of the real estate to which the water
service is being provided shall be responsible to pay and shall pay the fees,
fines and penalties as may be imposed properly pursuant to the terms of
this article.
§ 438-4. Violations and penalties.180
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate any of the provisions of
this article or any resolutions or rules and regulations made by the Council
of the Borough of Hellertown or by the Hellertown Borough Authority
in pursuance thereof or aiding or assisting therein shall, upon conviction
thereof, be sentenced to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and,
in default of payment of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not
to exceed 30 days. Each day that a violation of this article continues or each
section of this article which shall been found to have been violated shall
constitute a separate offense.
§ 438-5. Additional remedies.
In addition to the foregoing penalties, the Borough of Hellertown, either
itself or acting through the Hellertown Borough Authority as its agent,
shall require the owner of any property to which water service is being
provided to correct any illegal, improper or unauthorized connections to
179. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
180. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 438-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-5
1:547
or uses of the water system, and should said owner(s) fail or refuse to
make such required correction(s) no later than 10 days following the receipt
of a written notice to do so, the Borough or the Authority may cause
the corrections to be made, with the costs thereof being charged to the
owner(s) of the property in a manner provided by law.
§ 438-6. Abatement.
The imposition of penalties and/or remedies herein prescribed shall not
preclude the Borough of Hellertown or the Hellertown Borough Authority
from instituting appropriate actions or proceedings to prevent the violation
of this article, to restrain, correct or abate any such violation, or to prevent
any act, conduct or activity constituting a violation of the provisions hereof.
§ 438-7. Effective date.
This article shall be effective five days from the date hereof.
§ 438-5 HELLERTOWN CODE § 438-7
1:548
ARTICLE II
Water Conservation
[Adopted 5-4-1992 by Ord. No. 583]
§ 438-8. General policy.
No water shall be provided for internal or external use to any residential,
commercial, industrial, recreational, agricultural, governmental or public
building or structure of any kind which is constructed or remodeled and in
which plumbing, water piping or water fixtures are to be installed, extended
or altered in any way, and for which work a permit is required to be obtained
from the Borough of Hellertown (or would be required but for an exemption
from such a permit requirements for public or governmental agencies),
unless the new, extended or altered plumbing, water piping and other
water-using fixtures therein conform to the requirements and standards set
forth below at § 438-9 of this article. The provisions of this article shall
apply to any such building or structure for which such a permit is issued, or
otherwise would be required to be issued but for an exemption as provided
for in § 438-11 below, on or after the date of adoption of this article.
§ 438-9. Water conservation performance and lead-free standards
for plumbing fixtures and fittings.
A. Water closets and associated flushing mechanisms. The water
consumption of all water closets shall not exceed the average 1.6
gallons per flush cycle over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
pounds per square inch (psi). The fixture shall perform in accordance
with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI A112.19.6M.
B. Urinals and associated flushing mechanisms. Urinal water consumption
shall not exceed an average of 1 1/2 gallons per flush cycle over a range
of test pressures from 20 to 80 psi. The fixtures shall perform in
accordance with the test requirements of ANSI A112.19.2M and ANSI
A112.19.6M.
C. Showerheads. Showerhead discharge rates shall not exceed three
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112.18.1M.
D. Faucets. Sink and lavatory discharge rates shall not exceed three
gallons of water per minute over a range of test pressures from 20 to 80
psi. The fixture shall perform in accordance with the test requirements
of ANSI A112.18.1M.
E. Soldered joints. The joining of water supply piping systems shall be
made with lead-free solder and fluxes. For purposes of this article,
"lead-free" shall mean a chemical composition equal to or less than 2/
10% lead and conforming to ASTM B32.
§ 438-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-10
1:549
§ 438-10. Compliance documentation.
It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property at which any
plumbing work addressed by this article is proposed to document to the
satisfaction of the Borough of Hellertown that the fixtures and materials
to be used in the proposed work comply fully with the water conservation
performance and lead-free standards set forth herein.
§ 438-11. Special provisions.
§ 438-12. Review and modification.
The Council of the Borough of Hellertown, from time to time, may review
and modify, add to or delete from the standards and restrictions as
contained herein pursuant to resolution of said Council.
§ 438-13. Violation and penalties.181
Any person, firm or corporation who shall violate or does not comply with
any provision(s) of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be sentenced
to pay a fine of not more than $1,000 plus costs and, in default of payment
of said fine and costs, to a term of imprisonment not to exceed 30 days.
Each day that a violation of this article continues or each section of this
article which shall be found to have been violated shall constitute a separate
offense.
A. Special purpose equipment. The performance standards established in
§ 438-9, supra, shall not apply to fixtures and fittings such as
emergency showers, aspirator faucets and blowout fixtures that, in
order to perform a specialized function, cannot meet the specified
standards.
B. Exemptions. Any person may apply to the Borough of Hellertown for an
exemption to the standards set forth in this article, which may be
granted upon proof that some other device, system or procedure will
save as much or more water as those set forth herein, or that those set
forth herein cannot be complied with absent of undue hardship.
181. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 438-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 438-13
1:550
Chapter 450
ZONING
GENERAL REFERENCES
Planning Commission — See Ch. 61.
Code enforcement — See Ch. 153.
Uniform construction codes — See Ch. 160.
Flood damage prevention — See Ch. 204.
Rental property — See Ch. 326.
Sewers — See Ch. 338.
Political signs — See Ch. 349.
Storage containers — See Ch. 372.
Stormwater management — See Ch. 378.
Curbs, sidewalks and driveways — See Ch.
385, Art. III.
Subdivision and land development — See Ch.
390.
Swimming pools — See Ch. 399.
Transient retail businesses — See Ch. 411.
Trees — See Ch. 416.
Water — See Ch. 438.
§ 438-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 438-13
1:551

ARTICLE I
Title and Short Title
§ 450-1. Title.
An ordinance to limit and restrict to specified districts or zones, and to
regulate therein, buildings and structures according to their construction
and the nature of and the extent of their use and the nature and extent of
the uses of land in Hellertown Borough, Northampton County, Pennsylvania,
hereinafter referred to as "the Borough," and providing for the
administration and enforcement of the provisions therein contained, and
fixing penalties for the violation thereof.
§ 450-2. Short title.
This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the "Hellertown Borough
Zoning Ordinance of 2002."
§ 450-3. Declaration of purpose.
This chapter is adopted for the purpose of promoting the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare of the community and to further the
following related and more specific objectives:
A. To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development and
redevelopment of the Borough in accordance with the goals, objectives
and plans of the Hellertown Borough Comprehensive Plan of 1977, as
amended by the 1984 supplement and the 2000 supplement. These
goals, objectives and plans are hereby incorporated as objectives of this
chapter.
B. To protect the established character and the social and economic wellbeing
of both private and public property.
C. To promote, in the public interest, the utilization of land for the
purposes for which it is most appropriate.
D. To secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers and to provide
adequate light, air and convenience of access.
E. To prevent overcrowding of land or buildings and to avoid undue
concentration of population.
F. To lessen and, where possible, to prevent traffic congestion on public
streets and highways.
G. To conserve the value of buildings and to enhance the value of land
throughout the Borough.
§ 450-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-3
1:553

ARTICLE II
Application of Regulations
§ 450-4. Conformity with use regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof and
no lot or land or part thereof shall hereafter be used, except in conformity
with the use regulations herein prescribed. Any lawful use that does not
conform to the use regulations of this chapter shall be deemed a
nonconforming use, except that uses granted as special exception uses by
the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 450-64 shall be deemed conforming
uses. Variances granted by the Zoning Hearing Board pursuant to § 450-65
shall be deemed nonconforming.
§ 450-5. Conformity with building regulations.
Except as hereinafter provided, no building or structure or part thereof
shall hereafter be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or rebuilt except
in conformity with the lot dimensions, yard, court, coverage, height and
density regulations herein prescribed. Any building or structure that does
not conform to such regulations, hereinafter referred to as the "building
regulations" of this chapter, shall be deemed a nonconforming structure,
irrespective of the use to which it is put.
§ 450-6. Continuation of existing uses.
Any legally established existing use of a building or structure, lot or land, or
part thereof, which use continues a conforming use under the provisions of
this chapter, may be continued.
§ 450-6.1. Condemnation. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
A partial taking by eminent domain of a de minimis portion of land or
improvements by the Borough of Hellertown which would cause any
property, in whole or in part, to become nonconforming as to any provision
of this chapter shall be deemed to be conforming and not in violation of the
Borough Zoning Ordinance immediately and simultaneously upon the date
of the taking.
§ 450-4 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-6.1
1:555

ARTICLE III
Definitions
§ 450-7. Definitions; word usage.
Certain words and terms are used in this chapter for the purposes hereof
and are defined as follows.
A. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, words used in the
present tense include the future, the singular numbers include the
plural and the plural the singular.
B. The word "person" includes a profit or nonprofit corporation, company,
partnership, individual or other entity.
C. The word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is
permissive.
D. The word "lot" includes the work "plot."
E. The word "structure" includes the word "building."
F. The word "use" and the word "used" refer to any purpose for which a lot
or land or part thereof is arranged, intended or designed to be used,
occupied, maintained, made available or offered for use, and to any
purpose for which a building or structure or part thereof is arranged,
intended or designed to be used, occupied, maintained, made available
or offered for use or erected, reconstructed, altered, enlarged, moved
or rebuilt with the intention or design of using the same.
G. The word "Borough" means Borough of Hellertown, Northampton
County, Pennsylvania, the term "Borough Council" means the Council of
said Borough, the term "Zoning Hearing Board" means the Zoning
Hearing Board of Hellertown Borough, the term "Planning Commission"
means the Planning Commission of Hellertown Borough.
H. Definition of terms. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall
have the meanings indicated:
ACADEMIC CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTER — An accredited medical
school within this commonwealth that operates or partners with an
acute care hospital licensed within this commonwealth.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING — A subordinate use or building
customarily incidental to and located on the same lot occupied by
the main use or building. The term "accessory building" includes a
private garage, garden shed or barn, a private playhouse, a private
greenhouse, a pergola and a private swimming pool.
ADULT-ORIENTED ESTABLISHMENTS — The definition for this term
and for all uses included under this term shall apply as are provided
in Title 68, Article II, Subpart E, Chapter 55, Section 5502 of the
Pennsylvania Consolidated Statutes, as amended.182 Such definitions
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:557
in Pennsylvania statutes are hereby included by reference, including
but not limited to, the definitions for "adult bookstore," "adult
entertainment," "adult mini-motion picture theater," "adult motion
picture theater," "sexual activities," "specified anatomical areas,"
"specified sexual activities." The definition shall also include "body
washing."[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706; amended 3-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 813]
AGRICULTURAL OPERATION — An enterprise that is actively engaged
in the commercial production and preparation for market of crops,
livestock and livestock products and in the production, harvesting and
preparation for market or use of agricultural, agronomic, horticultural,
silvicultural and aquacultural crops and commodities. The term
includes an enterprise that implements changes in production practices
and procedures or types of crops, livestock, livestock products or
commodities produced consistent with practices and procedures that
are normally engaged by farmers or are consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry.
AGRICULTURE — The raising and keeping of field, truck and tree
crops. For purposes of this chapter, the term "agriculture" does not
include animal husbandry.
ALLEY — A public or privately owned thoroughfare having a right-ofway
width of 20 feet or less, regardless of how named.
AMERICAN NATIONAL STANDARDS INSTITUTE (ANSI) — A national
organization which formulates guidelines and standards. ANSI
standards are recognized as authoritative by the FCC.[Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
ANIMAL HUSBANDRY — The raising and keeping of livestock and
poultry for capital gain, not including household and farm pets.
ANTENNA — Any device used for the transmission or reception of
radio, television, wireless telephone, pager, commercial mobile radio
service, or any other wireless communications signals, including
without limitation omnidirectional or whip antennas and directional or
panel antennas owned or operated by any person or entity licensed
by the Federal Communications Commission ("FCC") to operate such
device, which is attached to a wireless support structure. This definition
shall not include the following: private residence-mounted satellite
dishes; television antennas; amateur radio equipment including without
limitation ham or citizens band radio antennas; or support structures
for antennas or any related equipment that is mounted to the ground
or at ground level.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676; amended
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY — A complex designed to accommodate
the elderly, with staff personnel and programs to assist residents with
many activities of daily living. Units may or may not have kitchens, but
182. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5502.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:558
meals are provided in a central dining area. (An assisted living facility
includes "housing for the elderly.")[Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No.
813]
AUTHORITY — A body politic and corporate created pursuant to the
Act of May 2, 1945 (P.L. 382, No. 164), known as the Municipality
Authorities Act of 1945.183[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
BANK — A bank is a financial institution licensed to receive deposits
and make loans. Banks may also provide financial services, such as
wealth management, currency exchange and safe deposit boxes. There
are two types of banks: commercial/retail banks and investment banks.
A bank shall include a drive-through bank.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 813]
BANNER — Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is
mounted to a pole, building, tree or other object at one or more of
its edges. National, state or municipal flags or the official flag of any
institution or business shall not be considered banners.
BED-AND-BREAKFAST — A building involving the rental of overnight
lodging for transient guests, the provision of meals for overnight guests
only, which does not routinely involve rental of accommodations
exceeding 14 consecutive days and which includes the owner or
primary operator residing on the premises.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord.
No. 763]
BOARDINGHOUSE — A private dwelling in which at least two, but not
more than six, rooms are offered for rent, payable in money or other
consideration, whether or not table board is furnished to lodgers and
in which no transients are accommodated and no public restaurant is
maintained, such as school or college dormitory, fraternity or sorority
house, membership club with residents and other similar uses.
BODY PIERCING — The means of puncturing or penetration of a
person's skin with presterilized single-use needles and the insertion
of presterilized jewelry or other adornment thereto in the opening,
except that puncturing the outer perimeter or lobe of the ear with a
presterilized single-use stud-and-clasp ear-piercing system shall not be
included in this definition.[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
BOTTLE CLUBS — The term "bottle club" means an establishment
operated for profit or pecuniary gain, which admits patrons upon the
payment of a fee; has a capacity for the assemblage of 20 or more
persons; and in which alcoholic liquors, alcohol or malt or brewed
beverages are not legally sold but where alcoholic liquors, alcohol
or malt or brewed beverages are either provided by the operator or
agents or employees of the operator for consumption on the premises
or are brought into or kept at the establishment by patrons or persons
assembling there for use and consumption. The term shall not include
183. Editor's Note: Former 53 P.S. § 301 et seq. [5-2-1945 (P.L. 382)] was repealed 6-19-2001
(P.L. 287, No. 22); see now the Municipality Authorities Act, 53 Pa.C.S.A. § 5601 et seq.
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:559
a license under the Act of April 12, 1951 (P.L. 90, No. 21), known as the
Liquor Code,184 or any organization as set forth in Section 6 of the Act
of December 19, 1990 (P.L. 1200, No. 202), known as the "Solicitation of
Funds for Charitable Purposes Act."185[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No.
706]
BUILDING — A structure constructed or erected on the ground, with
a roof supported by columns or walls, and intended for the shelter,
housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind.
BUILDING, AREA OF — The horizontal area measured around the
outside of the foundation walls and of the floors or roofed porches
and roofed terraces, inclusive, and including the area of accessory
buildings, if any. In the case of split-level dwellings, the "first floor area"
shall be deemed to include floor areas on two nonoverlapping levels,
separated by a half story or less of height.
BUILDING MATERIALS AND SUPPLIES — Retail establishments
selling lumber and other large building materials, where most display
and sales occur indoors.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
BUS PASSENGER STATION — Any designated area, whether on private
property or within a public right-of-way, which is intended or used as
a scheduled pickup or discharge point for passengers by a common
carrier. The term "bus passenger station" does not apply to locations
used in operations of vehicles used to transfer students to and from
school.
CABARET — A club, bar, tavern, peep show, hall or similar place that
presents lewd entertainment, whether live, recorded or simulated, for
observation by consenting patrons.
CAREGIVER — The individual designated by a patient to deliver
medical marijuana.186[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
CERTIFIED MEDICAL USE — The acquisition, possession, use or
transportation of medical marijuana by a patient, or the acquisition,
possession, delivery, transportation or administration of medical
marijuana by a caregiver, for use as part of the treatment of the
patient's serious medical condition, as authorized by certification by the
commonwealth.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
CHANNEL — A segment of a frequency band assigned to a specific
user.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
CHECK-CASHING BUSINESS — An establishment engaged primarily in
the cashing of checks by individuals or the deferred deposit of personal
checks, whereby the check cashier refrains from depositing a personal
check written by a customer until a specific date; or the offering of a
loan until a paycheck would be received by the person receiving the
184. Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq.
185. Editor's Note: See 10 P.S. § 162.1 et seq.
186. Editor's Note: The former definition of "cellular telephone," added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No.
676, which immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:560
loan. This term shall not include any of the following:[Added 7-2-2007
by Ord. No. 706]
CLINICAL REGISTRANT — An entity that:[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 811]
CO-LOCATION — The mounting of one or more antennas, on an existing
communications tower, or on any structure that has been approved
by the Borough, to support at least one antenna.[Added 3-6-2017 by
Ord. No. 814]
COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATIONS TOWER — Any structure, other
than a building, that is constructed for the primary purpose of
supporting one or more antennas, including, but not limited to, selfsupporting
lattice towers, guy towers and monopoles.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
COMMERCIAL RECREATION — A recreation facility operated on a
profit basis which is open to the general public.
COMMUNITY CENTER — A grouping of buildings, structures or
facilities designed and intended for cultural, educational or
recreational use by residents of a community and its surrounding area.
The term "community center" shall not include parks and play area, art
gallery, museum, commercial recreation area or use or school.
CONDEMNATION — The legal process pursuant to the Eminent
Domain Code,187 by which the Borough takes, injures or destroys
property by authority of law for a public purpose.[Added 2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 751]
CONDITIONAL USE — A use permitted in a particular zoning district
pursuant to the provision in Article VI of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
CONDOMINIUM — Residential real estate, portions of which are
designated for separate ownership and the remainder of which is
A state or federally chartered bank, savings association, credit
union, or industrial loan association; and
(1)
A retail store engaged primarily in selling or leasing items to retail
customers and that cashes a check for a fee not routinely exceeding
1% of the check amount as a service to its customers incidental to
the retail store principal use.
(2)
(1) Holds a permit both as a grower/processor and a dispensary; and
Has a contractual relationship with an academic clinical research
center under which the academic clinical research center or its
affiliate provides advice to the entity regarding, among other areas,
patient health and safety, medical applications and dispensing and
management of controlled substances.
(2)
187. Editor's Note: See 26 Pa.C.S.A. § 101 et seq.
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:561
designated for common ownership solely by the owners of these
portions, created under either the Pennsylvania Unit Property Act of
July 3, 1963, or the amended Pennsylvania Uniform Condominium Act,
July 2, 1980, as amended.188
CONSTRUCTION PERMIT — A document issued by the FCC to a
broadcast applicant giving permission to construct a radio or TV
broadcast station. It is not the same as a station license.[Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
DECISION — Final adjudication of any board or other body granted
jurisdiction under any land use ordinance or this chapter to do so,
either by reason of the grant of exclusive jurisdiction or by reason of
appeals from determinations. All decisions shall be appealable to the
court of common pleas of the county and judicial district wherein the
municipality lies.[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
DETERMINATION — [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
DISPENSARY — A person, including a natural person, corporation,
partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any combination
thereof, which holds a permit issued by the Department of Health
(DOH) of the commonwealth to dispense medical marijuana.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
DUMP — A lot, land, building, structure or part thereof used primarily
for disposal by abandonment, dumping, burial, burning, incineration or
any other means for whatever purpose of garbage, offal, sewage, trash,
refuse, junk, discarded machinery, vehicles or parts thereof, or waste
materials of any kind.
DWELLING — A building arranged, intended or designed to be
occupied by one or more families.
Final action by an officer, body or agency charged with the
administration of any land use ordinance or applications
thereunder, except the following:
(a) The Borough Council.
(b) The Zoning Hearing Board.
The planning agency, only if and to the extent the planning
agency is charged with final decision on preliminary or final
plans under the Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance
(Chapter 390) or planned development provisions.
(c)
(1)
Determinations shall be appealable only to the boards designated
as having jurisdiction for such appeal.
(2)
188. Editor's Note: The Unit Property Act, former 68 P.S. § 700.101 [7-3-1963 (P.L. 196)], was
repealed 7-2-1980 (P.L. 286, No. 82); for the Uniform Condominium Act, see 68 Pa.C.S.A. §
3101 et seq.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:562
DWELLING UNIT — One or more rooms with provision for cooking,
living, sanitary and sleeping facilities arranged for the use of one
family. (See also "multiple dwelling," "single-family detached dwelling,"
"single-family semidetached dwelling," "single-family attached
dwelling," "mobile home" and "condominium.")
EFFICIENCY — A configuration for a dwelling unit within a multiple
dwelling where a separate bedroom is not provided. The sleeping
quarters are located in the same room as the living quarters.
ELECTROMAGNETIC RADIATION (EMR) — A technical term for the
nature of energy emitted by a transmitting antenna.[Added 7-5-2005
by Ord. No. 676]
FALL ZONE — The fall zone shall be equal to the height of the antenna
and/or commercial communications tower, as applicable.[Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
FAMILY — An individual or individuals related by blood, marriage
or adoption (including persons receiving foster care) that maintain
one common household and live within one dwelling unit. Additionally,
unrelated individuals who maintain a common household and live
within one dwelling unit may be considered a family. Finally, a family
shall also expressly include unrelated individuals who reside within a
licensed group home, as defined herein.[Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord.
No. 751]
FENCE — A barrier intended to prevent intrusion or escape or to mark
a boundary. A fence can involve both man-made structures as well as
organized planting.
FLOOR AREA — The floor area shall be construed as the sum of
areas on all floors of the building measured from the outside faces of
the exterior walls, including halls, lobbies, stairways, closets, elevator
shafts, enclosed porches and balconies and below-grade floor areas,
but excluding open terraces, patios, atrium and balconies, carports,
garages, breezeways and toolsheds.
FM/TELEVISION BROADCASTING — Transmission of radio and/or
television programs intended for reception by the general public. An
FM/television broadcasting tower shall mean a tower maintaining the
primary or main transmitter of an FCC-licensed broadcast
station.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
FORESTRY — The management of forests and timberlands when
practiced in accordance with accepted silvicultural principles, through
developing, cultivating, harvesting, transporting and selling trees for
commercial purposes, which does not involve any land development.
FORM OF MEDICAL MARIJUANA — The characteristics of the medical
marijuana recommended or limited for a particular patient, including
the method of consumption and any particular dosage, strain, variety
and quantity or percentage of medical marijuana or particular active
ingredient.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:563
GARAGE, PRIVATE — An accessory structure used primarily for vehicle
parking maintained primarily for the convenience of the occupants of
the main building and in which no business or other use is carried on
and no service is rendered to the general public.
GAS STATION — An establishment engaged in the retail sale of gasoline
and similar products to motorists and in the repair of motorized
vehicles.
GENERAL SERVICING OR REPAIR SHOP — An establishment engaged
in the service and/or repair of personal property items such as
appliances, timepieces, computers and peripherals and the like.
GROSS LEASABLE AREA — The total floor area designed for tenant
occupancy and exclusive use, including basements, mezzanines and
upper floors.
GROUP HOME — A dwelling operated by a responsible individual,
family or organization with a program to provide a supportive living
arrangement for individuals where special care is needed by the
individuals served due to age or emotional, mental or physical
handicap. This definition shall expressly exclude facilities for the
supervised care of persons under treatment for alcohol and/or drug
abuse and any use related to criminal rehabilitation of adults or
juveniles or services related to the treatment of the criminally insane.
Group homes must be licensed where required by any appropriate
government agencies, and a copy of any such licenses must be
delivered to the Borough prior to beginning the use.[Added 2-7-2011
by Ord. No. 751]189
GROWER/PROCESSOR — A person, including a natural person,
corporation, partnership, association, trust or other entity, or any
combination thereof, which holds a permit from the DOH to grow and
process medical marijuana.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
GUN SHOP — An establishment which sells/trades/exchanges any
weapon which is designed to or may readily be converted to expel,
release or propel any projectile by the action of an explosive; or the
frame or receiver of any such weapon. The term "weapon" `includes
shotgun, airgun, air pistol, spring gun, spring pistol, rifle and pistol of
any caliber or any implement which impels with force a pellet, pellets
or single projectile of any kind.[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
HANDICAP — A physical or mental impairment which substantially
limits one or more of such person's major life activities, a record
of having such an impairment or being regarded as having such an
impairment, but not including current illegal use of or addiction to a
controlled substance.
189. Editor's Note: This ordinance also repealed definitions of "group care facility, large" and
"group care facility, small," which immediately followed this definition.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:564
HEARING — An administrative proceeding conducted by a board
pursuant to § 909.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
(53 P.S. § 10909.1).[Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
HEIGHT ABOVE AVERAGE TERRAIN (HAAT) — A technical term used
by the FCC to determine the effective height of an antenna by
considering the effects of terrain variations in the coverage area
provided by the antenna.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
HEIGHT OF A STRUCTURE — The vertical distance derived from the
average finished grade at the foundation corners of the building or
structure, to the highest point of the building or structure, excluding a
chimney or other similar structure as listed in § 450-18D.
HEIGHT OF TOWER — The overall height of the tower from the base of
the tower to the highest point of the tower, including, but not limited to,
antennas, transmitters, satellite dishes or any other structures affixed
to or otherwise placed on the ground. If the base of the tower is not
on ground level, the height of the tower shall include the base of the
building or structure to which the tower is attached.[Added 7-5-2005
by Ord. No. 676; amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
HOME OCCUPATION — A customary personal service occupation such
as dressmaking, millinery, home cooking, beauty parlors, barbershops,
hairdressing and manicuring establishments and other similar personal
services conducted in a dwelling unit by a member or members of the
resident family.
HOME OFFICE — An office, located within a dwelling, the area of
which office does not exceed 10% of the floor space of the dwelling
(excluding the basement, attic or other nonhabitable portions), devoted
solely to the administration of a business or service which is conducted
wholly off the premises. The home office shall be used solely by the
regular residents of the dwelling; storage of merchandise, equipment,
materials or the like is prohibited, except for personal tools, office
machines and miscellaneous equipment which would not interfere with
the residential character of the dwelling or the neighborhood and which
shall be stored within an enclosed structure. There shall be no stock-intrade
stored within the premises, nor shall any nonresidents, customers
or clients present themselves at the premises for business purposes.
External display or identification is prohibited.
HOME PROFESSIONAL OFFICE — The office or studio of a resident
physician, surgeon, dentist, lawyer, architect, artist, engineer, certified
public accountant, real estate broker or salesman, insurance broker or
agent, musician, teacher or other similar professional office or studio
conducted in a dwelling unit by a member or members of the resident
family.
HOSPITAL — A building used exclusively by physicians for treatment
and examination of patients involving overnight stays.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:565
IDENTIFICATION CARD — A document issued by the DOH that permits
access to medical marijuana.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE — A surface which prevents the percolation of
water into the ground.
INTERMODULATION — A technical term referring to the possible
mixing of two transmitted signals which creates unwanted and
potentially interfering signals.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
JUNK — Any discarded material or article, including, but not limited to,
scrap metal, scrapped, abandoned or junked motor vehicles, machinery,
equipment, paper, glass containers and structures. It shall not include,
however, refuse or garbage kept in a proper container for the purpose
of prompt disposal.
JUNKYARD — Any place where any junk as hereinabove defined is
stored, disposed of or accumulated.
LAND MOBILE SYSTEMS — Radio communications service for mobile
or stationary units in which each user is assigned a particular
frequency. It includes conventional two-way radio, special mobile radio
service and one-way paging.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
LEASE TOWER — A tower whose owner has as his principal business
the leasing of tower space to other users.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord.
No. 676]
LEASED LOT — A parcel or tract of realty held under a lease.[Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
LOT — A parcel of land used or designed to be used by one use or
structure or by a related group of uses or structures and the accessory
uses or structures customarily incident thereto, including such open
spaces as are arranged or designed and required in connection with a
structure or group of structures. A lot may be or may not be the land
shown as a single lot on a duly record plat or other official record.
LOT AREA — The total horizontal area included within lot lines.
LOT, CORNER — A lot at the junction of and fronting on two or more
intersecting streets.
LOT COVERAGE — The percentage of the lot area that is occupied by
structures, including principal buildings and accessory structures.
LOT, DEPTH OF — The distance along a straight line drawn from the
midpoint of the front lot line to the midpoint of the rear lot line.
LOT LINE — Any boundary of a lot. Any lot line not a rear lot line or a
front line shall be deemed a side lot line.
LOT LINE, FRONT — The street line at the front of a lot. On a corner
lot, the owner may specify the front lot line on the plot plan.
LOT LINE, REAR — The lot line or lines opposite to the front lot line.
LOT, THROUGH — A lot extending from one street to another.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:566
LOT, WIDTH OF — The distance between the side lot lines measured
across the rear of the required front yard.
MAIN USE OF BUILDING — The principal or most important use or
building on a lot.
MASSAGE PARLOR — An establishment that meets all of the following
criteria:[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
MEDICAL OFFICE BUILDING — A building used exclusively by
physicians and dentists for treatment and examination of patients,
provided that no overnight patients shall be kept on premises.
MEDICAL MARIJUANA — Marijuana for certified medical use as legally
permitted by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania with Act 16.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA DELIVERY VEHICLE OFFICE — Any facility
used to house delivery vehicles for supplying marijuana plants or seeds
to one or more marijuana grower/processors and/or
dispensaries.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
MEDICAL MARIJUANA ORGANIZATION OR FACILITY — A dispensary
or a grower/processor of marijuana for medical purposes.[Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
MEMBERSHIP CLUB — A building, structure, lot or land area used as
a private club, fraternal or social organization.
MOBILE HOME — A transportable single-family dwelling intended for
a permanent occupancy, office or place of assembly, contained in one
unit or in two units designed to be joined into one integral unit, capable
of again being separated for repeated towing, which arrives at a site
complete and ready for occupancy except for minor and incidental
The use does not involve a person licensed or certified by the state
as a health care professional or a massage therapist certified by
a recognized professional organization that requires a minimum of
80 hours of professional training. Massage therapy by a certified
professional shall be considered "personal service."
(1)
Massages are conducted involving one person using their hands
and/or a mechanical device on another person below or above the
waist, in return for monetary compensation, and which involves
persons who are not related to each other.
(2)
The massages are:
Conducted in a facility which is not a licensed hospital or
nursing home or an office of a medical doctor or chiropractor.
(a)
Not performed as an incidental accessory use to a permitted
exercise club or high school or college athletic program.
(b)
(c) Conducted within private or semiprivate rooms.
(3)
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:567
unpacking and assembly operations and constructed so that it may be
used without a permanent foundation.
MOBILE HOME PARK — A parcel of land which has been planned and
improved for the placement of two or more mobile homes occupied for
dwelling or sleeping and for nontransient uses.
MOTORIZED EQUIPMENT REPAIR SHOP — An establishment engaged
in the servicing and/or repair of personal property equipment, such as
lawn mowers and tractors, chain saws, portable generators, that are
powered and/or employ an internal combustion engine in their use and/
or operation.
MOTORIZED VEHICLE REPAIR SHOP — An establishment wherein
motorized vehicle repair, painting and bodywork is conducted.
MULTIPLE DWELLING — A single building or group of attached
dwelling units intended and designed to be occupied by three or more
families living independently of each other as separate housekeeping
units. The individual dwelling units share a common access and/or
common yard area.
NO-IMPACT HOME-BASED BUSINESS — A business or commercial
activity administered or conducted as an accessory use which is clearly
secondary to the use as a residential dwelling and which involves no
customer, client or patient traffic, whether vehicular or pedestrian,
pickup, delivery or removal functions to or from the premises, in excess
of those normally associated with residential use. The business or
commercial activity must satisfy the following requirements:[Added
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
The business activity shall be compatible with the residential use of
the property and surrounding residential uses.
(1)
The business shall employ no employees other than family
members residing in the dwelling.
(2)
There shall be no display or sale of retail goods and no stockpiling
or inventory of a substantial nature.
(3)
There shall be no outside appearance of a business use, including,
but not limited to, parking, signs or lights.
(4)
The business activity may not use any equipment or process which
creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors or electrical or
electronic interference, including interference with radio or
television reception, which is detectable in the neighborhood.
(5)
The business activity may not generate any solid waste or sewage
discharge, in volume or type, which is not normally associated with
residential use in the neighborhood.
(6)
The business activity shall be conducted only within the dwelling
and may not occupy more than 25% of the habitable floor area.
(7)
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:568
NONCONFORMING LOT — A lot the area or dimension of which was
lawful prior to the adoption or amendment of a zoning ordinance but
which fails to conform to the requirements of the zoning district in
which it is located by reasons of such adoption or amendment.190
NONCONFORMING STRUCTURE — A structure or part of a structure
manifestly not designed to comply with the applicable use or extent
of use provisions in a zoning ordinance or amendment heretofore or
hereafter enacted, where such structure lawfully existed prior to the
enactment of such ordinance or amendment or prior to the application
of such ordinance or amendment to its location by reason of annexation.
Such nonconforming structures include, but are not limited to,
nonconforming signs.191
NONCONFORMING USE — A use, whether of land or of structure,
which does not comply with the applicable use provisions in a zoning
ordinance or amendment heretofore or hereafter enacted, where such
use was lawfully in existence prior to the enactment of such ordinance
or amendment or prior to the application of such ordinance or
amendment to its location by reason of annexation.192
NONDISABLED GROUP HOME — One dwelling unit made up of
unrelated individuals who maintain a common household. This
definition shall expressly exclude facilities for the supervised care of
persons under treatment for alcohol and/or drug abuse and any use
related to criminal rehabilitation of adults or juveniles or services
related to the treatment of the criminally insane.[Added 2-7-2011 by
Ord. No. 751]
NURSING HOME or CONVALESCENT HOME — A facility, licensed as
such by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, where persons are lodged
and furnished with meals and nursing and medical care.
PARKING AREA — A lot or part thereof used for the storage or parking
of motor vehicles.
PARKING SPACE — A stall or berth which is arranged and intended for
parking of one motor vehicle in a garage or parking area.
PAWNSHOP — An establishment engaged in retail sales of secondhand
merchandise and that offers personal loans secured by consumer
goods, jewelry and other personal property held by the
pawnshop.[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
PENNANT — Any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, whether
or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from rope, wire or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
(8) The business may not involve any illegal activity.
190. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
191. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
192. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:569
PERGOLA — A structure consisting of parallel columns supporting an
open roof of beams and rafters.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
PERSONAL SERVICE — An establishment that provides a service
oriented to the personal needs of the general public and which is not
primarily a retail or wholesale sales business, including but not limited
to haircutting/styling, shoe repair, nail salons, and closely similar
uses.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
PLANNING AGENCY — A planning commission, planning department
or a planning committee of the Borough Council.193
POINT-TO-POINT MICROWAVE — Communication between specific
points using frequencies above 900 Mhz; normally transmitted between
two towers optimally located for line-of-sight transmission. Uses low
power levels.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
PUBLIC GROUNDS — 194 Includes:
PUBLIC HEARING — A formal meeting held pursuant to public notice
by the Borough Council or planning agency, intended to inform and
obtain public comment, prior to taking action in accordance with the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.195
PUBLIC MEETING — A forum held pursuant to notice under 65
Pa.C.S.A. Ch. 7 (relating to open meetings).196
PUBLIC NOTICE — Notice published once each week for two
successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation in the Borough.
Such notice shall state the time and place of the hearing and the
particular nature of the matter to be considered at the hearing. The first
publication shall not be more than 30 days and the second publication
shall not be less than seven days from the date of the hearing.[Added
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
REAR DWELLING — A dwelling located on the same lot and to the rear
of the main building for which the lot is used.
REGISTRY — The registry established by the DOH for all medical
marijuana organizations and practitioners.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 811]
Parks, playgrounds, trails, paths and other recreational areas and
other public areas.
(1)
Sites for schools, sewage treatment, refuse disposal and other
publicly owned or operated facilities.
(2)
(3) Publicly owned or operated scenic and historic sites.
193. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
194. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
195. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
196. Editor's Note: See 65 Pa.C.S.A. § 701 et seq.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:570
RELATED EQUIPMENT — Any structure or equipment at a fixed
location, not including a tower or antenna, that enables FCC license
communications between a user and a wireless network. This definition
includes base stations as defined by the FCC.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 814]
REPORT — Any letter, review, memorandum, compilation or similar
writing made by any body, board, officer or consultant other than a
solicitor to any other body, board, officer or consultant for the purpose
of assisting the recipient of such report in the rendering of any decision
or determination. All reports shall be deemed recommendatory and
advisory only and shall not be binding upon the recipient, board, officer,
body or agency, nor shall any appeal lie therefrom. Any report used,
received or considered by the body, board, officer or agency rendering
a determination or decision shall be made available for inspection to
the applicant and all other parties to any proceeding upon request,
and copies thereof shall be provided at cost of reproduction.[Added
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
RESEARCH FACILITY — A building or group of buildings containing
facilities for scientific research, investigation, testing or
experimentation, but not facilities for the manufacture or sale of
products.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
RESTAURANT, DRIVE-IN — An establishment whose principal business
is the sale of food or beverages to the customer in a ready-to-consume
state on edible or disposable containers, where no seating is provided
upon the premises.
RESTAURANT, OTHER — An establishment that serves ready-toconsume
food in a manner that does not meet the definitions of
"standard restaurant" or "drive-in-restaurant."
RESTAURANT, STANDARD — An establishment that serves ready-toconsume
food or drink. The majority of sales involve one of the
following characteristics:
RF INTERFERENCE — Disturbances in reception caused by intruding
signals or electrical current.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
SATELLITE EARTH STATIONS — A dish-shaped antenna designed to
receive television broadcasts relayed by microwave signals from earthorbiting
communications satellites.
SCHOOL, COMMERCIAL — An education facility principally offering,
for profit, specific courses of instruction in business, trade, industry or
other trained skills, but does not offer academic instruction equivalent
Customers are normally provided with an individual menu and
served their food and beverages by a restaurant employee at the
same table or counter where the items are consumed.
(1)
A cafeteria-type operation where food and beverages generally are
consumed within the restaurant building.
(2)
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:571
to standards prescribed by the commonwealth.[Added 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM, PUBLIC — The utility system designed
to collect, centrally treat and dispose of sewage operated by the
Hellertown Borough Authority.
SHARED HOUSING — A living arrangement where two unrelated
persons live together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit. Each
individual has private sleeping space and shares kitchen, bath, living
and dining space.
SHOPPING CENTER — A lot including four or more distinct separate
retail stores in a unified development with shared parking and traffic
access. A shopping center may also include other uses permitted in
the district (such as offices and personal services), provided all
requirements of this chapter are met.
SIGN — Any device or method which visually imparts a message
through the use of texts, pictures or models.
SIGN, ADVERTISING — A sign which directs attention to a business,
commodity, service or entertainment conducted, sold or offered
elsewhere than upon the property and only incidentally upon the
property if at all. A commercial billboard is an advertising sign.
SIGN, ATTACHED — A sign which is part of, attached directly to,
supported by or painted upon a building wall.
SIGN, BULLETIN BOARD — A sign of permanent character with
movable letters, words or numerals indicating the names of persons
associated with events conducted upon or products or services offered
upon the premises, permitted only in connection with public, religious
or civic institutions.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
SIGN, BUSINESS IDENTIFICATION — A sign which directs attention
to a business, profession, public or semipublic activity conducted upon
the property where the sign is displayed.
SIGN, DYNAMIC — A sign with characteristics that appear to have
movement or that appear to change, caused by any method other than
physically removing and replacing the sign or its components, whether
the apparent movement or change is in the display, the sign structure
itself, or any other component of the sign. This includes a display that
incorporates a technology or method allowing the sign face to change
the image without having to physically or mechanically replace its
components. This includes any rotating, revolving, moving, flashing,
blinking or animated display, rotating panels, LED lights manipulated
through digital input, or any other method or technology allowing the
sign face to present a series of images.[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
763]
SIGN, FREESTANDING — A sign supported by or suspended from a
freestanding column or other support located in or upon the ground
surface.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:572
SIGN, HOME OCCUPATION — A single, nonilluminated sign with a
maximum area of three square feet on a residential building which
directs attention to a home occupation conducted in such residential
building by identifying only the occupation name, residents, phone
number, address and/or logo.[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
SIGN, PORTABLE — Any sign which is not permanently attached to
a building, structure or the ground and/or a sign designed to be
transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be
transported by means of wheels, signs converted to A or T frames,
menu and sandwich board signs, balloons used as signs, umbrellas used
for advertising purposes, and signs attached to or painted on vehicles
parked and visible from the right-of-way, unless the vehicle is used in
the regular day-to-day operations of the business.
SIGN, TEMPORARY — A sign, constructed of cloth, canvas, fabric,
wood or other similar material, with or without a structural frame and
intended for a limited period of display. For purposes of this chapter,
real estate, political campaign and construction signs are temporary
signs. (See also "banner" and "pennant.")
SINGLE-FAMILY ATTACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a
permanent foundation designed and occupied as a residence for one
family with direct outside access, which is part of a group of three
or more dwellings with one or two vertical walls in common with
adjacent dwelling units. These dwelling units are commonly referred to
as "townhouses" or "row homes."
SINGLE-FAMILY DETACHED DWELLING — A dwelling unit on a
permanent foundation or a mobile stand constructed in conformance
with the standards of § 450-19D of this chapter, designed and occupied
as a residence for one family, which does not have a vertical wall in
common with another building.
SINGLE-FAMILY SEMIDETACHED DWELLING UNIT — A dwelling unit
on a permanent foundation designed and occupied as a residence for
one family, which has one vertical wall in common with the adjacent
dwelling. These dwellings are commonly referred to as "twins" or
"duplexes."
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS — Less than completely and
opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region, buttock or female
breast below the top of the areola or human male genitals in a
discernible turgid state, even if completely or opaquely covered.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES — Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation or arousal, acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse
or sodomy or fondling or other erotic touching of human genitalia,
pubic region, buttock or female breast(s).
STEALTH TECHNOLOGY — Camouflaging methods applied to wireless
communications facilities which render them more visually appealing
or blend the proposed facility into the existing structure or visual
backdrop in such a manner as to render it minimally visible to the
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:573
casual observer. Such methods include, but are not limited to,
architecturally screened roof-mounted antennas, building-mounted
antennas painted to match the existing structure and facilities
constructed to resemble trees, shrubs, flagpoles, lampposts, and light
poles.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
STREET — Any road, highway, avenue, street, parkway, lane or other
way, public or private, set aside and commonly used by the public for
street purposes, other than "alley," as defined herein, and shown upon
the Borough map or upon a filed plat.
STRUCTURAL CAPACITY — A term describing the physical stability of
a tower and associated antennas to withstand design loading without
collapsing.[Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
STRUCTURE — Anything constructed or erected on or under the
ground or upon another structure or building.
SUBSTANTIALLY CHANGE or SUBSTANTIAL CHANGE — A
modification to an existing wireless communications facility that
changes the physical dimensions of a tower or base station if it meets
any of the following criteria:[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
For a commercial communications tower outside the public rightsof-
way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10%, or
by the height of one additional antenna array with separation
from the nearest existing antenna, not to exceed 20 feet,
whichever is greater;
(a)
It protrudes from the edge of the wireless communications
facility by more than 20 feet, or more than the width of the
tower structures at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is
greater.
(b)
(1)
For a commercial communications tower in the rights-of-way:
It increases the height of the facility by more than 10% or 10
feet, whichever is greater;
(a)
It protrudes from the edge of the structure by more than six
feet;
(b)
It involves installation of more than the standard number of
new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to
exceed four cabinets;
(c)
It entails any excavation of deployment outside the current site
of the tower; or
(d)
It does not comply with conditions associated with prior
approval of construction or modification of the tower unless
(e)
(2)
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:574
SWIMMING POOL, NONCOMMERCIAL — Any constructed body of
water or structure to contain water and any accessory equipment
pertaining thereto used or intended to be used for swimming or bathing
by any family or persons residing on the premises and their guests.
Such noncommercial swimming pool shall not be operated for gain and
shall be located on a lot only as an accessory use to the dwelling or
dwellings, hotel, motel or membership club thereon.
TATTOO PARLOR — Any establishment that uses any method of placing
ink or pigment into or under the skin or mucosa by the aid of needles or
any other instrument used to puncture the skin, resulting in permanent
coloration of the skin or mucosa. This includes all forms of cosmetic
tattooing.[Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
THEATER — A facility used for cultural arts performances, such as
motion pictures, drama, dance, musical, etc., that are open to the
public, not including adult-oriented establishments as defined
elsewhere.197[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
TRAVEL TRAILER — A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis
and designed to be used for temporary occupancy for occasional travel,
recreational, vacation or other short-term uses, having a body width of
not more than eight feet and a body length of not more than 40 feet.
TREATMENT CENTER — A use (other than a prison or a permitted
accessory use in a "hospital") providing housing facilities for persons
who need specialized housing, treatment and/or counseling because of:
UNIT — A unit shall be defined as an area containing four occupants.
(The definition of "unit" shall apply to the following uses: assisted living
facility, nursing home, convalescent home, treatment center, housing
for the elderly and hospital.)[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
VARIANCE — Relief granted pursuant to the provisions of Articles
VI and IX of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.[Added
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
the noncompliance is due to an increase in height, increase in
width, or addition of cabinets.
Criminal rehabilitation, such as a criminal halfway house or a
treatment/housing center for persons convicted of driving under
the influence of alcohol;
(1)
(2) Addiction to alcohol or a controlled substance; or
A type of mental illness, criminal history or other behavior that has
caused or could reasonably be expected to cause a person to be a
threat to the physical safety of others.
(3)
197. Editor's Note: The former definition of "tower," added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676, which
immediately followed this definition, was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814.
§ 450-7 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-7
1:575
WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM, PUBLIC — The public utility system operated
by the Hellertown Borough Authority or successors designed to
transmit water from a common source to users.
WBCA — Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act (53 P.S.
§ 11702.1 et seq.)[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
WIRELESS — Transmissions through the airwaves including, but not
limited to, infrared line of sight, cellular, PCS, microwave, satellite, or
radio signals.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS FACILITY (WCF) — The antennas,
nodes, control boxes, towers, poles, conduits, ducts, pedestals,
electronics and other equipment used for the purpose of transmitting,
receiving, distributing, providing, or accommodating wireless
communications services.[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
WIRELESS SUPPORT STRUCTURE — A freestanding structure, such
as a commercial communications tower or any other support structure
that could support the placement or installation of a wireless
communications facility if approved by the Borough.[Added 3-6-2017
by Ord. No. 814]
YARD, FRONT — The required open unoccupied space situated between
the nearest roofed portion of the building and the front lot line and
extending from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, REAR — The required open unoccupied space between the
nearest roofed portion of the building and the rear lot line of the lot and
extending from side lot line to side lot line.
YARD, SIDE — The required open unoccupied space situated between
the nearest roofed portion of the building or of any accessory building
and side lot line of the lot and existing through from the front yard, or
from the lot line where no front yard exists, to the rear yard, or to the
rear lot line where no rear yard exists.
ZONING OFFICER — The Borough official designated to administer
and enforce this chapter.
§ 450-7 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-7
1:576
ARTICLE IV
Districts and Boundaries
§ 450-8. Classes of districts. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
For the purposes of this chapter, the Borough is hereby divided into the
following classes of districts:
§ 450-9. District boundaries.
§ 450-9.1. Conditional uses. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
For any use not specifically provided for in the Zoning Ordinance and
where the proposed use is not included within another use which has
A. R-1 — Residential.
B. R-2 — Residential.
C. M — Mixed.
D. TC — Town Center.
E. SC — Shopping Center.
F. I — Industrial.
G. C — Conservation.
H. HC — Highway Commercial.
I. FRO — Flexible Redevelopment Overlay.
J. TrOO — Trail Oriented Overlay.
A. Zoning Map. The boundaries of each district or zone are established as
shown on the Official Zoning Map of the Borough which accompanies
this chapter and is declared to be a part of this chapter.198
B. Delineation of district boundaries. The district boundary lines are
intended generally to follow the boundary lines of streets and similar
rights-of-way or lot lines, or straight line projections of such lines or
Borough boundary lines, all as shown on the Zoning Map, but where a
district boundary line does not follow such a line, its position is shown
on said Zoning Map by a specific dimension expressing its distance in
feet from a street line or other boundary line, as indicated.
C. Interpretation of district boundaries. In case of uncertainty as to the
true location of a district boundary line in a particular instance, the
determination thereof shall be made by the Zoning Officer or his
designee. An appeal may be taken to the Zoning Hearing Board.
198. Editor's Note: The Zoning Map is included as an attachment to this chapter.
§ 450-8 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-9.1
1:577
been specifically provided for in the Zoning Ordinance, said use shall be
permitted as a conditional use pursuant to §§ 450-62B(3) and 450-66.
§ 450-10. R-1 Residential.
The purpose of this district is to maintain the stable character of this area
as a desirable family-oriented living environment.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Public outdoor recreation areas such as parks, playgrounds and
picnic grounds.
(2) Single-family detached dwelling.
(3) Forestry.
(4) No-impact home-based business.
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Private garage or private parking area, pursuant to §§ 450-18B and
450-19B.
(2) Customary accessory structure or use.
(3) Private, noncommercial swimming pool pursuant to Chapter 399,
Swimming Pools, of this Code.
(4) Home office.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) 199Home occupation and home professional office.
(2) Public or private noncommercial school.
199. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Conversion of dwelling units into apartments,
which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 450-9.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-10
1:578
(3) Church, Sunday school, or other place of worship, parish house.
(4) Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas such as parks,
playgrounds and picnic grounds.
(5) Signs.
(6) Agricultural operation.
(7) Group home. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(8) Nondisabled group home. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
D. Lot area, width, building coverage and height regulations. [Amended
10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
Zone standards
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
5,500 50 40% 65% 40
Singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
(each
dwelling
unit)
3,850 35 40% 65% 40
All other
uses
7,800 60 40% 65% 40
E. Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 450-10 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-10
1:579
§ 450-11. R-2 Residential.
The purpose of this district is to provide areas where a variety of housing
needs can be met through a choice of housing types while simultaneously
preserving the integrity of the existing residential environment.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front
Yard
(feet)
One Side
Yard
(feet)
Both
Side
Yards,
Total
Width
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
25 7 16 20 30
Singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
(each
dwelling
unit)
25 8 16 20 30
All other
uses
25 10 20 20 30
F. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for public and private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas
pursuant to § 450-78.
(2) Required for conversions of dwelling units into apartments, public
or private noncommercial school and churches. Sunday schools or
other places of worship pursuant to § 450-64C.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Agriculture.
(2) Cemetery.
(3) Multifamily dwelling.
(4) Public outdoor recreation areas such as parks, playgrounds and
picnic grounds.
§ 450-10 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-11
1:580
(5) Single-family attached dwellings (townhouses).
(6) Single-family detached dwellings.
(7) Single-family semidetached dwellings (duplexes).
(8) Forestry.
(9) No-impact home-based business.200
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Private garage or private parking area pursuant to §§ 450-18B and
450-19B.
(2) Customary accessory structure or use.
(3) Private, noncommercial swimming pursuant to Chapter 399,
Swimming Pools.
(4) Home office.
C. Special exception use. Application for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) 201Home occupation and home professional office.
(2) Membership club.
(3) Mobile home park.
(4) Group care and family care facilities.
(5) Public or private noncommercial school.
(6) Church, Sunday school, or other place of worship, parish house.
(7) Housing for the elderly.
(8) Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas such as parks,
playgrounds and picnic grounds.
200. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
201. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(1), Conversion of dwelling units into apartments,
which immediately preceded this subsection, was repealed 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726.
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-11
1:581
(9) Signs.
(10) Group home. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(11) Nondisabled group home. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
D. Lot area, density, width, building coverage and height regulations.
[Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
Uses
Minimum
Lot
Area
Maximum
Density
(units/
acre)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
5,000
square
feet
— 40 40% 65% 40
Singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
(each
dwelling
unit)
3,750
square
feet
— 30 40% 65% 40
Singlefamily
attached
dwelling
(each
dwelling
unit)
2,500
square
feet
12 20 40% 65% 40
Multifamily
dwelling
None 15 None 45% 65% 40
Mobile
home
park
5 acres 6 300 25% 65% 25
Agriculture None — None None None None
Housing
for the
elderly
— 40 — 40% 65% 45
All other
uses
7,500
square
feet
— 60 40% 65% 40
E. Minimum yard requirements. [Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
§ 450-11 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-11
1:582
§ 450-12. M Mixed. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 662]
The purpose of this district is to recognize the currently mixed land use
character of these areas, to provide for a variety of land uses which allow
for the economically viable use or reuse of the properties, to manage the
land uses in the area so as to minimize the frictions between the land uses,
and to stabilize the character of the area.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front
Yard
(feet)
Each
Unattached
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached
dwelling
25 5 20 30
Single-family
semidetached
dwelling
25 5 20 30
Single-family
attached
dwelling
25 10 15 30
Mobile home
park
35 25 30 30
Agriculture None None None None
Housing for the
elderly
25 20 20 20
All other uses 25 10 20 30
F. Site plan approval. Required for all special exception uses, excepting
home occupations pursuant to § 450-64C.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Retail store or shop.
(2) Business office or office building.
(3) Professional or medical offices.
(4) Personal service store or shop.
(5) Standard restaurant.
(6) Membership club.
§ 450-11 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-12
1:583
(7) Forestry.202
(8) Single-family detached dwelling.
(9) Single-family semidetached dwelling (duplex).
(10) Single-family attached dwelling (townhouse).
(11) Multifamily dwelling.
(12) Funeral home.
(13) Commercial schools.
(14) Building or facility for municipal and governmental use.
(15) Public utility building, structure or facility.
(16) Community center, public library or similar use.
(17) Medical marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(4). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Customary accessory uses and structures.
(2) Signs pursuant to § 450-22.
(3) Home occupations and home professional offices pursuant to
§ 450-19A.
(4) Private, noncommercial swimming pool pursuant to Chapter 399,
Swimming Pools.
(5) Private garage or private parking area pursuant to § 450-18B.
(6) Home office pursuant to § 450-19A.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
202. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding banks or other financial institutions,
was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsection A(8) through A(18) as Subsection A(7) through A(17), respectively.
§ 450-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-12
1:584
(1) Commercial recreation area or use.
(2) Apartments in combination with stores or offices.
(3) Conversion of dwelling units into apartments.
(4) Convalescent or nursing home.
(5) Group home. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(6) Church, Sunday school, or other place of worship.
(7) Boardinghouse.
(8) General servicing or repair shop.
(9) Printing or publishing establishment.
(10) Assisted living facilities.
(11) Nondisabled group home. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(12) Treatment center. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(13) Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
D. Conditional uses: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813203]
E. Lot area, width, density, building coverage, minimum and maximum
height regulations and maximum building footprint.
Zone standards
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Density
(units/
acre)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lots
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lots
Minimum
Building
Height
(stories)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square
feet)
Singlefamily
detached
dwelling
4,800 40 — 40% 65% — 40 1,920
Singlefamily
semidetached
dwelling
(each
dwelling
unit)
3,000 25 — 40% 65% — 40 1,200
203. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 450-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-12
1:585
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Density
(units/
acre)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lots
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lots
Minimum
Building
Height
(stories)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square
feet)
Singlefamily
attached
dwelling
2,200 18 13 40% 65% — 40 880
Multifamily
dwelling
— — 15 45% 65% 2 40 8,500
Conversion
of dwelling
units into
apartments
(each unit)
or
apartments
in
combination
with stores
or offices
3,000 — — 45% 65% 2 40 —
Bus
passenger
station, taxi
station
None — — — — — — 8,500
All other
uses
6,000 60 — 60% 85% 2 40 8,500
NOTES:
Maximum building size restrictions do not apply to existing structures. The maximum building
size restrictions do apply to additions to existing buildings.
F. Minimum yard requirements.
§ 450-12 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-12
1:586
§ 450-13. TC Town Center. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 662]
The purpose of this district is to set the area as the focal point of the
community. This district encourages the most intense development of any
area of Hellertown.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Front Yard
(feet)
Each
Unattached
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Single-family
detached dwelling
10 5 10 25
Single-family
semidetached
dwelling (each
dwelling unit)
10 5 10 25
Single-family
attached dwelling
10 10 10 25
Multifamily
dwelling and
conversions of
dwelling units into
apartments
15 10 15 25
Bus passenger
station, tax station
None None None None
All other uses 10 5 10 10
G. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for all nonresidential permitted pursuant to § 450-78.
(2) Required for all special exception uses pursuant to § 450-64C.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Retail store or shop.
(2) Business office or office building.
(3) Professional or medical offices.
(4) Personal service store or shop.
(5) General servicing or repair shop.
§ 450-12 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-13
1:587
(6) Standard restaurant.
(7) Commercial schools.
(8) Building or facility for municipal and governmental use.
(9) Public outdoor recreation areas such as parks and playgrounds.
(10) Membership club.
(11) Cultural facilities such as art galleries, libraries or museums,
community facility.
(12) Mid-rise apartments.
(13) Condominiums.
(14) Bed-and-breakfast.204 [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
(a) The permitted use shall be no more than four guest rooms in
any individual residential property.
(b) The permitted use must also meet the requirements set forth in
§ 450-56.2 except for Subsection A(4).
(15) Medical marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(4). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Private garage or private parking area pursuant to § 450-19B.
(2) Public parking area.
(3) Customary accessory structure or use.
(4) Signs, pursuant to § 450-22.
(5) Private, noncommercial swimming pool pursuant to Chapter 399,
Swimming Pools.
(6) Home occupation and home professional office pursuant to
§ 450-19A.
(7) Home office pursuant to § 450-19A.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
204. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(14), regarding banks and other financial institutions,
was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsection A(15) through A(16) as Subsection A(14) through A(15), respectively.
§ 450-13 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-13
1:588
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Apartments in combination with stores or offices.
(2) Conversion of dwelling units into apartments.
(3) Drive-in bank or remote banking facility.
(4) Commercial recreation area or use.
(5) Group home. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(6) Other restaurant.
(7) Church, Sunday school, or other place of worship.
(8) Housing for the elderly.
(9) Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas such as parks and
playgrounds.
(10) Assisted living facilities.
(11) Drive-in restaurant.
(12) Nondisabled group home. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
(13) Treatment center. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
D. Conditional uses: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813205]
(1) Bank.
(2) Gun shops.
E. Lot area, width, density, building coverage, minimum and maximum
height requirements, and maximum building footprint.
205. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 450-13 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-13
1:589
Zone standards
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Density
(units/
acre)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Minimum
Building
Height
(stories)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Footprint
(square
feet)
Housing for
the elderly
— — 40 40% 65% 2 45 8,500
Mid-rise
apartments,
condominiums
— — 25 40% 80% 2 45 8,500
Conversions
of dwelling
units into
apartments,
apartments
in
combination
with stores
3,000 — — — 80% 2 — —
All other
uses
None 40 — 80% 85% 2 45 8,500
NOTE:
Maximum building size restrictions do not apply to existing structures. The maximum building
size restrictions do apply to additions to existing buildings.
F. Minimum yard requirements.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Each
Unattached
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Housing for the
elderly, mid-rise
apartments,
condominiums
25 20 20 20
All other uses None 7 10 10
G. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for gas station, motorized vehicle repair shop, automobile
sales, mid-rise apartments and condominiums pursuant to
§ 450-78.
(2) Required for all special exceptions uses pursuant to § 450-64C.
§ 450-13 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-14
1:590
§ 450-14. SC Shopping Center.
The purpose of this area is to provide an area where major commercial
uses and highway-oriented businesses can locate to serve Hellertown and
surrounding communities.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Retail store or shop.
(2) Standard restaurants.
(3) Personal service store or shop.
(4) General servicing or repair shop.
(5) Business offices or office building.
(6) Professional or medical offices.
(7) Commercial recreation area or use.206
(8) Shopping center.
(9) Commercial school.
(10) Public utility building or facility.
(11) Cemeteries.
(12) Forestry.
(13) Academic clinical research centers, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(1). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
(14) Medical marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(4). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
(15) Hospital. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
(16) Tattoo parlor. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
(17) Body piercing. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
B. Accessory uses. The uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
206. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding banks and other financial institutions,
was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsection A(8) through A(18) as Subsection A(7) through A(17), respectively.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:591
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Home occupations and home professional offices pursuant to
§ 450-19A.
(2) Parking and loading areas pursuant to §§ 450-18B and 450-20.
(3) Signs pursuant to § 450-22.
(4) Customary accessory uses incidental to the principal uses.
(5) Home office pursuant to § 450-19A.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exceptions are subject
to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the provisions of
§ 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning Hearing Board
has determined that the relevant standards and criteria contained in
Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning Hearing Board
may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to
those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement
the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health, safety,
morals and the general welfare. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(1) Other restaurant.
(2) Agricultural operation.
(3) Drive-in bank or automatic teller service.
(4) Motorized vehicle repair shop.
(5) Gas station.
(6) Automobile or motorized vehicle sales with accessory service
facilities.
(7) Bus passenger or taxi station.207
(8) Drive-in restaurant.
(9) Motorized equipment repair shop.
(10) Communications towers and/or communications antennas. [Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676; amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
691]
(a) In Zoning Districts SC, I, C, and HC. The use shall not be
permitted in R-1, R-2, Mixed or Town Center Zoning Districts.
(b) For the zoning districts in which the use of communication
towers and/or communication antennas is permitted, as set
207. Editor's Note: Former Subsection C(8), Adult bookstores, adult movie/picture theaters and
cabarets, which immediately followed this subsection, was repealed 7-2-2007 by Ord. No.
706.
§ 450-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-14
1:592
forth above, the use shall be permitted by special exception.
The special exception use shall be pursuant to Article VI,
§§ 450-55 and 450-56.
(11) Adult-oriented establishments and massage parlors. [Added
7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
(12) Check-cashing business. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
(13) Pawnshops. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
(14) Bottle clubs. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
(15) Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
(16) Medical marijuana dispensaries, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(4). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
D. Conditional use: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813208]
(1) Bank.
E. Lot area, width, building coverage, height and yard requirements.
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Shopping
centers
4 acres 250 30% 80% 40
All other
permitted
uses
20,000
square
feet
100 30% 80% 40
F. Minimum yard requirements.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Shopping centers 40 20 30
All other permitted
uses
30 15 25
G. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for all permitted uses pursuant to § 450-78.
208. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 450-14 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-14
1:593
§ 450-15. I Industrial.
(2) Required for all special exception uses pursuant to § 450-64C.
A. The purpose of the district is to provide for the continued use of the
industrial properties for their intended purposes and to provide
additional area for industrial expansion so as to provide employment
opportunities for area residents.
(1) Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district.
Upon demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are
met, the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(a) Any manufacturing or assembly operation meeting the
performance standards of this chapter.
(b) Research institute or laboratory meeting the performance
standards of this chapter.
(c) Wholesale establishment, warehouse, storage and distribution
establishment.
(d) Building material sales and storage yard.
(e) Dry-cleaning plant, laundry.
(f) Public outdoor recreation areas such as parks and
playgrounds.
(g) Business office or office building.
(h) Public utility building, structure or facility.
(i) Municipal building or facility.
(j) Automobile sales with accessory service buildings, including
outdoor storage of nonjunked cars for sale.
(k) Printing or publishing establishment.
(l) Motorized vehicle repair shop.
(m) Forestry.
(n) Motorized equipment repair shop.
(o) Medical marijuana growers/processors, with consideration for
the applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(2).
[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
(p) Hospital. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
§ 450-14 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-15
1:594
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Customary accessory uses and structures.
(2) Parking and loading facilities pursuant to §§ 450-18B and 450-20.
(3) Signs pursuant to § 450-22.
(4) Storage facilities.
(5) Home occupation and home professional offices pursuant to
§ 450-19A.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Railroad terminal and distribution facilities.
(2) Oil, coal or propane distribution or sales facilities.
(3) Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas such as parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Other uses not provided for elsewhere in this chapter, so long as
said uses are reasonable and compatible with the overall zoning
scheme and recognizing the agricultural, commercial, industrial
and residential emphasis of the Borough of Hellertown.
(5) Communications towers and/or communications antennas. [Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676; amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
691]
(a) In Zoning Districts SC, I, C, and HC. The use shall not be
permitted in R-1, R-2, Mixed or Town Center Zoning Districts.
(b) For the zoning districts in which the use of communication
towers and/or communication antennas is permitted, as set
forth above, the use shall be permitted by special exception.
The special exception use shall be pursuant to Article VI,
§§ 450-55 and 450-56.
(6) Mineral extraction.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813209]
(1) Bank.
§ 450-15 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-15
1:595
§ 450-16. C Conservation.
The purpose of the district is to maintain the major open space and
recreation facilities in the Borough. Also, the district recognizes the
development limitations associated with the floodplains located therein and
protects these areas from incompatible development.
E. Lot area, width, building coverage, height and yard requirements.
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
All
permitted
uses
10,000 70 40% 80% 50
F. Minimum yard requirements.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front
Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
All permitted uses 25 10 20 20
G. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for all permitted uses pursuant to the provisions of
§ 450-78.
(2) Required for all special exceptions uses pursuant to the provisions
of § 450-64C.
A. Permitted uses.
(1) Fire station.
(2) Public outdoor recreation areas such as parks, playgrounds, picnic
grounds, swimming pools, golf courses and ice skating rinks.
(3) Tree nursery.
(4) Municipal building or facility.
(5) Forestry.
209. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 450-15 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-16
1:596
B. Accessory use. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Customary accessory use or structure.
(2) Signs pursuant to § 450-22.
(3) Garage or parking area pursuant to § 450-18B.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas such as parks,
playgrounds, picnic grounds, swimming pools, golf courses and ice
skating rinks.
(2) Communications towers and/or communications antennas. [Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676; amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
691]
(a) In Zoning Districts SC, I, C, and HC. The use shall not be
permitted in R-1, R-2, Mixed or Town Center Zoning Districts.
(b) For the zoning districts in which the use of communication
towers and/or communication antennas is permitted, as set
forth above, the use shall be permitted by special exception.
The special exception use shall be pursuant to Article VI,
§§ 450-55 and 450-56.
(3) Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
D. Lot area, width building coverage and height regulations.
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
All
permitted
uses
543,560 150 30% 40% 35
E. Minimum yard requirements.
§ 450-16 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-16
1:597
§ 450-17. HC Highway Commercial District.
Purpose. To provide for a mix of commercial uses oriented toward serving
transient motorists from the nearby highway as well as Hellertown and
surrounding communities. These uses shall be compatible with adjacent
neighborhoods and promote efficient traffic access.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
Abutting
Street
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
All permitted uses 50 15 25 40
F. Site plan approval. Required for fire stations pursuant to § 450-78.
A. Permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right in the district. Upon
demonstration to the Zoning Officer or his designee that the
dimensional and other applicable requirements of this chapter are met,
the Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a zoning permit.
(1) Shopping center.
(2) Hotel or motel.
(3) Retail store or shop.
(4) Restaurant, standard.
(5) General servicing or repair shop.
(6) Professional or medical offices.
(7) Commercial recreation area or use.210
(8) Gas station.
(9) Theater.
(10) Office buildings.
(11) Personal service facilities.
(12) Commercial school.
(13) Bus passenger or taxi station.
(14) Public utility installations.
(15) Municipal facilities/services.
210. Editor's Note: Former Subsection A(7), regarding banks and other financial institutions,
was repealed 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813. This ordinance also redesignated former
Subsection A(8) through A(19) as Subsection A(7) through A(18), respectively.
§ 450-16 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17
1:598
(16) Medical marijuana growers/processors, with consideration for the
applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(2). [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
(17) Medical marijuana transport vehicle offices, with consideration for
the applicable performance standards found in § 450-22.1A(3).
[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 811]
(18) Hospital. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
B. Accessory uses. These uses occur on the same lot as the permitted uses
and are customarily incidental and subordinate to the permitted use.
Accessory uses shall meet all yard and other applicable provisions of
this chapter.
(1) Signs pursuant to § 450-22.
(2) Parking and loading areas pursuant to §§ 450-18B and 450-20.
(3) Customary accessory uses incidental to the principal uses.
(4) Home occupations.
C. Special exception uses. Applications for special exception uses are
subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to the
provisions of § 450-64. These rules shall be permitted after the Zoning
Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and criteria
contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and safeguards, in
addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may deem necessary to
implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect the public health,
safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Restaurant, other.
(2) Motorized vehicle repair shop.
(3) Automobile sales facility.
(4) Motorized equipment repair shop.
(5) Communications towers and/or communications antennas. [Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676; amended 3-20-2006 by Ord. No.
691]
(a) In Zoning Districts SC, I, C, and HC. The use shall not be
permitted in R-1, R-2, Mixed or Town Center Zoning Districts.
(b) For the zoning districts in which the use of communication
towers and/or communication antennas is permitted, as set
forth above, the use shall be permitted by special exception.
The special exception use shall be pursuant to Article VI,
§§ 450-55 and 450-56.
§ 450-17 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17
1:599
§ 450-17.1. HC Highway Commercial District. [Added 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
Purpose: To permit and encourage flexibility in development to encourage
reinvestment and redevelopment. The intent is to allow for the use of
vacant and under-utilized land and buildings through the use of flexible
development and redevelopment standards and compatible architectural
design.
D. Conditional uses: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813211]
(1) Bank.
E. Lot area, width, building coverage, height and yard requirements.
Uses
Minimum
Lot Area
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
Shopping
centers
3 acres 200 30% 80% 40
Hotel/
motel
3 acres 200 30% 80% 70
All other
permitted
uses
20,000
square feet
100 30% 80% 40
F. Minimum yard requirements.
Minimum Acceptable Dimensions
Uses
Front Yard
(feet)
Side Yard
(feet)
Rear Yard
(feet)
Shopping centers 40 20 30
Hotel/motel 40 20 30
All other uses 30 15 25
G. Site plan approval.
(1) Required for all permitted uses pursuant to § 450-78.
(2) Required for all special exception uses pursuant to § 450-64C.
A. Procedural requirements.
(1) After review by the Planning Commission, Borough Council, at its
sole and absolute discretion, may elect to apply the Flexible
211. Editor's Note: This ordinance also redesignated former Subsections D through F as
Subsections E through G, respectively.
§ 450-17 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17.1
1:600
Redevelopment Overlay to a parcel or set of contiguous parcels
within the area designated on the Zoning Map that meets one of
the following:
(a) A structure or site vacant for one year.
(b) An unoccupied structure tax delinquent for two years.
(c) Physical condition that has rendered the site a public nuisance
per Borough building codes.
(d) Presence of a fire hazard to persons or property as determined
by the Borough Fire Chief.
(e) Physical condition that has rendered the site an attractive
nuisance to children, including abandoned wells and shafts,
basements, excavations or unsafe structures.
(f) A structure that, due to dilapidation, sanitation, vermin, lack of
facilities or safety, has been designated by the Borough as unfit
for human habitation.
(g) A structure from which the utilities, plumbing, heating,
sewerage or other facilities have been disconnected,
destroyed, removed or rendered ineffective so that the
property is unfit for its intended use.
(2) After review by the Planning Commission, Borough Council may, in
its sole discretion, determine whether the proposed tract is
suitable for application of the Flexible Redevelopment Overlay.
B. R-2 District permitted uses under the Flexible Redevelopment Overlay.
These uses are permitted by right upon application of the overlay
district as described above. Upon demonstration to the Zoning Officer
that the dimensional and other applicable requirements of the section
are met, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit.
(1) Apartments with stores or offices.
(2) Condominiums.
(3) Mid-rise apartments.
(4) Banks.
(5) Business offices.
(6) Commercial school.
(7) Funeral homes.
(8) General service repair shop.
(9) Home occupation/professional office.
§ 450-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17.1
1:601
(10) Home office.
(11) Personal service shop.
(12) Professional or medical offices.
(13) Standard restaurant (floor area not to exceed 5,000 square feet).
(14) Theater (capacity not to exceed 500 seats).
C. M District permitted uses under the Flexible Redevelopment Overlay.
These uses are permitted by right upon the Borough's application of the
overlay district as described above. Upon demonstration to the Zoning
Officer that the dimensional and other applicable requirements of the
section are met, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit.
(1) Apartments with stores or offices.
(2) General service repair shop.
(3) Personal service shop.
(4) Theater (capacity not to exceed 500 seats).
D. M District special exception uses. Applications for special exception
uses are subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to
the provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the
Zoning Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and
criteria contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The
Zoning Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may
deem necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect
the public health, safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Other restaurant.
E. HC District permitted uses under the Flexible Redevelopment Overlay.
These uses are permitted by right upon the Borough's application of the
overlay district as described above. Upon demonstration to the Zoning
Officer that the dimensional and other applicable requirements of the
section are met, the Zoning Officer shall issue a permit.
(1) Apartments with stores or offices.
(2) Drive-in banks.
(3) Drive-in restaurants.
(4) Other restaurant.
(5) Shopping center.
F. FRO lot area, width, coverage, and height requirements:
§ 450-17.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17.1
1:602
Minimum
Lot
Area
Minimum
Lot
Width
(feet)
Maximum
Density
(units/
acre)
Maximum
Building
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Impervious
Coverage
of Lot
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
R-2 FRO,
all
permitted
uses
7,500
square
feet
40 50 60% 85% 70
M FRO,
all
permitted
uses
2,200
square
feet
18 18 65% 85% 45
HC FRO,
all
permitted
uses
20,000
square
feet
Same as
underlying
district
N/A 60% 85% 70
G. FRO yard requirements:
Minimum
Front Yard
(feet)
Maximum
Front Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Side Yard
(feet)
Minimum
Rear Yard
(feet)
R-2 FRO, all
permitted
uses
None 5 15 20
M FRO, all
permitted
uses
0 5 5 10
HC FRO, all
permitted
uses
None 5 15 20
H. Site plan approval: required for all nonresidential permitted uses
pursuant to § 450-78.
I. Design standards. Intent: to provide a set of guidelines that will result
in unified, harmonious, high-quality architecture throughout the FRO
without inhibiting the creative work of designers and the individuality
of property owners and tenant businesses. Design methods are
encouraged that minimize the large-scale visual impact of buildings and
create a complex compatible with pedestrian-scale streetscape.
(1) Site design criteria.
(a) Entrance drives shall be clearly visible and provide safe and
continuous means of ingress and egress to a street and be so
§ 450-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17.1
1:603
located as to be clearly discernible and accessible without
obstruction and so arranged to lead directly to the street.
(b) Conflict between service vehicles, autos, and pedestrians shall
be minimized.
(c) Main building entries shall be emphasized by accent features,
including one or more of the following: covered vehicle
dropoffs, plazas, planters and landscaping, architectural walls.
(d) Site development shall be coordinated and unified with
building architecture.
(e) Each phase of a development project shall provide stand-alone
visual unity.
(2) Building form and materials.
(a) Building walls shall be designed to create pedestrian-scale
exterior spaces by utilizing small wall segments, landscaping,
wall texture and shadow lines.
(b) Building walls shall be comprised of one primary material that
expresses permanence, substance, timelessness and restraint.
(c) Materials shall be sufficiently durable to provide low
maintenance, stability and a reasonable life span.
(d) Materials shall be consistent or blend with existing materials in
adjacent areas of the district.
(e) Pre-engineered painted metal is strongly discouraged.
(f) Exposed drainage pipes on building fronts shall only be
permitted with the approval of the Borough.
(g) Rooftop mechanical equipment visible from the ground shall be
screened or arranged in a neat and compact manner and
colored to blend into the visual background.
(h) Sloped roofs shall be comprised of a traditional roof material.
(3) Lighting guidelines.
(a) Lighting visible from an adjacent street shall be indirect or
utilize a full-cutoff shield-type fixture.
(b) Parking and vehicle access and circulation areas shall be
illuminated by full-cutoff fixtures. Parking area illumination
shall achieve an average-to-minimum uniformity ratio of 3 to 1
with minimum of 0.3 footcandle.
(c) Service-area lighting shall be substantially contained within
the area's boundaries and walls.
§ 450-17.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17.1
1:604
(d) Indirect (invisible source) wall lighting is encouraged.
(e) Outdoor pedestrian area lighting shall achieve an average-tominimum
uniformity ratio of 3.5 to 1 with minimum of 0.18
footcandle.
(f) Outdoor pedestrian walkway lighting shall clearly identify the
walkway and imply the travel direction.
(g) Inoperable bulbs shall be replaced and fixtures maintained/
repaired within five business days to maintain required light
levels.
(4) Landscaping.
(a) Landscaping strips shall be provided to separate travel lanes of
adjoining roads from buildings, off-street parking lots, offstreet
loading and outdoor storage.
(b) Landscaping strips shall be provided to delineate travel lanes
of on-site access drives, driveways, interior drives and offstreet
loading.
(c) Landscaping materials shall be provided to buffer and screen
to promote compatibility between different adjoining land
uses.
(d) Landscaping materials shall be comprised of native species
that are healthy and vibrant. Dead material shall be replaced
within six months.
(e) Side and rear yard landscaping strips required elsewhere shall
be at least 10 feet wide, six feet high, and achieve seventy-fivepercent
coverage within four years of installation.
(f) Any parking lot containing 20 or more parking spaces shall
include landscaping comprising at least 5% of the total lot
area.
(5) Integration. A development shall be designed and arranged to
integrate with its surroundings.
(a) A development's configuration shall provide for a logical and
seamless connection with its surroundings through the
connection of roads, access drives, driveways, pedestrian
paths and traffic control devices with existing adjoining similar
facilities at logical locations.
(b) Development features shall be coordinated, such as shared use
of access drives, driveways, off-street parking, loading,
storage, display features, pedestrian paths and stormwater
management facilities. Shared-use facilities shall be
§ 450-17.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17.1
1:605
§ 450-17.2. TrOO Trail Oriented Overlay District. [Added 4-16-2012
by Ord. No. 763]
Purpose: to permit and encourage flexibility in development by allowing
additional uses within the below zoning districts to facilitate trail-oriented
and trail-compatible uses.
guaranteed through recorded common use and maintenance
agreements.
(c) A development shall provide for safe and convenient
pedestrian access to each use from adjoining properties and
nearby residential areas.
A. TrOO District permitted uses. These uses are permitted by right upon
the Borough's application of the overlay district as described above.
Upon demonstration to the Zoning Officer that the dimensional and
other applicable requirements of the section are met, the Zoning Officer
shall issue a permit.
(1) Apartments with stores or offices.
(2) Bed-and-breakfast.
(3) Banks.
(4) Commercial recreation.
(5) Professional or medical offices.
(6) Retail stores or shops.
(7) Standard restaurant.
(8) Community center, library, cultural.
(9) Public recreation facility.
(10) Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
(a) The permitted use shall be no more than four guest rooms in
any individual residential property.
(b) The permitted use must also meet the criteria set forth in
§ 450-56.2 except for Subsection A(4).
B. TrOO District special exception uses. Applications for special exception
uses are subject to review by the Zoning Hearing Board according to
the provisions of § 450-64. These uses shall be permitted after the
Zoning Hearing Board has determined that the relevant standards and
criteria contained in Article VI, Special Exception Uses, are met. The
Zoning Hearing Board may attach any reasonable conditions and
safeguards, in addition to those expressed in this chapter, as it may
§ 450-17.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17.2
1:606
deem necessary to implement the purpose of this chapter and to protect
the public health, safety, morals and the general welfare.
(1) Other restaurant.
(2) Personal service shop.
C. TrOO lot area, width, coverage and height requirements: same as in the
underlying district.
D. TrOO yard requirements: same as in the underlying district.
E. Site plan approval: required for all nonresidential permitted uses
pursuant to § 450-78.
F. Design standards for trail-adjacent properties. Intent: to provide a set
of guidelines that will result in unified, harmonious, high-quality
architecture for trail-adjacent properties in the TrOO without inhibiting
the creative work of designers and the individuality of property owners
and tenant businesses. Design methods are encouraged that maximize
the visibility of the trail, create a visual relationship between the trail
and adjacent buildings, and create pedestrian-scale architecture along
both trail and the street.
(1) Site design criteria.
(a) Buildings shall be located to preserve trail views.
(b) Buildings shall be set back at least 15 feet from the trail
property line.
(c) Buildings shall have their primary entrance facing the street
and a secondary entrance facing the trail.
(d) For nonresidential buildings and apartments, ground-floor
facades of buildings visible to pedestrians on the trail shall
contain a minimum of 60% window area and a maximum of
75%.
(e) For nonresidential buildings and apartments, upper-story
facades of buildings visible to pedestrians on the trail shall
contain a minimum of 35% window area and a maximum of
75%.
(f) Structures exceeding the maximum building height and
requiring a variance shall submit shadowing studies describing
the impact to the trail.
(g) Lots more than 300 feet from the end of a block shall provide a
path connecting the trail to the street. The path shall be
reserved for public use through dedication or the granting of
an easement to the Borough. The path shall consist of crushed
stone or paving and shall be at least four feet in width.
§ 450-17.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-17.2
1:607
(h) Parking lots containing five or more spaces shall include bike
racks.
(i) Signs visible from the trail shall not exceed 20 square feet.
(2) Building form and materials.
(a) Building materials and dimensions shall be designed to create
architectural variety and to offer an attractive, comfortable
walking environment.
(3) Landscaping.
(a) Landscaping materials shall be provided to buffer and screen
to promote compatibility between different adjoining land
uses.
§ 450-17.2 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-17.2
1:608
ARTICLE V
Supplementary Regulations
§ 450-18. General regulations applying to all districts and uses.
A. Flood protection. All structures, buildings and uses shall comply with
the provisions of Chapter 204, Flood Damage Prevention, and any
amendments or revisions thereto.
B. Placement of accessory uses and structures. The placement of a private
garage, accessory parking area, pergola or other accessory building or
use shall be subject to the following requirements:
(1) No accessory building shall be constructed within three feet of any
rear or side lot line; however, this setback shall be increased to five
feet when associated with a rear or side alley or street.
(2) Nothing contained herein shall prevent the construction of a
private garage as a structural part of a main dwelling, provided
that, when so constructed, the exterior garage wall shall be
regarded as the walls of the main dwelling in applying the front,
rear and side yard regulations of this chapter.
(3) No private garage or other accessory building shall be within a
required front yard. Unroofed parking areas are permissible in
required front yards and in portions of side yards not otherwise
required for a planting screen in industrial districts only, provided
that the parking area is of sufficient size for vehicle storage and
maneuvering, and provided that ingress and egress points are
clearly established for the safe channelization of traffic to and from
the adjacent streets. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(4) Any access driveway may be located within a required side yard or
required front yard.
(5) Accessory buildings and uses shall be on the same lot with the main
building or buildings or on an immediately adjacent lot in the same
ownership or within the site limits of a site plan of development
approved by the Planning Commission as prescribed in this
chapter.
(6) Required accessory parking areas and truck loading spaces shall
have safe and adequate access to a public street either by a
driveway on the same lot or by means of a permanent easement
across an adjoining lot.
(7) No required accessory parking area or off-street truck loading
space shall be encroached upon by buildings, open storage or any
other use.
(8) Accessory private garages may be constructed within or under any
portion of a main building. Accessory private garages may be built
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:609
on the property side yard line, providing two adjoining property
owners agree to build a combined garage utilizing a common
driveway. An eight-inch masonry fire wall must be constructed
on the property line extending to the ridge line of the combined
building.
(9) Pergolas may be located within the required side yard and rear
yard. Pergolas shall not be located within the required front yard.
C. Small lots of record. In the R-1 and R-2 Districts, a single-family
detached dwelling, and in the M, TC and SC, I or HC District, a building
or structure to contain a permitted or special exception use, may be
erected on any lot with less than the minimum required lot width or lot
areas, providing said lot is separately owned and is not adjacent to any
other lot in the same ownership at the time application is made for the
proposed development of the lot, provided that the aggregate width of
the proposed side yards is not less than 25% of the total lot width, that
the narrower proposed side yard is not less than five feet in width and
that the proposed front and/or rear yards shall be not less than 65% of
the required minimum front and/or rear yard as specified in this
chapter in the minimum yard requirements table for the applicable
zoning district in which the lot is located.212
D. Height.
(1) Nothing herein contained shall restrict the height of a church spire,
belfry or flagpole, none of which shall be in excess of 60 feet above
grade. No structure shall:
(a) Have a lot coverage at the base in excess of 10% of the lot area.
(b) Be used for residency or tenancy purposes.
(c) Have any advertising or device inscribed upon or attached to
such structure.
(2) No portion of the structure of a private garage or other accessory
building shall exceed 20 feet in height.
E. Yards.
(1) Front yard. The space in a required front yard shall be open and
unobstructed except for an unroofed balcony or terrace projecting
not more than eight feet or steps giving access to a porch or first
floor entry door.
(2) All yards. Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky,
unobstructed by structures except for retaining walls and for
accessory buildings in a rear yard and except for the ordinary
projections of sills, belt courses and for ornamental features
projecting not to exceed six inches.
212. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-18
1:610
(3) Open or lattice-enclosed fireproof fire escapes or stairways
required by law, projecting into a yard not more than four feet, and
the ordinary projections of chimneys and pilasters shall be
permitted when placed so as not to obstruct light and ventilation.
(4) Front yard exemptions. The front yard requirements shall not apply
to a lot where the buildings on the lots to both sides of the lot in
question are nonconforming relative to the front yard setback
requirements. In such cases, the front yard requirement shall be
reduced to the setback of the adjoining building which is lesser in
degree of nonconformity.
F. Through lots. Where a lot extends through from a street to street, the
applicable front yard regulations shall apply on both street frontages.
G. Corner clearance.
(1) On a corner lot, within the triangular area (shown in the figure)
determined as provided in this section, no wall or fence or other
structure shall be erected to a height in excess of three feet, and no
vehicle, object or any other obstruction of a height in excess of
three feet shall be parked or placed, and no hedge, shrub or other
growth shall be maintained at a height in excess of three feet,
except that trees whose branches are trimmed away to a height of
at least 10 feet above the curb level shall be permitted.
(2) Such triangular area shall be determined by the intersecting street
center lines and a diagonal connecting two points, one at each
street center line, each of which points is 50 feet from the
intersection of such street center line.
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-18
1:611
H. A temporary building permit may be issued for a period not to exceed
one year for nonconforming building, structure or use incidental to a
building or other construction project, including such uses as the
storage of building supplies and machinery and a real estate office
located on a tract of land where individual properties are being offered
for sale, provided that such temporary permit shall be issued only upon
written agreement by the owner or his agent to remove such building or
structure upon expiration of such permits, and further provided that
such permit shall be subject to such reasonable conditions as the
Zoning Hearing Board shall determine to be necessary to protect the
public health, safety, morals and general welfare. Such permit may be
renewed annually over a period not to exceed three years.
I. Rear dwellings. Rear dwellings shall be prohibited in all districts.
§ 450-18 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-18
1:612
§ 450-19. Regulations applying to certain uses and districts.
J. Storage and use of travel trailer, boat, boat trailer, combination boat
and trailer, recreational vehicle or similar vehicles.
(1) The external storage of any travel trailer, boat, boat trailer,
combination boat and trailer, recreational vehicle or similar
vehicles shall be prohibited within the front yard.
(2) The external storage of any travel trailer, boat, boat trailer,
combination boat and trailer or similar vehicles shall not encroach
on the required side or rear yard setbacks.
(3) The occupancy of any travel trailer or similar vehicle as a dwelling
shall not exceed any consecutive forty-eight-hour period.
(4) No more than two travel trailers, boats, boat trailers, combination
boats and trailers or similar vehicles shall be externally stored on a
lot of record at any one time.
(5) The storage of a recreational vehicle shall be set back at least five
feet from side and rear lot lines.
A. Home occupations, home professional offices and home offices. Home
occupations and home professional offices shall be allowed based on
compliance with the following criteria; home offices shall be allowed
based on compliance with criteria as established at Subsection A(3),
(4), (6), (7) and (8):
(1) A home occupation or home professional office shall occupy a space
which constitutes less than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling.
The area of garages or other accessory buildings shall not be used
for the computation of the floor area. The occupation shall not
occur in the garage or other accessory building.
(2) Outside employees.
(a) A maximum of two persons not residing at the dwelling may be
employed for a home professional office.
(b) A maximum of one person not residing at the dwelling may be
employed for a home occupation.
(c) For home professional offices and home occupations in the R-1
and R-2 Districts, no person who does not reside at the
dwelling shall be employed.
(3) No home occupation or home professional office shall require
structural alterations of an existing structure. The exterior design
shall reflect the principal residential use of the structure.
(4) Signs associated with the home occupation or home professional
office shall conform to the provisions of § 450-22.
§ 450-18 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-19
1:613
(5) The parking needs of the home occupation or home professional
office shall be met through the use of off-street parking areas
according to the provisions of § 450-20. However, all required
parking for uses in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall be provided on
site. The provisions of § 450-20A(7) and C(3) shall not apply to uses
in the R-1 and R-2 Districts.
(6) The home occupation or home professional office shall not create
noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes or electrical interference
beyond the bounds of the property to any extent greater or more
frequent than ordinarily associated with the dwelling unit.
(7) All storage of materials associated with the home occupation or
home professional office shall be in enclosed buildings.
(8) In the R-1 and R-2 Districts, all home occupation, home
professional office or home offices that provide a service, other
than a medical office, shall be operated on a visit by appointment
basis only. Appointments shall not exceed two per hour of
operation.
(9) In the R-1 and R-2 Districts, the hours of business for home
occupations and home professional offices shall be limited to 7:00
a.m. to 7:00 p.m.
B. Private garages or private parking area.
(1) A private garage or private parking area may be utilized only as an
accessory to the main use, except that no more than two parking
spaces in a private garage accessory to a one-family or a two-family
dwelling may be rented to a person who is not a resident of the
dwelling, and in no circumstance, in any district, shall parking
facilities be rented to others unless the off-street parking
requirements of the occupants of the buildings on the premises, as
those requirements are specified elsewhere in this chapter or have
been set by the Zoning Hearing Board, first have been met.
(2) Not more than one commercial vehicle, with a gross weight limited
to four tons, may be housed on any lot, and then only in a private
garage.
C. Fences.
(1) No fences or walls over six feet in height shall be erected or located
in the R-1 or R-2 District.
(2) Nothing herein contained shall restrict the height of fences in
conjunction with private noncommercial swimming pools or when
such fences are used to enclose utilities such as electric
transformers, switching stations, reservoirs and/or all other uses
deemed as dangerous or a hazard.
§ 450-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-19
1:614
(3) A fence constructed within the required front yard in the R-1 or R-2
District shall not exceed three feet in height.
(4) Fences shall be erected so as to maintain a minimum of five feet of
setback from the right-of-way line associated with a side or rear
street or alley.
(5) Fences, walls or hedges otherwise in conformity with the provisions
of this chapter may be erected or located within a side yard or rear
yard and along a side or rear property line not associated with a
street or alley.
D. Mobile home siting. All mobile home placements shall occur in accord
with the following provisions:
(1) The area of the mobile home stand shall be improved to provide an
adequate foundation for the placement of the mobile home.
(2) The stand shall be constructed from material sufficient to
adequately support the mobile home and prevent abnormal settling
or heaving under the weight of the home. The corners of the mobile
home shall be anchored to prevent wind overturn and rocking with
tie-downs such as concrete "dead men," screw augers, arrowhead
anchors or other devices suitable to withstand a tension of at least
2,800 pounds.
(3) After a mobile home has been anchored to the mobile home stand,
the hitch which is employed for the transportation of the unit shall
be removed if not of bolted construction and there shall be a
decorative skirt installed around the base of the unit.
(4) The mobile home shall utilize the public water supply system and
the public sanitary sewer system.
E. Buffers.
(1) Applicability. All lots proposed for nonresidential uses shall be
screened by the use of landscaped buffer strips along those
property lines which are directly contiguous to an R-1 or R-2 zone
or an existing residential lot.
(2) Regulations. A solid and continuous landscape screen shall consist
of a protective planting strip not less than 10 feet or more than 30
feet in width, situated within any required side or rear yard,
designed and laid out with suitable evergreen plant material which
will be planted at a minimum height of four feet and will attain and
shall be maintained at a height of not less than eight feet so as to
provide an effective natural screen between the nonresidential and
residential districts or uses. A planting plan specifying the type,
size and location of existing and proposed plant material shall be
required. Where the distance between the nonresidential use or
parking lot is less than 10 feet from the property line, a fence
§ 450-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-19
1:615
meeting the following specifications shall be provided: The fence
shall be six feet high. It shall be composed of masonry, wood or
vinyl. Chain-link material shall not be allowed. The fence shall
provide a finished appearance on both sides.
F. Satellite earth stations.
(1) The maximum size of a satellite earth station shall be 12 feet in
diameter.
(2) In an R-1 or R-2 District, no satellite earth station may be located in
the front yard of a lot or in the street side yard of a corner lot.
(3) Any satellite earth station located in a side or rear yard in any
district must be set back from the nearest property line a distance
equal to the overall height of the antenna, which may not exceed 15
feet.
(4) No satellite earth station located on a roof may exceed an overall
height of 10 feet above the highest point of the roof.
(5) No satellite earth station may be used for commercial purposes if
located in an R-1 or R-2 District.
G. Shared housing. A shared housing arrangement may occur in any
housing unit where such use is permitted by the zoning district, subject
to the following provisions:
(1) The living arrangement shall result in no interior or exterior
structural alterations.
(2) The use of a dwelling for a shared housing arrangement shall
involve no more than two individuals as a single nonprofit
housekeeping unit.
(3) A minimum of one of the participating individuals shall be at least
65 years of age.
H. Town Center design standards. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) Build-to line. Except where otherwise required, buildings shall be
built to the sidewalk or set back from the sidewalk a maximum of
20 feet for purposes of a plaza, square, courtyard, recessed
entrance, or outdoor dining.
(2) Building orientation and entrances.
(a) The front facade of buildings shall be oriented towards
commercial/main streets, with a daily public entrance in the
front facade.
(b) Buildings located on corners shall have their entrance located
on the corner with articulation, such as chamfered corner,
turret, canopy or other similar building feature.
§ 450-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-19
1:616
(c) Primary building entrances shall be accentuated by recess,
protruding canopy, portico, overhang or similar building
feature.
(3) Walls.
(a) Exterior walls facing a street, parking area or walking area
shall not be blank.
(b) Walls or portions of walls without windows shall contain
architectural treatments similar to the front facade, including
materials, colors and details. At least four of the following shall
be provided: masonry, concrete or masonry plinth at the wall
base, belt courses of a different texture or color, projecting
cornice, projecting metal canopy, decorative tile work, planting
trellis, opaque or translucent glass, artwork, vertical or
horizontal articulation, lighting fixtures, or a similar
architectural element.
(4) Windows.
(a) Ground-floor front facades of buildings visible to pedestrians
shall contain a minimum of 50% window area and a maximum
of 75%. [Amended 3-16-2015 by Ord. No. 797]
(b) Ground-floor windows shall be a maximum of 20 inches above
grade.
(c) Upper-story front facade windows shall contain a minimum of
35% window area and a maximum of 75%.
(d) Windows shall not be smoked, reflective, black or boarded.
(e) If security bars are required to be installed they shall be placed
on the inside of the windows. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No.
813]
(5) Roofs.
(a) Roofs shall be in keeping with the character of adjacent
buildings.
(b) Rooftop mechanical equipment shall be concealed by or
integrated within the roof form or screened from view at
ground level of nearby streets.
(6) Architectural rhythm.
(a) Infill development shall retain the architectural rhythm of
building openings of the same block.
(b) Infill development shall maintain the horizontal rhythm of
street facades of the same block by using similar alignment of
windows, floor spacing, cornices, awnings and other elements.
§ 450-19 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-19
1:617
§ 450-20. Parking and truck loading space requirements. [Amended
12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 645]
(7) Massing.
(a) Buildings shall be similar in height and size or articulated and
subdivided into massing that is more or less proportional to
adjacent structures.
(b) The horizontal massing of any facade shall not exceed 50 feet
without variations.
(c) Nonresidential buildings shall have at least a break in depth of
three feet in all street facades for every 50 feet of continuous
facade, using bay windows, porches, porticos, building
extensions, towers, recessed doorways, or other similar
architectural treatments.
A. Off-street parking. Off-street parking spaces for the storage or parking
of passenger vehicles shall be provided pursuant to the provisions of
this section.
(1) Individual parking spaces. Parking areas shall be marked off into
parking spaces, each with a minimum width of nine feet and a
minimum area of 160 square feet, exclusive of driveways and
turning areas. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall contain a
minimum area of 215 square feet and shall be a minimum width of
12 feet, including the access aisle. Adjacent parking spaces for the
handicapped shall each contain a minimum width of eight feet with
a shared access aisle between them containing a minimum width of
five feet. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(2) Minimum requirements for parking areas. The minimum number of
off-street parking spaces required shall be calculated using the
following table: [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763;
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813; 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 820]
Use Requirement
Adult bookstores 1 space per 100 gross square feet
plus 1 space per employee
Adult movie/picture theater 1 space per 2 seats plus 1 per
employee
Agriculture 1 space per employee
Apartment and office
combinations
2 spaces per dwelling unit plus 1
space per 200 gross square feet of
office
Apartment conversion 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit
Apartment, mid-rise 3 spaces per dwelling unit
§ 450-19 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-20
1:618
Use Requirement
Assisted living facility 1 space per dwelling unit plus 1
space per maximum number
employees at one time
ATMs (automatic teller
machines)
1 space per 1 machine
Automotive repair shop 5 spaces per bay plus 1 space per
employee
Bank 1 space per 200 gross square feet
plus 1 space per 2 employees
Bed-and-breakfast 1 space per rental unit plus 2 per
dwelling unit plus 1 per nonresident
employee
Beverage distributor 1 space per 200 gross square feet
plus 1 per employee
Boardinghouse 1 space per dwelling/rental unit plus
1 space per nonresident employee
Bowling alley 2 spaces per lane plus 2 per pool
tables plus 1 space per employee
Building materials (sales) 1 space per employee plus 1 visitor
space per 250 square feet
Bus station 4 spaces per loading/unloading stall
for buses plus 1 per employee
Car wash 1 per employee
Cemeteries 1 space per employee plus visitor
parking
Church or place of worship 1 space per 5 seats or per 50 square
feet of meeting space plus 1 space
per 2 employees
Clubs, lodges and similar
uses
1 space per 6 persons of total
capacity plus 1 per 2 employees
Commercial or public or
private nonprofit school
(children age over 16)
6 spaces per classroom plus 1 space
per employee
Commercial or public or
private nonprofit school
(children age under 16)
2 spaces per classroom plus 1 space
per employee
Community center 1 space per 400 square feet of floor
area plus 1 space per employee
Condominium/townhome 3 spaces per dwelling unit*
Convenience stores 1 space per 75 square feet of gross
floor area
§ 450-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:619
Use Requirement
Cultural facility 1 space per 400 square feet of floor
area plus 1 space per employee
Dance club 1 space per 100 square feet floor
area* plus 1 space per 2 employees
Day care (as accessory use
to a dwelling)
Designated safe dropoff/pickup area
plus 1 space per nonresident
employee
Day-care center (as
principal use)
1 space per 12 students plus 1 space
per 2 employees
Dry-cleaning facility 1 space per 2 employees plus 1
visitor space per 250 square feet
Dwelling, multifamily 2.5 spaces per dwelling unit*
Dwelling, single-family
attached
3 spaces per dwelling unit*
Dwelling, single-family
detached
2 spaces per dwelling unit*
Dwelling, single-family
semidetached
3 spaces per dwelling unit*
Food markets and grocery
stores
1 space per 150 square feet of gross
floor area
Funeral home 1 space per 75 square feet of
assembly space plus 1 space per
employee
Gas station 5 spaces per bay plus 1 space per
employee
General service shop 1 space per 150 square feet
customer floor area plus 1 space per
employee
Government building or use 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per vehicle used plus 1 space per 4
persons of total capacity
Home occupation 1 space per 250 square feet devoted
to home occupation, minimum of 1,
plus 1 space per nonresident
employee
Home professional
(nonmedical)
1 space per 100 square feet devoted
to home occupation plus 1 space per
nonresident employee
Hospitals 1 space per 2 beds plus 1 space per
1.2 employees
§ 450-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-20
1:620
Use Requirement
Hotels or motels 1 space per guest/rental unit plus 1
space per 5 seats in meeting room
plus 1 space per employee
Housing for the elderly;
assisted living facility
1 space per 5 dwelling/rental units
plus 1 space per employee on largest
shift
Industrial 1 space per 0.9 employee during
largest shift plus 1 per company
vehicle
Kennel 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per 15 animals of capacity
Laundromat 1 space per 3 washing machines plus
1 space per on-site employee
Library 1 space per 400 square feet of floor
area plus 1 space per employee
Manufacturing 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per company vehicle plus 1 space
per 250 square feet
Membership club 1 space per 6 persons of total
capacity plus 1 space per employee
Mini warehouse 1 space per 25 storage units plus 1
space per on-site employee
Mobile home park 2 spaces per dwelling unit
Motorized equipment
repair
1 space per 250 square feet total
floor area plus 1 space per 2
employees
Motorized vehicle sales Motor sales: 1 space per 15 vehicles
on display plus 1 space per 300
square feet sales floor area
Motorized vehicle service Motor service: 5 spaces per bay plus
1 space per employee on largest
shift
Museums, art galleries 1 space per 400 square feet gross
floor area
Nursing home/convalescent
home
1 space per 4 beds plus 1 space per
employee on largest shift (including
staff doctors)
Office (veterinarian) 4 spaces per doctor plus 1 space per
employee
Offices (business) 1 space per 200 gross square feet
Offices (governmental) 1 space per 250 gross square feet
§ 450-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:621
Use Requirement
Offices (medical) 5 spaces per practitioner plus 1
space per employee
Offices (professional) 1 space per 200 gross square feet
Oil/gas/coal distribution 1 space per employee
Personal care homes 1 space per 3 beds plus 1 space per
2 employees
Personal service shop 1 space per 150 square feet
customer floor area plus 1 space per
employee
Plant nursery 1 space per employee plus 1 per 100
square feet total customer area
Printing 1 space per 100 square feet
customer floor area plus 1 space per
employee
Public utility building (nonoffice)
1 space per vehicle routinely needed
to service facility
Publishing shop 1 space per 100 square feet
customer floor area plus 1 space per
employee
Research facility 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per company vehicle plus 1 space
per 250 square feet
Recreation (indoor) (nonbowling)
1 space per 200 square feet member
floor area (plus 2 space per racquet
court) plus 1 space per 2 employees
Recreation (outdoor) (nonpublicly
owned)
1 space per 3 persons of capacity
plus 1 space per 2 employees
Rehabilitation centers (no
overnight stay)
1 space per 400 square feet total
floor area plus 1 space per 2
employees
Rehabilitation centers
(treatment facilities)
1 space per 10 patients plus 1 space
per employee
Restaurant, drive-in 1 space per 25 square feet customer
floor area plus 1 space per employee
Restaurant, other 1 space per 3 seats plus 1 per
employee
Restaurant, standard 1 space per 4 seats plus 1 per
employee
Retail services (barbers,
beauticians, tanning, salon,
tattoo parlor, photographer,
etc.)
1 space per customer seat plus 1
space per employee
§ 450-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-20
1:622
Use Requirement
Retail stores/shops 1 space per 250 gross square feet
plus 1 space per employee
Salvage yard/recycling
center
1 space per 10,000 square feet plus
1 per employee
Seasonal roadside produce
stand
1 space per employee plus 1 space
per 100 square feet total customer
floor area
Self-storage 1 space per 25 storage units plus 1
space per on-site employee
Shopping center 1 space per 200 gross square feet
Swimming pool
(nonresidential)
1 space per 40 square feet of water
surface (non-wading) plus 1 space
per employee
Tavern or nightclub
(including BYOB)
1 space per 100 square feet total
customer floor area plus 1 space per
employee
Theater or auditorium 1 space per 5 seats or per 50 square
feet of meeting space plus 1 space
per 2 employees
Vocational training and
adult education
1 space per 3 students at peak time
plus 1 space per faculty/employee
Warehouse 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per company vehicle plus 1 space
per 250 square feet
Wholesale 1 space per employee plus 1 space
per company vehicle plus 1 space
per 250 square feet
(3) Other uses not specifically listed. The same requirements as for the
most similar use listed in Subsection A(2). [Amended 7-6-2004 by
Ord. No. 662]
(4) Mixed uses. Total requirements shall be the sum of the
requirements of the component uses computed separately, except
where there is a shared parking agreement as noted in this section.
[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(5) Fractional space. In all districts when required parking spaces
results in the requirement of a fractional space, any fraction may
be disregarded. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(6) Nonapplicability of existing buildings and uses. The provisions of
Subsection A(1) through (5) shall not apply to any building,
structure or use lawfully in existence at the effective date of this
§ 450-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:623
chapter, whether continued as a permitted or a nonconforming use,
provided that the use is unchanged and is not enlarged.
(7) On-street parking. The requirements of Subsection A(2) shall not
be met by including on-street parking spaces in meeting the total
number of required off-street parking spaces under Subsection
A(2). On-street parking shall not be counted to satisfy the total
number of off-street parking spaces required under this chapter.
The Zoning Hearing Board, by grant of a variance, may permit onstreet
parking spaces to count towards the off-street parking
requirements of Subsection A(2) if the applicant offers evidence
demonstrating an excess of on-street parking during the peak
demand and can legally meet the requirements for a variance.
[Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 662; 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
763]
(8) Reduction in parking demand. A reduction in the number of
parking spaces may be permitted where: [Amended 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
(a) A diminution in the number of dwelling units, gross leasable
area or other relevant factor occurs. The remaining number of
parking spaces shall conform to the standards contained in
Subsection A(2).
(b) A public parking facility is within a walking distance of 400 feet
from a building entrance.
(c) The applicant offers evidence of a shared parking agreement
meeting all of the following:
[1] The shared parking is guaranteed by a legally binding
agreement in a form acceptable to the Borough. If
requested by the Zoning Officer, the applicant shall
periodically provide evidence that the agreement remains
in effect If such agreement becomes legally ineffective,
then all parking shall be provided as would otherwise be
required.
[2] Calculate the minimum amount of parking required for
each land use as if it were a separate use. Determine peak
parking requirements by multiplying the minimum parking
required for each proposed land use by the corresponding
percentage in the table below for each of the six time
periods. Calculate the column total of each of the six time
periods. The column (time period) with the highest value
shall be the minimum parking requirement.
§ 450-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-20
1:624
Monday through
Friday Saturday and Sunday
Use
8:00
a.m.
to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m. to
12:00
Midnight
12:00
Midnight
to
8:00
a.m.
8:00
a.m.
to
6:00
p.m.
6:00
p.m.
to
12:00
p.m.
12:00
Midnight
to 8:00
a.m.
Residential0.60 1.00 1.00 0.80 1.00 1.00
Office 1.00 0.10 0.05 0.05 0.05 0.05
Commercial0.90 0.80 0.05 1.00 0.60 0.05
Hotel 0.70 1.00 1.00 0.70 1.00 1.00
Restaurant0.70 1.00 0.10 0.70 1.00 0.20
Theater 0.40 0.80 0.10 0.80 1.00 0.10
Entertainm0e.n4t0 1.00 0.10 0.80 1.00 0.50
Institutional 1.00 0.40 0.05 0.10 0.10 0.05
Religious
institution
0.20 0.40 0.05 1.00 0.50 0.05
[3] Reduced parking requirements for shared parking shall
only continue in effect as long as such uses or their closely
similar successor uses remain in operation and so long as
the shared parking agreement remains in effect. Should
one or more uses change in a manner that invalidates the
calculations above, then all parking shall be provided as
would otherwise be required.
(d) The lot includes the reservation, permanently or for a specified
period, of areas sufficient to otherwise meet the required
number of spaces if needed in the future.
[1] Such reservation shall be provided in a legally binding
agreement in a form acceptable to the Borough.
[2] The applicant shall submit site plans to the Zoning Officer
showing where and how the additional parking could be
accomplished in a manner integrated with provided
parking and access. Such future parking area shall not be
covered by buildings and shall be attractively landscaped
unless and until needed for parking.
[3] Such additional parking shall be provided within one year
after a written determination by the Zoning Officer that it
is required to meet actual demand.
(9) Off-site parking. Up to 50% of the parking spaces required of a
principal use may be located on other off-street property than the
§ 450-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:625
lot containing the principal use, provided that: [Added 4-16-2012
by Ord. No. 763]
(a) The parking is guaranteed by a legally binding agreement in a
form acceptable to the Borough. If requested by the Zoning
Officer, the applicant shall periodically provide evidence that
the agreement remains in effect. If such agreement becomes
legally ineffective, then all parking shall be provided as would
otherwise be required.
(b) For residential uses, the off-site parking facility shall be within
100 feet of an entrance.
(c) For nonresidential uses, the off-site parking facility shall be
within 300 feet of an entrance.
(d) For designated employee parking, the off-site parking facility
shall be within 500 feet of an entrance.
B. Required off-street truck loading spaces. [Amended 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
(1) Every building or structure, lot or land hereafter put into use for
business or industrial purposes or for a hospital, and which has a
total floor area of 4,800 square feet or more, shall be provided with
off-street truck loading spaces in accordance with the following
schedule:
Square Feet of Total Floor Area
Devoted to Such Use
(square feet)
Required Number of
Off-Street Truck
Loading Spaces
4,800 to 25,000 1
25,001 to 40,000 in all districts 2
40,001 to 100,000 in all districts 3
Each additional 60,000 in all districts 1 additional
(2) Size of individual truck loading space. An off-street truck loading
space shall have a minimum width of 12 feet, a minimum length of
53 feet, and minimum clear height of 14 feet including its access
from the street.
(3) All truck loading spaces shall be designed so that maneuvering of
trucks to reach the loading dock shall not preempt the use of
required off-street parking space or intrude into the street right-ofway.
C. Parking lot design standards.
(1) All lighting fixtures used to illuminate parking areas shall be
arranged to prevent glare into adjoining properties.
§ 450-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-20
1:626
(2) The number of off-street parking spaces provided for an existing
use may not be reduced below the minimum standards of this
chapter.
(3) The required off-street parking spaces shall be located on the same
lot as the principal use served, except where otherwise noted in
this section. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 662; 4-16-2012
by Ord. No. 763]
(4) No parking area shall be designed so as to require vehicles to back
out of the area directly onto a street with a right-of-way width more
than 20 feet.
(5) In parking lots for multifamily dwellings or single-family attached
dwellings, the parking lot design shall prevent through traffic
between parking areas. For multifamily dwellings, a maximum of
two access points shall be permitted per street fronted, excepting
streets with rights-of-way less than 20 feet wide. There shall be no
limit as to the maximum number of access points along streets with
rights-of-way less than 20 feet wide.
(6) Except as noted in this section, all off-street parking areas shall be
graded and paved with a hard surface such as macadam or
concrete. Provisions satisfactory to the Borough shall be made with
regard to the management of stormwater runoff. Parking lots for
six or fewer cars where the average slope is 4% or less may be
covered by PennDOT Type 2A modified slag or modified stone.
(7) Landscaping. All off-street parking areas, other than those for
single-family residences, which are not contained in a garage shall
be landscaped according to the following standards:
(a) If the parking area abuts a residential lot, screening to prevent
the glare of headlights from shining on the residential lot shall
be provided.
(b) One shade tree shall be planted within or adjacent to the
parking area for each 10 parking spaces provided.
(c) The area between the parking area and a public street shall be
landscaped with evergreen shrubs and shall average at least
one planting for every four feet of frontage and with all
plantings to be at least three feet high at the time of
installation. As an alternative to landscaping, the area between
the parking area and a public street may be screened by a
three-foot-tall decorative masonry wall with brick or stone
faces and include a cap of brick, bluestone or cast stone.
[Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(8) Parking lots shall provide spaces reserved for the handicapped in
accordance with relevant federal requirements and standards.
§ 450-20 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-20
1:627
§ 450-21. Industrial and research center performance standards.
(9) Parking areas serving home occupations, home offices and home
professional offices in the R-1 and R-2 Districts shall not be located
in the portion of the front yard, as defined in Article III, that is
located directly between the principal building and the front yard
line.
(10) Driveways for parking lots shall be as follows: [Amended
4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(a) Located a minimum of 50 feet from street intersections,
measured from the intersection of the street center lines.
(b) Located on a side street or alley whenever possible.
(c) No wider than 24 feet when crossing sidewalks.
(11) Interconnected parking lots: [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(a) Parking lots on abutting nonresidential lots shall be
interconnected by access driveways. Interconnections shall be
logically placed and easily identifiable to ensure convenient
traffic flow.
(b) Each nonresidential lot shall provide cross-access easements
for its parking lots and access driveways guaranteeing access
to adjacent lots. Cross-access easements shall be in a form
acceptable to the Borough.
(12) Location of parking lots. Surface parking shall be located to the
rear of the principal building or to the side, but not between a
building and the street, except where otherwise permitted in this
chapter. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(13) Aisle widths shall be no less than 12 feet wide for one-way access
and no less than 24 feet for two-way access. [Added 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
(14) Pedestrian protection. Wheel stops, curbing or planting strips no
less than three feet wide shall be provided to prevent vehicles from
extending over any sidewalk or designated pedestrian path.
[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(15) Applicants shall make every effort to encourage principal use
employees to park in off-street parking facilities provided under
this section. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
D. Bank drive-in facilities: [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
(1) There shall be a stacking requirement minimum of three cars per
lane.
§ 450-20 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-21
1:628
§ 450-22. Signs.
A. Glare. No use shall produce glare by a strong dazzling light or
reflections of a strong dazzling light beyond its lot lines.
B. Vibration. No use shall cause earth vibrations or concussions detectable
beyond its lot lines without the aid of instruments, with the exception of
that vibration produced as a result of construction activity.
C. Electrical interference. No use shall cause electrical interference with
or disturbance of any equipment, other than that of the creator of the
interference or disturbance, at any point beyond its lot lines.
D. Emergency preparedness. All uses shall prepare a preparedness,
prevention and countermeasure plan according to the regulations of the
Department of Environmental Protection.
E. No use shall produce a risk to public health by the nature of its
operation due to, but not limited to, the potential for explosion, fire,
biologic hazard or the release of toxic substances.
A. Applicability of sign regulations.
(1) All signs which can be seen off the premises on which they are
located, unless they are listed below under Subsection A(3), shall
comply with any applicable provisions of this chapter, regardless of
whether a permit is required or not. Signs which cannot be seen off
the premises on which they are located need not comply and do not
require a permit.
(2) A zoning permit shall be required for all business identification
signs, advertising signs, temporary signs, portable signs, bulletin
boards and home occupation or professional office signs, which will
be seen off the premises on which they are located, before erection
or replacement. No permit shall be required for normal
maintenance of existing signs.
(3) No permit shall be required for and the regulations of this section
shall not be applicable to the following types of situations:
(a) Signs not exceeding two square feet in area and bearing only
property numbers, post office box numbers, names of
occupants of premises or other identification of premises not
having commercial connotations.
(b) No trespassing signs and other signs indicating the private
nature of a road, driveway or premises, which do not exceed
two square feet in area.
(c) Flags and insignia of any government, except when displayed
in connection with commercial promotion.
§ 450-21 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22
1:629
(d) Legal notices, identification, information or directional signs
erected or required by governmental bodies, official traffic
signs and signals, other state, county, school district or
municipal government signs.
(e) Integral decorative or architectural features of buildings,
except letters, trademarks, moving parts or moving lights.
(f) Signs, not exceeding six square feet in area and bearing no
advertising matter, which direct and guide traffic and parking
on private property.
(g) Signs, not exceeding two square feet in area and bearing no
advertising matter, which give information on location of such
things as rest rooms, telephones, offices or the functional
subdivision of the premises.
B. Prohibited signs. The following types of signs shall not be permitted or
erected in any district, notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter:
(1) Signs which make use of words such as "stop," "look," "one-way,"
"danger," "yield" or any similar words, phrases, symbols, lights or
characters, in such manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse
traffic.
(2) Signs with dynamic displays, except those allowed under
Subsection I of this section. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(3) Signs of which all or any part is in motion by any means, including
fluttering, rotating, revolving, flashing, twinkling or other moving
devices. Units which alternately display time and temperature shall
be permitted.
C. Surface area limitations, number of signs and sign setbacks.
(1) Surface area limitations. The maximum surface area for each type
of sign for which a permit is required shall not exceed the Schedule
of Sign Regulations set forth in Subsection C(4). The maximum
surface area shall also be subject to the following standards:
(a) The total area of any attached sign shall not exceed 20% of the
area of the building face (including window and door area
cornices) to which it is attached, up to the maximum surface
area stipulated for each district in the Schedule of Sign
Regulations.
(b) Permanent window signs shall be considered attached signs
and included in computation of the maximum surface area but
shall nevertheless not exceed 30% of the total window area on
each street.
§ 450-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22
1:630
(2) Number of signs. The maximum number of signs allowed for each
type of sign for which a permit is required shall be subject to the
Schedule of Sign Regulations in Subsection C(4). For purposes of
determining the number of signs permitted, a sign shall be
considered to be a single entity organized, related and composed to
form a unit. Where the organization, relationship or composition of
a number of elements is not readily discernible as a single sign,
each element shall be considered to be a single sign.
(3) Sign setbacks. Signs for which a permit is required are subject to
the setback requirements set forth in the Schedule of Sign
Regulations in Subsection C(4).
(4) Schedule of Sign Regulations. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
763]
KEY:
* = If freestanding
Z = Per Subsection E of this section
N/A = Not permitted
Uses
R-1
Residential
R-2
Residential
M
Mixed
TC
Town
Center
SC
Shopping
Center
I
Industrial
C
Conservation
HC
Highway
Commercial
Business Identification
Attached
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
40 40 100 40 20 100
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 2 1 1 2
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Freestanding
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
30 30 30 30 20 160
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22
1:631
Uses
R-1
Residential
R-2
Residential
M
Mixed
TC
Town
Center
SC
Shopping
Center
I
Industrial
C
Conservation
HC
Highway
Commercial
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 1 1 1 1
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
15 15 10 10 15 15 15 15
Advertising
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
300 300
Number/
property
—
maximum
Z Z
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
30 30
Temporary
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
6 6 32 32 32 32 32 32
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
15 15 10 10 15 15 15 15
Bulletin Board
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
20 20 20 20 20
§ 450-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22
1:632
Uses
R-1
Residential
R-2
Residential
M
Mixed
TC
Town
Center
SC
Shopping
Center
I
Industrial
C
Conservation
HC
Highway
Commercial
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 1 1 1
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
10* 10 15 15* 15
Home Occupation/Home Professional Office
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
10* 10* 10* 10 10 10* 10
Portable
Surface
area —
maximum
(square
feet)
20 20 20 20 20
Number/
property
—
maximum
1 1 1 1 1
Street
cartway
setback
(feet)
15 15 15 15 15
(5) Surface area calculation. The size of any sign shall be completed by
multiplying its greatest height by its greatest length, exclusive of
supporting structures. In the case of signs that have no definable
edges, such as raised letters attached to a building facade, the sign
size shall be that area within a single continuous perimeter
enclosing the extreme limits of the actual message or copy area. In
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22
1:633
computing the surface area of a multifaced sign, only one side shall
be considered, provided all faces are identical. If the interior angle
formed by the two faces of a double-face sign is greater than 45°,
then both sides of such sign shall be considered in calculating the
sign area. Structural members not bearing advertising matter or
not in the form of a symbol shall not be included in the computation
of surface areas.
D. Sign placement, height, clearance, projections from walls and
illumination.
(1) Sign placement. Sign placement shall be subject to the following
requirements:
(a) No sign shall be located or arranged that it interferes with
traffic through glare, through blocking of reasonable sight
lines for streets, sidewalks or driveways, through confusion
with a traffic control device (by reason of color, location, shape
or other characteristics), or through other means.
(b) No sign shall be erected, attached or displayed within 25 feet
of the point of the intersection of the street right-of-way lines at
a street corner except for flat wall signs in accord with the
provision of Subsection D(3) and (4). The requirements of
§ 450-18G, Corner clearances, shall apply to signs.
(2) Sign height.
(a) Freestanding signs shall not exceed 18 feet in height, except in
the Highway Commercial District. In the Highway Commercial
District, signs shall not exceed 36 feet in height.
(b) No attached wall sign shall be erected upon the roof of a
building or extend above the height of the building, except in
the Industrial, Shopping Center and Highway Commercial
Districts. In the Industrial and Shopping Center Districts,
attached signs may be erected upon the roof of the building or
extend above the height of the building, if the sign is no higher
than 18 feet from the average finished grade of the building. In
the Highway Commercial District, attached signs may be
erected upon the roof of the building or extend above the
height of the building if the sign is no higher than 36 feet from
the average finished grade of the building.
(c) Bulletin board signs shall not exceed four feet in height.
[Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(3) Clearance. All wall signs which project more than 10 inches from
the building shall have a minimum of 10 feet of clear space between
the sign and the ground. This clear space shall not include any
support structures for the sign.
§ 450-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22
1:634
(4) Projection from walls.
(a) Flat wall signs shall not project more than four feet from the
building.
(b) Bulletin boards attached to a building wall shall not project
more than 18 inches from the building.
(c) Home occupations or professional office signs shall not project
more than 12 inches from the building.
(5) Illumination. All signs may be illuminated by shielded floodlights;
provided, however, that no red or green lights shall be permitted
within 75 feet of the point of intersection of the street right-of-way
lines at a street corner.
E. Advertising signs. There shall be a minimum distance of 100 feet
between advertising signs. Advertising signs shall not be permitted
within 50 feet of any residential use, no matter in what district they are
located.
F. Temporary signs. The following types of temporary signs shall be
permitted:
(1) Temporary signs which advertise the prospective or completed sale
or rental of the premises upon which it is located are permitted,
provided that it shall be maintained and removed within 10 days
after the execution of a lease or an agreement of sale.
(2) Temporary signs indicating the contractors, consultants,
mechanics and artisans performing work or services on the
premises, provided they shall be removed within 10 days after
completion of the service or work and not more than one sign shall
be placed on each street fronted by the site.
(3) Temporary signs appertaining to campaigns, drives or events of
civic, philanthropic, educational or religious organizations,
provided, that they shall be removed within 10 days of the
completion of the campaign, drive or event. No such sign shall be
posted earlier than three weeks before the occurrence of the event
to which it relates. A bond of $50 must be posted with the Borough
for each campaign, drive or event. The bond is a surety that the
signs will be taken down within the time period specified in this
section.213 [Amended 2-6-2006 by Ord. No. 668]
(4) Signs for garage sales or yard sales shall comply with the
provisions of Chapter 209, Garage and Yard Sales.
G. Signs for specific uses. Signs for the following uses shall be permitted
according to the listed standards. These signs shall be allowed in
addition to those set forth in Subsection C.
213. Editor's Note: See also Ch. 349, Signs, Political.
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22
1:635
(1) In the case of shopping center, office building or similar structure
with multiple commercial or business occupants on a lot held in
single and separate ownership, the provisions of Subsection C(4)
relating to the maximum number and maximum surface area of
signs permitted on a property shall not apply. Instead, each such
store, office or other business use on the property shall be
permitted to have two flat wall signs. The surface area of each sign
shall not exceed 25% of the surface area of the exposed exterior
wall up to a maximum of 100 square feet. No more than two
freestanding signs indicating the name of the shopping center,
office building or similar group of stores, offices or other business
uses shall be permitted in conformance with other applicable
provisions of this chapter. Additionally, each such store, office or
other business use on the property shall be permitted to have a
business identification sign, not to exceed six square feet in area,
located on the underside of walkway overhangs. All other
provisions of this chapter shall apply. [Amended 4-16-2012 by
Ord. No. 763]
(2) One sign may be erected to identify a major subdivision, land
development or apartment complex, providing that such sign is
located at a main entrance and has a maximum area of 50 square
feet.
H. Portable signs. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) Portable signs shall be permitted for use up to four times per year.
The cumulative length of time that a portable sign may be used
shall not exceed 45 days per calendar year.
(2) Pennants shall be permitted only as follows:
(a) In the HC District.
(b) For use up to four times per year for up to three days each
time.
(3) Banners shall be permitted for use up to four times per year. The
cumulative length of time that banners may be used shall not
exceed 45 days per calendar year.
(4) Each time that a property owner wishes to use portable signs,
pennants or banners, he or she shall apply for a permit from the
Zoning Officer. The permit application shall specify the first and
last day of display.
(5) Sandwich board signs shall be: [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No.
763]
(a) Constructed of a durable materials and weighted or anchored
for stability.
(b) Prohibited outside of business hours.
§ 450-22 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22
1:636
§ 450-22.1. Medical marijuana facilities.
(c) Permitted along a sidewalk only with an encroachment permit
unless a walking distance of five feet is maintained to allow a
clear pathway for pedestrians.
I. Dynamic signs. [Added 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) Dynamic signs shall be permitted only in the HC and SC Zones, as
follows:
(a) On lots that front an interstate highway or arterial road.
(b) In excess of 100 feet from a residential district.
(c) In place of two business identifications signs otherwise
permitted by this chapter.
(d) At 80% of the surface area of the otherwise permitted sign
type.
(2) Dynamic signs shall not be illuminated in excess of 0.5 footcandle
as measured at the property line.
(3) Dynamic signs shall be equipped with automatic day/night dimming
software to reduce the illumination intensity from one hour after
sunset to one hour prior to sunrise.
(4) Dynamic signs shall cease all illumination the earlier of 11:00 p.m.
or 30 minutes after business hours.
(5) The time interval used to change from one complete message,
image or display to the next complete message, image or display
shall be a maximum of one second.
(6) Dynamic sign messages, images or displays shall not change more
than once every 15 seconds.
(7) Light level intensity and contrast shall remain constant throughout
the sign face.
A. Use regulations.
(1) Academic clinical research centers.
(a) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article V, § 450-20, off-street parking regulations, and/or as
listed for a research facility.
(b) An academic clinical research center may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance
and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor
facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile
§ 450-22 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22.1
1:637
or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other
motor vehicle.
(c) All external lighting serving an academic clinical research
center must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to
be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(d) A buffer planting is required where an academic clinical
research center adjoins a residential use or district.
(2) Medical marijuana grower/processor.
(a) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall meet the same
municipal zoning and land use requirements as other
manufacturing, processing and production facilities that are
located in the same district.
(b) A medical marijuana grower/processor may only grow medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, and secure building which
includes electronic locking systems, electronic surveillance
and other features required by the DOH. The grower/processor
facility shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container, mobile
or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or other
motor vehicle.
(c) A medical marijuana grower/processor shall meet the setback,
parking, landscaping, coverage, and building height
requirements of the applicable zoning district to determine the
building envelope and maximum allowable floor area.
(d) The maximum floor area of a medical marijuana grower/
processor shall be limited to 20,000 square feet, of which
sufficient space must be set aside for secure storage of
marijuana seeds, related finished product, and marijuanarelated
materials used in production or for required laboratory
testing.
(e) There shall be no emission of dust, fumes, vapors, odors, or
waste into the environment from any facility where medical
marijuana growing, processing or testing occurs.
(f) Marijuana remnants and by-products shall be secured and
properly disposed of in accordance with the DOH policy and
shall not be placed within any unsecure exterior refuse
containers.
(g) The grower/processor shall provide only wholesale products to
other medical marijuana facilities. Retail sales and dispensing
of medical marijuana and related products is prohibited at
medical marijuana grower/processor facilities.
§ 450-22.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22.1
1:638
(h) Grower/processors may not locate within 1,000 feet of the
property line of a public, private, or parochial school or daycare
center.
(i) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana grower/
processor must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light
to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(j) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article V, § 450-20, for warehouse and wholesale off-street
parking regulations.
(k) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana
grower/processor adjoins a residential use or district.
(l) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana grower/
processor must be designed to accommodate the anticipated
vehicles used to service the facility.
[1] All accesses must secure the appropriate highway
occupancy permit from the Department of Transportation
and/or Borough of Hellertown.
[2] The clear sight triangle found in Article V, § 480-18, must
be considered and maintained.
[3] The driveway must be designed and improved to the
standards expressly described in Article V, § 390-21, of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(m) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is designed
it should be from within a secure environment.
(3) Medical marijuana transport vehicle service.
(a) A traffic impact study is required where the office is operated.
(b) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article V, § 450-20, off-street parking regulations for motorized
vehicle services.
(c) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana transport
vehicle service must be shielded in such a manner to not allow
light to be emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
(d) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana
transport vehicle service adjoins a residential use or district.
(e) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana transport
vehicle service must be designed to accommodate the
anticipated vehicles used to enter and exit the premises.
§ 450-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22.1
1:639
[1] All accesses must secure the appropriate highway
occupancy permit from the Department of Transportation
and/or the Borough of Hellertown.
[2] The clear sight triangle found in Article V, § 480-18, must
be considered and maintained.
[3] The driveway must be designed and improved to the
standards expressly described in Article V, § 390-21, of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(f) If for some reason a medical marijuana product is to be
temporarily stored at a medical marijuana transport vehicle
service facility, the facility must be secured to the same level as
a medical marijuana grower/producer and dispensary.
(g) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is designed
it should be from within a secure environment.
(4) Medical marijuana dispensary.
(a) A medical marijuana dispensary shall meet the same municipal
zoning and land use requirements as other commercial
facilities that are located in the same district.
(b) A medical marijuana dispensary must be legally registered in
the commonwealth and possess a current valid medical
marijuana permit from the DOH.
(c) A medical marijuana dispensary may only dispense medical
marijuana in an indoor, enclosed, permanent, and secure
building and shall not be located in a trailer, cargo container,
mobile or modular unit, mobile home, recreational vehicle or
other motor vehicle.
(d) A medical marijuana dispensary may not operate on the same
site as a facility used for growing and processing medical
marijuana.
(e) Medical marijuana dispensaries shall have a single secure
public entrance and shall implement appropriate security
measures to deter and prevent the theft of marijuana and
unauthorized entrance into areas containing medical
marijuana.
(f) Permitted hours of operation of a dispensary shall be 8:00 a.m.
to 8:00 p.m. (of the same calendar day).
(g) A medical marijuana dispensary shall meet the setback,
parking, landscaping, coverage and building height
requirements of the applicable zoning district to determine the
building envelope and maximum allowable floor area.
§ 450-22.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22.1
1:640
(h) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a maximum of 3,000
gross square feet, of which no more than 500 square feet shall
be used for secure storage of product, and shall have an
interior customer waiting area equal to a minimum of 25% of
the gross floor area.
(i) A medical marijuana dispensary shall:
[1] Not have a drive-through service;
[2] Not have outdoor seating areas;
[3] Not have outdoor vending machines;
[4] Prohibit the administering of, or the consumption of,
medical marijuana on the premises; and
[5] Not offer direct or home delivery service.
(j) A medical marijuana dispensary may dispense only medical
marijuana to certified patients and caregivers and shall comply
with all lawful, applicable health regulations.
(k) A medical marijuana dispensary may not be located within
1,000 feet of the property line of a public, private or parochial
school or a day-care center. This distance shall be measured in
a straight line from the closest exterior wall of the building or
portion thereof in which the business is conducted or proposed
to be conducted, to the closest property line of the protected
use, regardless of the municipality in which it is located.
(l) A medical marijuana dispensary shall be a minimum distance
of 1,000 feet from the next nearest medical marijuana facility.
This does not include complementing or supporting businesses
covered by different definitions. This distance shall be
measured in a straight line from the closest exterior walls of
the buildings or portions thereof in which the businesses are
conducted or proposed to be conducted, regardless of the
municipality in which it is located. This separation distance
does not apply to the distance between the grower/processor
or academic clinical research centers and the specific
dispensary they serve, or with which they partner.
(m) Any medical marijuana facility lawfully operating shall not be
rendered in violation of these provisions by the subsequent
location of a public, private or parochial school or a day-care
center.
(n) All external lighting serving a medical marijuana dispensary
must be shielded in such a manner to not allow light to be
emitted skyward or onto adjoining properties.
§ 450-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22.1
1:641
(o) Parking requirements will follow the parking schedule found in
Article V, § 450-20, off-street parking regulations, as listed for
medical offices.
(p) A buffer planting is required where a medical marijuana
dispensary adjoins a residential use or district.
(q) Entrances and driveways to a medical marijuana dispensary
must be designed to accommodate the anticipated vehicles
used to service the facility.
[1] All accesses must secure the appropriate highway
occupancy permit from the Department of Transportation
and/or the Borough of Hellertown.
[2] The clear sight triangle found in Article V, § 480-18, must
be considered and maintained.
[3] The driveway must be designed and improved to the
standards expressly described in Article V, § 390-21, of the
Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
(r) Loading and off-loading areas within the structure are
preferred. If an external loading dock arrangement is designed
it should be from within a secure environment.
(s) In the event the Controlled Substance, Drug, Device and
Cosmetic Act relating to marijuana conflicts with a provision of
Act 16, Pennsylvania Act 16 is declared to take precedence.
B. Administration and enforcement.
(1) Building and zoning permits/approvals.
(a) A zoning permit shall be required prior to obtaining a building
permit for the construction or erection of a building; the
alteration of a building or portion thereof; the use or change in
use of a building or land; or any adjustments to a
nonconforming use.
(b) The Borough's zoning permit application must be completed.
(c) Permit fees shall be as stipulated in the fee schedule adopted
by resolution of the municipal governing body in effect at the
time of application.
(d) Permits may be denied if the applicant, in the reasonable
opinion of the Borough of Hellertown, is failing to comply with
any state or local law or regulation.
(e) In the case of new construction meeting the Pennsylvania MPC
definition "land development,"214 plan application is required
214. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. 10107.
§ 450-22.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-22.1
1:642
to be submitted and an approval secured, prior to
establishment of the use.
(f) If the application is to change the use of a building, or needs to
demonstrate allocation of space within a structure, the
applicant shall provide architectural drawings prepared by an
architect registered in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
(g) A medical marijuana grower/processor must be legally
registered in the commonwealth and possess a current valid
medical marijuana permit from the DOH.
§ 450-22.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-22.1
1:643

ARTICLE VI
Special Exception Uses
§ 450-23. Procedure for special exception uses.
The Zoning Hearing Board shall make a determination that the proposed
special exception use will or will not be permitted pursuant to the
procedures set forth in § 450-64. The use shall be permitted if the standards
and criteria set forth in this article are met. The use shall not be permitted
if the standards and criteria set forth in this article are not met. The Zoning
Hearing Board may attach reasonable conditions and safeguards which are
necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, general welfare or
morals of the community in the permitting of a special exception use.
§ 450-24. General standards.
These standards are applicable to all applications for special exception uses
as set forth in Article IV.
A. Such use shall be one which is specifically authorized as a special
exception use in the district within which such particular site is located.
B. For every special exception use, the Board shall determine that there is
appropriate provision for access facilities adequate for the estimated
traffic from public streets and sidewalks, so as to assure the public
safety and to avoid traffic congestion. Vehicular entrances and exits
shall be clearly visible from the street and not within 75 feet of the
intersection of the street lines at a street intersection if alternative
locations are available. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
C. For every special exception use, the Board shall determine that there
are fully adequate parking areas and off-street truck loading spaces, in
conformity with this chapter and all other pertinent ordinances, for the
anticipated number of occupants, employees and patrons, and that the
layout of the parking spaces, truck loading berths and interior
driveways is convenient and conducive to safe operation.
D. For every special exception use, the Board may require a protective
planting strip not less than 10 feet nor more than 30 feet in width,
situated within any required or rear yard, designed and laid out with
suitable evergreen plant material which will be planted at a minimum
height of four feet and will attain and shall be maintained at a height of
not less than eight feet so as to provide an effective natural screen
between the nonresidential and residential districts or uses. A planting
plan specifying the type, size and location of existing and proposed
plant material shall be required.
E. For every special exception use, where the installation of outdoor
floodlighting or spotlighting is intended, the Board shall determine that
such lighting will not shine directly upon any abutting property, nor
upon the street. No unshielded lights shall be permitted.
§ 450-23 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-24
1:645
§ 450-25. Standards relevant to individual uses.
These standards are applicable to the individual uses listed in Article IV.
These standards are to be applied in addition to those set forth in § 450-24.
§ 450-26. Adult-oriented establishments and massage parlors.
[Amended 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
F. For every special exception use, the Board shall determine that
adequate provisions will be made for collection and disposal of
stormwater runoff from the site.
G. For every special exception use, the Board shall determine that
adequate provision has been made for snow removal.
A. Purposes. To serve the intent and respond to the findings provided in
Title 68, Article II, Subpart E, Chapter 55 of the Pennsylvania
Consolidated Statutes, as amended, which are hereby included by
reference.215 To serve the overall objectives of this section and the
following purposes:
(1) To recognize the adverse secondary impacts of adult-oriented
establishments that affect health, safety and general welfare
concerns of the Borough. These secondary impacts have been
documented in research conducted across the nation. These
secondary impacts typically include, but are not limited to,
increases in criminal activity, increases in activities that increase
the risk of transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, increases
in activities that increase the risk of transmission of other
communicable diseases, increases in blight, decreases in the
stability of residential neighborhoods, and decreases in property
values for surrounding homes, and decreases in the marketability
of nearby commercial business space. The research conducted
across the nation concluded that adult-oriented establishments
typically involved insufficient self-regulation to control these
secondary effects.
(2) To limit adult-oriented establishments to locations where these
secondary impacts can be minimized, particularly as they affect
residential neighborhoods and commercial revitalization.
(3) To not attempt to suppress any activities protected by the "free
speech" protections of the State and United States Constitutions,
but instead to control secondary effects.
B. A lot or parcel which contains an adult-oriented establishment or
massage parlor shall not be located within 1,000 lineal feet of another
lot or parcel which contains an adult-oriented establishment or
massage parlor.
215. Editor's Note: See 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et seq.
§ 450-24 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-26
1:646
C. The setbacks for an adult-oriented establishment or massage parlors
shall also apply from dwellings, uses and residential districts located in
an adjacent municipality. The lot line of a lot occupied by an adultoriented
establishment or massage parlor shall be located a minimum
of the following distances:
(1) One thousand feet from an elementary or secondary school; child
day-care center or nursery school; church, synagogue, mosque or
similar place of regularly scheduled religious worship; library;
public park or playground; hotel/motel; bed-and-breakfast; or
residential dwelling unit.
(2) Seven hundred fifty feet from a residential or conservation zoning
district.
D. A fifty-foot buffer yard shall be provided, regardless of zoning district,
along the side and rear lot lines for adult-oriented establishments. The
buffer shall include continuous, opaque screening by evergreens with
an initial height of five feet. The buffer shall be installed and maintained
at all times by the property owner.
E. No pornographic material, displays, signs or words shall be placed in
view of persons who are not inside the adult-oriented establishment.
Definite precautions shall be made to prohibit minors from entering the
premises.
F. No adult-oriented establishment or massage parlor shall be used for
any purpose that violates any federal, state or municipal law.
G. The adult-oriented establishment shall not include the sale or display of
"obscene" materials, as defined by Pennsylvania criminal law, as may be
amended by applicable court decisions.
H. An adult-oriented establishment shall be prohibited in all districts
except as a special exception use in the Shopping Center District. An
adult-oriented establishment is a distinct use and shall not be allowed
under any other use, such as a retail store or club.
I. A massage parlor shall be prohibited in all districts except as a special
exception use in the Shopping Center District.
J. A minimum lot area of 0.5 acre is required for an adult-oriented
establishment.
K. For public health reasons, private booths of any kind are prohibited.
This specifically includes, but is not limited to, booths for viewing adult
movies or nude dancers.
L. No use may include live actual simulated sex acts nor any physical or
sexual contact between employees and entertainers nor between
employees or entertainers and customers. At an adult-oriented
establishment involving "live entertainment," employees or
entertainers shall maintain a minimum distance of three feet from
§ 450-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-26
1:647
customers. This shall include, but not be limited to, a prohibition on "lap
dancing."
M. Only "lawful" massages, as defined by state court decisions, shall be
performed in a massage parlor.
N. Any application for an adult-oriented entertainment use shall state the
names and business addresses of all individuals intended to have more
than a five-percent ownership in such use or in a corporation owning
such use and an on-site manager responsible to ensure compliance with
this section on a daily basis. A telephone number shall be provided
where the on-site manager can be reached during business hours. Such
information shall be updated at the beginning of each year in writing to
the Zoning Officer or his designee.
O. The adult-oriented establishment use shall not operate between the
hours of 10:00 p.m. and 11:00 a.m. Massage parlors shall not operate
between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
P. As specific conditions of approval under this section, the applicant shall
prove compliance, where applicable, with the following state laws, as
amended: the Pennsylvania Liquor Code, Act 219 of 1990 (which
pertains to sale or consumption of alcohol between 2:00 a.m. and 8:00
a.m.); Act 207 of 1990 (which pertains to obscenity); and Act 120 of
1996 (which pertains to adult-oriented establishments and which limits
enclosed viewing booths among other matters), as amended.216
Q. An adult-oriented establishment shall not be on the same lot as a use
that sells alcoholic beverages.
R. All adult-oriented establishments and massage parlors shall be required
to:
(1) Obtain and carry general liability coverage with the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed
with the Borough of Hellertown Zoning Officer or his designee.
(2) Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and Borough of Hellertown, and
prominently display said certificate as required.
(3) Obtain from the Borough of Hellertown Zoning Officer or his
designee a valid, annually renewed, permit pursuant to this section,
and prominently display said permit as required.
(4) Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business
premises, such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of same.
S. Adult-oriented businesses and massage parlor permit.
216. Editor's Note: See 47 P.S. § 1-101 et seq., 18 Pa.C.S.A. § 5903, and 68 Pa.C.S.A. § 5501 et
seq., respectively.
§ 450-26 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-26
1:648
(1) Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate an
adult-oriented business or massage parlor shall file with the
Borough of Hellertown an application for an adult-oriented
business or massage parlor permit, which application shall include
the following information: the name and address of the adultoriented
business or massage parlor; a statement whether the
business premises is leased or owned by the adult-oriented
business or massage parlor; the name and address of the lessor of
the business premises, if applicable; the nature of the ownership of
the adult-oriented business or massage parlor, i.e., corporation,
partnership, joint venture, association; the names and addresses of
the officers and/or financial interest in the adult-oriented business
or massage parlor.
(2) The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Hellertown or his designee
shall determine whether the adult-oriented business or massage
parlor fully and completely complies with the provisions and
requirements of this section within 20 days following the date on
which application is received. If the Borough Zoning Officer or his
designee determines that the applicant fully and completely
complies with the provisions hereof, the Borough Zoning Officer or
his designee shall issue an adult-oriented business or massage
parlor permit; if the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee
determines that the applicant does not fully and completely comply
with the provisions hereof, the Borough Zoning Officer or his
designee shall deny the issuance of an adult-oriented business or
massage parlor permit and shall furnish written evidence of the
same to the applicant together with the reason(s) for denial.
(3) The adult-oriented business or massage parlor shall pay an
administrative fee of $250 for an adult-oriented business or
massage parlor permit and $250 for each renewal thereof. Said
adult-oriented business or massage parlor permit shall be effective
for a period of one year following the date of issuance, provided
that, in the event the adult-oriented business or massage parlor
fails to fully and completely comply with the provisions hereof or is
convicted of any unlawful activity during the term of the adultoriented
business or massage parlor permit, the Borough of
Hellertown shall have the authority to revoke the adult-oriented
business or massage parlor permit due to an adult-oriented
business' or massage parlor's lack of compliance.
(4) Subject to the consent of an applicant or licensee, the Zoning
Officer or his designee may inspect the premises of adult-oriented
establishments and massage parlors for purposes of ensuring
compliance with this section during any time it is open for business.
In the event that the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee has
probable cause to believe that an adult-oriented establishment and
massage parlor is operating in violation of this section, he may
inspect the premises of the adult-oriented establishment and
§ 450-26 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-26
1:649
§ 450-27. Agricultural operation.
The operation shall be consistent with practices and procedures that are
normally engaged by farmers or that is consistent with technological
development within the agricultural industry.
§ 450-28. Apartment in combination with stores or offices.
massage parlor for purposes of ensuring compliance with this
section during any time it is open for business.
(5) No operator or employee of an adult-oriented establishment shall
permit any minor to loiter in any part of the establishment,
including parking lots immediately adjacent to the establishment
used by patrons of any adult-oriented establishment.
(6) Every adult-oriented establishment doing business in this Borough
shall be well lighted at all times and be physically arranged in such
a manner that the entire interior portion of the booths, cubicles,
room or stalls where adult entertainment is provided shall be
clearly visible from the common areas of the premises. Visibility
into such booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls shall not be blocked or
obscured by doors, curtains, partitions, drapes or any other
obstruction whatsoever. It shall be unlawful to install enclosed
booths, cubicles, rooms or stalls within adult-oriented
establishments for whatever purpose, but especially for the
purpose of providing for the secluded viewing of adult-oriented
motion pictures or other types of adult-oriented entertainment.
(7) No adult-oriented establishment shall contain partitions between
subdivisions of a room or portions or parts of a building, structure
or premises with an aperture which is designed or constructed to
facilitate sexual activity between persons on either side of the
partitions.
(8) The operator of each adult-oriented establishment shall be
responsible for and shall provide that any room or other area used
for the purpose of viewing adult-oriented motion pictures or other
types of live adult entertainment shall be well lighted and readily
accessible at all times and shall be continuously open to view in its
entirety. The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting
fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate at not less than one
footcandle as measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the
operator and the operator's agents to ensure that the illumination
required by this subsection is maintained at all times that a patron
is present in the premises.
A. The apartments shall be located in the same building as the stores or
offices.
§ 450-26 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-28
1:650
§ 450-29. Assisted living facilities.
§ 450-30. Boardinghouse.
The boardinghouse shall comply with the characteristics of a boardinghouse
established in the definition of the term.217
§ 450-31. Bottle club. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
The following additional regulations shall apply to bottle clubs:
B. Exitways shall provide safe and continuous means of egress to a street
or to an open space with direct access to a street. Each apartment shall
be provided with direct and continuous access to such an exitway. All
required exitways shall be so located as to be discernible and accessible
without obstruction and so arranged as to lead directly to the street or
to an area of safety with supplemental means of egress that will not be
obstructed or impaired by fire, smoke or other cause.
A. The maximum permitted density shall not exceed 25 units per acre.
B. The facility shall have obtained any and all licenses and permits
required by the federal or state government which may be relevant to
the facility.
C. A minimum of 20% of the site shall be suitable and developed for
outdoor passive recreation uses. The passive recreation areas may
include, but shall not be limited to, sitting areas and pedestrianwalks.
D. Each facility shall develop an evacuation plan approved by the Chief of
the Dewey Fire Company or successor.
E. Each facility shall meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry.
A. Unlawful activities. In any district in which bottle clubs are otherwise
permitted, it shall be unlawful for any person or persons who own,
operate, lease, manage or control a bottle club to:
(1) Remain open and/or transact business between the hours of 10:00
p.m. and 11:00 a.m., prevailing time. In all cases, the premises
must be vacated within 15 minutes after the required closing time.
(2) Conduct activities to which this section applies without possessing
a valid club permit as specified herein.
B. Setbacks. The setbacks for a bottle club shall also apply from dwellings,
uses and residential districts located in an adjacent municipality. The
lot line of a lot occupied by a bottle club shall be located a minimum of
the following distances:
217. Editor's Note: See § 450-7.
§ 450-28 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-31
1:651
(1) One thousand feet from an elementary or secondary school; child
day-care center or nursery school; church, synagogue, mosque or
similar place of regularly scheduled religious worship; library;
public park or playground; hotel/motel; bed-and-breakfast; or
residential dwelling unit.
(2) Seven hundred fifty feet from a residential or conservation zoning
district.
C. Club requirements. Any and all bottle clubs, as the term is defined, shall
comply with the following requirements:
(1) Obtain and carry general liability coverage with the minimum
amount of $1,000,000 per occurrence, proof of which shall be filed
with the Borough of Hellertown Zoning Officer or his designee.
(2) Possess a valid certificate of occupancy issued by the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and Borough of Hellertown, and
prominently display said certificate as required.
(3) Obtain from the Borough of Hellertown Zoning Officer or his
designee a valid bottle club permit pursuant to this section, and
prominently display said permit as required.
(4) Conspicuously post the hours of operation at the business premises
such that patrons are sufficiently apprised of same.
D. Bottle club permit.
(1) Any person or persons desiring to operate or continue to operate a
bottle club shall file with the Borough of Hellertown an application
for a bottle club permit, which application shall include the
following information: the name and address of the bottle club; a
statement whether the business premises is leased or owned by the
bottle club; the name and address of the lessor of the business
premises, if applicable; the nature of the ownership of the bottle
club, i.e., corporation, partnership, joint venture, association; the
names and addresses of the officers and/or financial interest in the
bottle club.
(2) The Zoning Officer of the Borough of Hellertown or his designee
shall determine whether the bottle club fully and completely
complies with the provisions and requirements of this section
within 20 days following the date on which application is received.
If the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee determines that the
applicant fully and completely complies with the provisions hereof,
the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee shall issue a bottle club
permit; if the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee determines
that the applicant does not fully and completely comply with the
provisions hereof, the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee shall
deny the issuance of a bottle club permit and shall furnish written
§ 450-31 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-31
1:652
§ 450-32. Bus passenger station, taxi station.
§ 450-33. Check-cashing business. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No.
706]
The following additional regulations shall apply to check-cashing
businesses:
§ 450-34. Church, Sunday school or other place of worship.
§ 450-35. Commercial recreation area or use.
evidence of the same to the applicant, together with the reason(s)
for denial.
(3) The club shall pay an administrative fee of $250 for a bottle club
permit and $250 for each renewal thereof. Said bottle club permit
shall be effective for a period of one year following the date of
issuance, provided that, in the event the bottle club fails to fully
and completely comply with the provisions hereof or is convicted of
any unlawful activity during the term of the bottle club permit, the
Borough of Hellertown shall have the authority to revoke the bottle
club permit due to the bottle club's lack of compliance.
A. Adequate street area for the loading, unloading and stacking of the
buses or taxis shall be available. The traffic movements necessary for
the operation of the facility shall be arranged so as not to promote
traffic congestion and to maintain traffic safety.
B. The facility shall not be used for the storage of vehicles.
A. The building area occupied by a check-cashing business shall not be
located within:
(1) One thousand feet of a lot or parcel which is occupied by another
lot or parcel which contains a check-cashing business or financial
institution, such as a bank.
(2) A check-cashing business shall require a zoning permit and a
certificate of occupancy before being open for business.
A. The site layout shall provide sufficient parking and assure safe
pedestrian and vehicular circulation.
B. A buffer strip in accord with the requirements of § 450-24D shall be
provided.
A. The area or use shall conform to the provisions of Chapter 140,
Businesses, Registration and Licensing, and all modifications thereto.
B. The noise generated from the area or use as measured at the property
line shall not increase the noise level customarily present in the
immediate area.
§ 450-31 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-35
1:653
§ 450-36. Conversions of dwelling units into apartments.
C. Buildings shall conform to the provisions of the Fire and Panic Law218 as
administered by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and Industry.
A. Each apartment must include the following number of square feet of
interior space: [Amended 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
(1) Efficiencies and one-bedroom: 650 square feet.
(2) Two-bedroom: 800 square feet.
(3) Three-bedroom: 950 square feet.
(4) One hundred fifty square feet of additional space for each
additional bedroom.
B. Each apartment must provide complete, independent living facilities for
one or more persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, eating, washing, cooking and sanitation.
C. Ingress/egress. Exitways shall provide safe and continuous means of
egress to a street or to open space with direct access to a street. Each
apartment shall be provided with direct and continuous access to such
an exitway. All required exitways shall be so located as to be discernible
and accessible without obstruction and so arranged to lead directly to
the street or to an area of safety with supplemental means of egress
that will not be obstructed or impaired by fire, smoke or other cause.
D. Conversions shall conform to the provisions of the Fire and Panic
Law219 as administered by the Pennsylvania Department of Labor and
Industry.
E. Conversions shall conform to the lot size, building setback, lot coverage
and height limitations as set forth in Article IV.
F. No conversion shall require structural alterations of the existing
structure. The exterior appearance shall reflect the residential use of
the structure.
G. Additional parking spaces shall not be located within the required front
yard. They shall be located in the side and rear yards.
H. The parking area shall meet the screening requirements of
§ 450-20C(7)(a).
I. Conversions shall have a minimum lot area of 2,000 square feet for each
proposed dwelling unit, with a maximum of four dwelling units per lot.
[Added 10-6-2008 by Ord. No. 726]
218. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1221 et seq.
219. Editor's Note: See 35 P.S. § 1221 et seq.
§ 450-35 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-37
1:654
§ 450-37. Drive-in restaurants. [Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 813]
§ 450-38. Other restaurant.
§ 450-39. Gas station.
§ 450-40. Generalized servicing or repair shop, excluding those
related to motorized vehicles.
The shop, through its use, shall not adversely affect adjoining properties by
reason of noise.
§ 450-41. Group homes. [Amended 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
A. Drive-in windows shall be so arranged that sufficient area exists for the
expected lines of vehicles. The area set aside for the lines shall not be
used for other internal traffic circulation.
B. Directions for the internal movement of traffic shall be clearly marked.
A. Suitable areas shall be provided for trash storage which are designed
as to have minimal visibility from a public street. The trash storage area
must allow for safe, easy removal of trash.
B. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from residential properties.
C. If the other restaurant is also designed to provide drive-in or pickup
service, the provisions of § 450-37 shall also apply.
A. Spray painting or bodywork shall not be permitted.
B. All refuse shall be stored within an enclosed area. All parts and
inoperable vehicles shall be stored in an enclosed structure.
C. The gasoline pumps shall be arranged so that sufficient area exists for
expected lines of vehicles awaiting fueling within the property line.
D. In no case may the gasoline pump be located within 25 feet of any
property line.
E. When the rental of equipment such as automobiles, trucks and trailers
is to be conducted, an additional 1,000 square feet of lot area shall be
provided for each five automobiles and trailers and 1,000 square feet
for each four trucks.
F. Ancillary businesses such as car washes and convenience markets must
provide sufficient parking and a clear, safe access arrangement.
G. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from residential properties.
A. The facility shall have obtained and maintain any and all licenses and
permits required by the federal, state, county or local government
which may be relevant to the particular type of facility.
§ 450-37 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-41
1:655
B. A group home shall be subject to the same limitations and regulations
by the Borough as the type of dwelling it occupies within each specified
zoning district for which said use is permitted. Additionally, the
provisions of § 450-24, General standards, shall not apply to group
homes. However, the Board shall determine for the health, safety and
welfare of the group home residents and employees that adequate
parking areas exist to provide safe ingress and egress into the group
home and to ensure parking is adequate for the anticipated number of
occupants, employees and visitors.
C. The facility shall not provide medical, counseling, day-care or other
services and/or any type of care whatsoever to persons who do not
reside at the group home.
D. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
E. Involves providing nonroutine support services and oversight to
persons who need such assistance to avoid being placed within an
institution, because of physical disability, old age, mental retardation/
developmental disability or other "handicap," as defined by the
applicable federal law.
F. The use shall not be related to criminal rehabilitation of adults or
juveniles, treatment of the criminally insane or treatment for current
alcohol or drug addiction. The use does not meet the definition of a
"treatment center" or a "boardinghouse."
G. Pursuant to the Fair Housing Act, as amended, a dwelling unit is not
required to be made available to an individual whose tenancy would
constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or
whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the
property of others. The Zoning Hearing Board shall determine if an
individual's proposed tenancy constitutes a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals or would result in substantial physical
damage to the property of others.
H. Should any physical characteristics of the site involve construction or
changes, the applicant shall obtain land development approvals from
the Borough and an approval (license or certification) from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania licensing agency.
I. A copy of the license or certification for operation shall be filed with the
Borough and shall be required to be shown to the Zoning Officer upon
request. Prior to any changes to sponsorship, management or type of
resident residing at the group home, the responsible person in charge
shall notify the Borough in writing within 14 days of a change in the
type of clients, the sponsoring agency, or the maximum number of
residents, or if an applicable certification license expires, is suspended
or is withdrawn, and shall provide written confirmation that said
change has been approved by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania
licensing agency prior to instituting any such changes.
§ 450-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-41
1:656
J. The applicant shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough that
all necessary approvals and permits from the Pennsylvania Department
of Labor and Industry have been obtained with respect to fire
protection, safety measures, construction standards and building
design/modification standards to accommodate the handicapped.
K. The applicant shall document to the Zoning Officer that all building,
fire, plumbing, heating, electrical and similar facilities meet the
standards set by the Borough and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
L. The premises at which the group home is located shall be owned or
leased by the social service agency sponsoring the group home. The
group home, by design and intent, shall provide for the long-term need
of its residents.
M. Employees of the group home shall be prohibited from having visitors
on the premises, unless such visitation is necessary for the operation of
the group home and except for emergencies.
N. The maximum number of occupants who shall reside in a group home
shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board based on the size of
the physical structure itself. The Zoning Hearing Board shall review the
livable square footage space, the number of bedrooms available or
which could be reasonably constructed to ensure the health, safety, and
welfare of the residents and to prevent overcrowding or any unsafe
condition which would be created due to the physical characteristics of
the structure proposed to be used as a group home.
O. The Zoning Hearing Board shall consider a reasonable accommodation
to any applicant who shall make a request to change, waive or make
exceptions to any of the above conditions to afford individuals with
disabilities the same equal opportunity to housing as those who are
without disabilities. In analyzing a request for a reasonable
accommodation, the Zoning Hearing Board shall review the following
factors and render findings of fact on a case-by-case basis:
(1) Whether the requested accommodation is reasonable. In order to
analyze if the requested accommodations is reasonable, the Zoning
Hearing Board shall analyze the following criteria:
(a) Does the requested accommodation impose an undue financial
or administrative burden on the Borough.
(b) Does the requested accommodation impose undue hardship on
the Borough.
(c) Does the requested accommodation require a fundamental
alteration in the current nature of the Borough's zoning
scheme.
(2) Whether the requested accommodation is necessary. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall analyze the following criteria:
§ 450-41 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-41
1:657
§ 450-41.1. Nondisabled group home. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No.
751]
(a) The Board shall analyze if, but for the accommodation, the
applicant is likely to be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy
the housing of the applicant's choice.
A. The facility shall have obtained any and all licenses and permits
required by the federal, state, county or local government which may be
relevant to the particular type of facility.
B. A nondisabled group home shall be subject to the same limitations and
regulations by the Borough as the type of dwelling it occupies within
each specified zoning district for which said use is permitted.
Additionally, the provisions of § 45-24, General standards, shall not
apply to nondisabled group homes. However, the Board shall determine
for the health, safety and welfare of the nondisabled group home
residents that adequate parking areas exist to provide safe ingress and
egress into the nondisabled group home and to ensure parking is
adequate for the anticipated number of occupants and visitors.
C. Involves persons functioning as a common household.
D. The use shall not be related to criminal rehabilitation of adults or
juveniles, treatment of the criminally insane or treatment for current
alcohol or drug addiction, and further does not meet the definition of a
"treatment center" or a "boardinghouse."
E. A dwelling unit shall not be required to be made available to an
individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health
or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in
substantial physical damage to the property of others. The Zoning
Hearing Board shall determine if the proposed tenancy constitute a
direct threat to persons or property.
F. Should any physical characteristics of the site involve construction or
changes, the applicant shall obtain land development approvals from
the Borough and approval (license or certification) from any other
required Commonwealth of Pennsylvania agency.
G. The maximum number of occupants who shall reside in a nondisabled
group home shall be determined by the Zoning Hearing Board based on
the size of physical structure itself. The Zoning Hearing Board shall
review the livable square footage space, the number of bedrooms
available or which could be reasonably constructed to ensure the
health, safety and welfare of the residents and to prevent overcrowding
or any unsafe condition which would be created due to the physical
characteristics of the structure proposed to be used as a nondisabled
group home.
§ 450-41 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-41.1
1:658
§ 450-42. Home occupation and home professional office.
§ 450-43. Housing for the elderly.
§ 450-44. Mineral extraction.
All relevant federal and state permits for the operation shall be obtained.
§ 450-45. Mobile home park.
H. The applicant shall document to the Zoning Officer that all building,
fire, plumbing, heating, electrical and similar facilities meet the
standards set by the Borough and the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
A. A home occupation or home professional office shall occupy a space
which constitutes less than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling. The
occupation and office shall not occur in a garage or other accessory
building, nor shall such structures be used for the computation of the
floor area.
B. No home occupation and home professional office shall require
structural alterations of an existing structure. The exterior design shall
reflect the principal residential use of the structure.
C. The home occupation and the home professional office shall not create
noise, vibration, glare, odors, fumes or electrical interference beyond
the bounds of the property to any extent greater or more frequent than
ordinarily associated with the dwelling unit.
D. All storage of materials associated with the home occupation and the
home professional office shall be in enclosed buildings.
A. The housing shall be designed primarily for persons 55 years of age or
older, or handicapped.
B. The housing shall consist of independent housekeeping units and shall
not incorporate nursing facilities or other medical care facilities
therein.
C. The facility may include a community room, a congregate dining facility
and similar common areas.
A. There shall be a minimum distance of 25 feet between an individual
mobile home, including accessory structures attached thereto, and the
pavement of any mobile home park street, except that, when the street
serves less than 10 mobile homes, a minimum distance of 10 feet shall
apply.
B. Mobile homes shall be separated from each other and from other
buildings and structures by a minimum distance of 25 feet.
C. Streets shall have a minimum road pavement width of 36 feet where
parking is permitted on both sides, or a minimum road pavement width
§ 450-41.1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-45
1:659
§ 450-46. Motorized vehicle repair shop, automobile or motorized
vehicle sales with accessory service facilities and motorized
equipment repair shop.
§ 450-47. Nursing or convalescent home.
§ 450-48. Oil, coal or propane distribution or sales facilities.
§ 450-49. Pawnshop. [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
The following additional regulations shall apply to pawnshop uses:
of 28 feet where parking is limited to one side. Where parking is
prohibited on both sides, the minimum pavement shall be 20 feet. The
above listed street width may be reduced by two feet if an adjacent
sidewalk is provided. A street serving less than ten-mobile homes shall
have a minimum width of 18 feet provided on-street parking is
prohibited.
D. Streets shall be constructed in conformance with the standards for
public streets contained in Article V, § 390-20, Street design, of the
Hellertown Borough Subdivision and Land Development Ordinance.
E. Mobile home parks shall be connected to public water supply and
sewage disposal systems.
A. All painting and repair work shall be performed in an enclosed building.
B. All parts, inoperative and dismantled vehicles and equipment shall be
screened or enclosed so as not to be visible outside the property.
C. Outdoor vehicle and equipment storage areas shall be paved.
D. Motor vehicles and equipment may not be stored outdoors for more
than 15 days.
A. The home shall be licensed by the Pennsylvania Department of Health.
B. Each facility shall develop an evacuation plan approved by the Chief of
the Dewey Fire Company or successor.
C. Each facility shall meet the requirements of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry.
A. Each facility shall prepare an emergency plan approved by the Chief of
the Dewey Fire Company or successor.
B. For propane and for aboveground oil facilities only, the fuel storage
area shall be surrounded by a chain-link-type fence of a minimum
height of five feet.
C. Each facility shall conform to the requirements of Flammable and
Combustible Liquids Handbook (37 Pa. Code Chapters 11 and 13).
§ 450-45 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-49
1:660
§ 450-50. Printing or publishing establishment.
The establishment shall meet the industrial and research center
performance standards of § 450-21.
§ 450-51. Private nonprofit outdoor recreation areas.
§ 450-52. Public or private noncommercial school.
§ 450-53. Railroad terminal and distribution facilities.
A. The lot which contains a pawnshop shall not be located within 1,000
feet of another lot or parcel which contains a pawnshop.
B. Setbacks. The setbacks for a pawnshop shall also apply from dwellings,
uses and residential districts located in an adjacent municipality. The
lot line of a lot occupied by a pawnshop shall be located a minimum of
the following distances:
(1) One thousand feet from an elementary or secondary school; child
day-care center or nursery school; church, synagogue, mosque or
similar place of regularly scheduled religious worship; library;
public park or playground; or residential dwelling unit.
(2) Seven hundred fifty feet from a residential or conservation zoning
district.
C. A pawnshop shall require a zoning permit and a certificate of occupancy
before being open for business.
A. The facility through its use shall not adversely affect adjoining
properties by reason of noise.
B. Adequate provision shall be made for collection and disposal of rubbish
and trash.
A. Application for public schools shall include a letter from the
Pennsylvania Department of Education stating that the requirements of
the Department relating to siting have been met.
B. Private noncommercial schools shall meet all requirements of the
Pennsylvania Department of Education which pertain to the site,
location and siting of such schools.
A. All areas used for vehicle storage, loading or maneuvering shall be
paved.
B. The parking area shall be arranged so that all internal traffic
movements can be made without entering the public right-of-way.
C. All repair operations shall be conducted within enclosed buildings.
D. All storage shall be within enclosed structures.
§ 450-49 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-54
1:661
§ 450-54. Signs.
The sign shall conform to the requirements of § 450-22.
§ 450-55. Commercial communications tower/antenna. [Added
7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
A. Principal use. Tower and/or antenna shall be permitted either as a
single use or a second principal use on a lot which is in conformity with
the Zoning Ordinance. Any tower that is a second principal use shall be
on either a leased or licensed premises that shall only be assignable to
another owner of the tower/antenna. A prohibition shall be placed on
any site plan that approves the tower/antenna use that covenants that
the leased or licensed property will not be conveyed as a separate lot.
Borough residents utilizing satellite dishes and antennas for the
purpose of maintaining television, phone, radio and/or internet
connections at their respective residences shall be exempt from the
regulations enumerated in this section of the Zoning Ordinance.
Amateur radio operators are exempt from the regulations enumerated
in this section. [Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
B. Tower classifications. A tower and accessory facilities may be permitted
for the following uses, if they comply with all of the requirements of this
section:
(1) FM/television broadcasting.
(2) Land mobile systems.
(3) Cellular telephone.
(4) Fixed point-to-point microwave.
(5) Lease tower.
(6) Any other communications use not specifically listed or covered in
any of the above five categories.
C. Setback requirements.
(1) The distance from the base of the proposed tower to the nearest
point on the lot line or leased lot line shall not be less than 110% of
the full height of the tower.
(2) Guy wire anchors, if used, shall be set back a minimum of 40 feet
from any lot line or leased lot line.
(3) If additional towers are present on the same lot, the distance from
the proposed tower to the base of the nearest tower, if it is selfsupporting,
or the nearest guy anchor of a non-self-supporting
tower shall not be less than the full height of the tallest tower.
D. Accessory facilities. Accessory facilities are permitted on the same lot
as a tower, subject to the following conditions:
§ 450-54 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:662
(1) An accessory facility containing equipment and control devices for
the continuing operation of a tower may be located on the lot.
(2) No building or facility may be used as an office or as a broadcast
studio. No building or facility may be used for long-term vehicle
storage or for other outdoor storage.
(3) No on-site employees shall be permitted to utilize any accessory
facility as an office. Employees are permitted to visit the site as
often as necessary for maintenance and inspection of the tower and
its accessory uses.
(4) Accessory facilities may be lighted for security or for maintenance
purposes. Any such lighting shall be shielded, and no lights shall be
emitted upward or spill over onto adjacent properties. Upward
lighting will be permitted only on a temporary basis as may be
required for emergency tower maintenance or repair.
(5) Lighting of parking areas and accessory facilities shall comply with
the specifications imposed by the Zoning Hearing Board, as
recommended by the Borough Engineer.
E. Parking requirements. Two off-street stone/paved parking spaces per
tower shall be required. The parking spaces shall conform to the
parking standards of this chapter.
F. RF interference to existing facilities. The applicant shall demonstrate
that the proposed transmitting facility will not cause RF interference to
any existing communications services (including but not limited to
other towers or transmitting facilities, communications services
reception by other property owners, etc.) in accordance with the FCC
requirements for the applicant's class of operation.
G. EMR compliance. The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed
RMS field intensity of EMR from applicant's antenna(s) measured at the
nearest point on the boundary of applicant's site from the proposed
antenna will not exceed the levels allowed under ANSI standard C95.3.
H. Environmental impact. All new towers proposed in the Borough shall
conform to the following environmental impact guidelines:
(1) Existing on-site vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum
extent practical.
(2) Artificial lighting is prohibited on all proposed towers unless
required by the FAA. When artificial lighting is required, the use of
strobe lighting is prohibited unless specifically required by the
FAA.
(3) Where the site abuts a public street or a lot that is either zoned
residential or used for a residential use, and where the base of the
tower can be seen from the public street or from a dwelling on the
residential lot, the site perimeter shall be buffered by planting
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:663
natural screening [in accordance with Article V, § 450-19E(2), of
this chapter] which blends in with existing vegetation to provide an
effective screen. Existing vegetation, fencing or walls may be used
if the Zoning Hearing Board finds:
(a) They achieve about the same degrees of screening, as
determined by the Zoning Hearing Board.
(b) New plantings would have a detrimental effect on the stability,
security or maintenance of the guy wires.
(c) They are needed for surveillance and security of structures to
be erected on the lot.
(4) No tower shall be located in a floodplain or wetland area.
(5) Towers shall be painted or have a galvanized finish retained to
reduce visual impact. Alternate colors must be approved following
justification from the visual impact analysis. Owner shall maintain
the tower in accepted color at all times.
(6) Visual impact analysis.
(a) To the extent permitted by federal and state law, the applicant
shall be required to undertake a visual impact analysis on any
proposed commercial communications tower or any proposed
modification to an existing tower which caused said tower to
exceed 30 feet in height from its original permitted height. The
visual impact analysis, in the form of a written report, shall
assess the cumulative impacts of the proposed facility and
other existing and foreseeable commercial communications
towers in the area and shall identify and include all feasible
mitigation measures necessary to mitigate any negative visual
impact by the proposed tower. Mitigation measures should be
consistent with the technological requirements of the
applicant. All Borough costs for the review of visual impact
analysis and applicable administrative costs shall be borne by
the applicant. [Amended 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
(b) The visual impact analysis report shall include, but not be
limited to, the following:
[1] A photograph simulation of predevelopment versus postdevelopment
views from key viewpoints, but from no less
than the four sides.
[2] An analysis of possible alternative tower structure designs
and color schemes.
[3] An analysis of the visual impact of the tower base,
accessory buildings and overhead utility lines from
abutting properties and streets.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:664
[4] If required by the Borough, an additional simulation of the
tower's visual impact shall be provided by erecting a
mechanical construction crane to the proposed height of
the tower at the proposed project site. The applicant shall
allow the viewing of the crane simulation by the Borough
and interested parties.
(c) The Borough shall review and consider all information
presented in the report. Measures necessary to mitigate
negative visual impacts created by the proposed tower shall be
provided to the satisfaction of the Borough.
I. Observatory telescope line-of-sight clearance. There shall be
maintained an unobstructed twenty-degree line-of-sight measured from
the horizontal plane surrounding any observatory telescope where the
observatory telescope has a greater than twenty-five-centimeter
aperture and the observatory facility is erected for the public use for
research and/or educational purposes.
J. FAA lighting and marking requirements. Lighting shall only be installed
on a tower if it is required by the FAA. If lighting is not required by the
FAA or any other governmental agency having jurisdiction, then
lighting shall not be installed on a tower. Only the minimum lighting
necessary to meet governmental requirements shall be permitted. If
strobe lights or flashing mechanisms are not required by such
governmental agencies, then such lighting shall not be permitted.
K. Tower design and installation.
(1) For any commercial communications tower or antenna higher than
50 feet, the applicant shall provide certification from a registered
professional engineer stating that the commercial communications
tower or antenna meets the wind resistance stated in the latest
version of the International Building Code. The registered
professional engineer shall also certify to the overall structural
integrity of the commercial communications tower or antenna and/
or base structure and building supporting the tower or antenna and
certify to the determination of the fall zone.
(2) If a non-self-support tower is proposed, the applicant must use a
guy wire configuration which is designed and certified by a
registered professional engineer.
(3) All new towers permitted after the effective date of this section
must be engineered to accommodate additional new users.
(4) The base of the tower shall be surrounded by a secure fence with a
minimum height of eight feet.
(5) The tower design and installation shall also comply with any
additional federal, state and local regulations as may apply.
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:665
L. Specific additional requirements for each tower classification.
(1) FM/television broadcasting use. An applicant proposing to erect a
new tower for an FM/television broadcasting use, as defined
herein, shall also comply with the following standards:
(a) No FM/television broadcasting tower shall exceed a height of
200 feet.
(b) Applicant shall request the minimum antenna height above
ground level which will satisfy the HAAT220 requirements
stipulated on the applicant's FCC construction permit,
provided the requested height of the tower does not exceed
200 feet above ground level.
(2) Land mobile radio use. An applicant proposing to erect a new tower
for land mobile radio use, as defined herein, shall also comply with
the following:
(a) Applicant shall demonstrate that the requested location can be
reasonably expected to provide the signal coverage deemed
necessary by the applicant.
(b) Applicant shall request the minimum antenna height above
ground level which will satisfy the antenna height
requirements stipulated on the applicant's FCC license,
provided the requested height of the tower does not exceed
199 feet above ground level.
(3) Cellular telephone use. An applicant proposing to erect a new
tower for Cellular Telephone use shall also comply with the
following:
(a) No cellular telephone tower shall exceed a height of 200 feet.
(b) Applicant shall demonstrate that existing tall structures within
a one-quarter-mile radius of the proposed operation will not
accommodate the applicant's proposed operation. The
Borough may deny the application to erect a new tower if the
applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the
antenna on an existing structure.
(c) Applicant shall request the minimum tower height necessary to
satisfy its function in the company's grid system, provided the
requested height of the tower does not exceed 200 feet above
ground level.
(d) Notwithstanding any other provisions in this section, the
following shall also apply to cellular telephone use since each
cellular telephone system is set up in a unique system of
220. Editor's Note: Height above average terrain.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:666
antennas to create a network for complete and adequate
service:
[1] Cellular telephone tower or antenna may be located on a
lot with additional principal uses or buildings as long as all
requirements of this section (cellular telephone use) are
met.
[2] Cellular telephone towers shall be set back from all
property boundaries a distance no less than 110% of the
height of any proposed tower.
(4) Point-to-point microwave use. An applicant proposing to erect a
new tower for point-to-point microwave use shall also comply with
the following:
(a) No point-to-point microwave tower shall exceed a height of 200
feet.
(b) Applicant shall request the minimum tower height necessary to
satisfy line-of-sight requirements to the next relay links in the
microwave system, provided the requested height of the tower
does not exceed 200 feet above ground level.
(5) Lease tower use. An applicant proposing to erect a lease tower
shall comply with the following:
(a) No lease tower shall exceed a height of 200 feet.
(b) Applicant shall request the minimum antenna height.
(c) Aboveground level which will reasonably accommodate the
antenna height requirements of prospective users, provided
the requested heights of the tower does not exceed 200 feet
above ground level.
(6) Requirements for any other use. An applicant proposing to erect a
new tower for any other use shall also comply with the following:
(a) No tower shall exceed a height of 200 feet.
(b) Applicant must request the minimum antenna heights above
ground level which will satisfy the antenna height
requirements stipulated on the applicant's FCC license,
provided the requested height of the tower does not exceed
200 feet above ground level.
M. Application contents for a new tower. An application for permission to
erect a new tower in the Borough shall include:
(1) A copy of applicant's FCC construction permit (for broadcast use)
or FCC station license (for other uses).
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:667
(2) A detailed site plan drawn, in accordance with § 450-78, to scale
and identifying: the site boundary; the proposed tower and any
existing towers; guy wire anchors; existing and proposed
structures; existing vegetation to be retained, removed or
replaced; and uses, structures and land-use designations on the
site and on neighboring parcels. In addition, the following
information shall be depicted on the site plan:
(a) Plan to be titled "Site Plan" with plan date and any subsequent
revision dates.
(b) Name and address of landowner, developer and plan preparer.
(c) Tax map, block and lot number and deed reference of the
property.
(d) Graphic scale, written scale, North arrow and legend.
(e) Site boundaries with a closure of 1:10,000, for lease and
easement areas, tied to a certified boundary survey of the tract
boundaries showing existing property monumentation.
Corners of lease and easement areas are to be monumented
with iron pins, which shall be shown on the plan.
(f) Existing and ultimate street right-of-way lines and existing
easements.
(g) Boundaries of all adjoining properties with names of
landowners and tax map, block and lot numbers.
(h) The date of zoning hearings where any zoning variances or
special exceptions were granted.
(i) Existing features within 200 feet of the property, including
structures, wooded areas, significant tree masses,
watercourses, rock outcrops and utilities.
(j) Cross sections of proposed driveway and parking areas.
Driveways must meet requirements of the Borough driveway
standards.221
(k) Proposed lighting, landscaping (with quantity, size, type and
spacing), tower, guide wire anchors, building, fencing
locations, utility lines, erosion and sedimentation controls.
(l) Proposed limits of stone or paved areas. Storm drainage
calculations are required for projects adding more than 5,000
square feet of impervious cover.
(m) Restrictive notes or covenants.
221. Editor's Note: See § 385-17 of Ch. 385, Streets and Sidewalks, Art. III, Curbs, Sidewalks,
Handicap Ramps and Driveways.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:668
(n) Tower profile and detail of antenna array showing the number,
shape and configuration of antennas.
(o) Dimension and identification of fall zone on the plan.
(3) A technical description of the facility, to include:
(a) A description of the tower and the technical and other design
factors of the tower.
(b) A description of the capacity of the tower, including the
number and types of antennas that it can accommodate.
(c) A statement from the FCC, FAA and State Aeronautics Division
that the proposed tower complies with applicable regulations
or that the tower is exempt from those regulations.
(4) An intermodulation analysis certified by a professional
communications engineer which demonstrates that the proposed
new equipment will not cause undue RF interference to existing
towers or transmitting facilities or communications service
reception by other property owners. The applicant shall be
responsible to resolve all instances of interference caused by the
actual operation of the tower that occurs after its installation.
N. Co-location and shared-use requirements.
(1) The shared use of existing public utility towers, antennas and
wireless telecommunications services facilities shall be strongly
encouraged. The Borough shall maintain an inventory of existing
towers, antennas and wireless communications services facilities,
including public utilities that are obligated under the Federal
Telecommunications Act of 1996 to provide wireless
communications service carriers with nondiscriminatory access to
their facilities.
(2) While co-location and shared use shall be considered a permitted
use as hereinabove referred, nonetheless and prior to the
installation of an antenna or other equipment on an existing tower
or service facility, an applicant shall make application for a zoning
permit from the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee.
Applications for collocated facilities that fall under the
Pennsylvania Wireless Broadband Collocation Act or the applicable
provision of the FCC's October 2014 Report and Order shall not be
subject to the permit requirements in § 450-55N(2)(a) through (d).
All other applications for such permit shall include: [Amended
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
(a) Wind-loading analysis certified by a licensed professional
communications engineer or licensed professional civil/
structural engineer which demonstrates that the proposed
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:669
communications antenna or equipment will not exceed the
structural capacity of the existing tower or facility.
(b) An intermodulation analysis which demonstrates that the
proposed transmitting facility will not cause RF interference to
any existing communications services (including but not
limited to other towers' or transmitting facilities'
communications services reception by other property owners,
so forth) in accordance with the FCC requirements for the
applicant's class of operation. The applicant shall be
responsible to resolve all instances of interference caused by
the actual operation of the tower and any additional antennas
or equipment after installation.
(c) Information demonstrating that the RMS field intensity of EMR
from the existing tower or service facility (with all existing and
proposed antenna and equipment) measured at the nearest
point on the boundary of applicant's site from the proposed
antenna or equipment will not exceed the levels allowed under
ANSI standard C95.3.
(d) A site plan shall be required, and an applicant shall comply
with all other specifications of this section.
(3) To the extent permitted by state and federal law, the total height of
any wireless support structure and mounted antenna shall not
exceed 20 feet above the maximum height permitted in the
underlying zoning district. The placement of antennas and
commercial communications towers on single-family dwellings is
prohibited. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
O. Removal of communications towers.
(1) If a wireless telecommunications services facility, tower or antenna
remains unused for a period of 12 consecutive months, the
applicant, owner or service provider shall dismantle and remove
the wireless telecommunications services facility, tower or antenna
within six months of written notice to do such by the Borough
Zoning Officer or his designee or the Borough Code Enforcement
Officer. The applicant, owner or service provider must provide to
the satisfaction of the Borough a written agreement (approved by
the Borough Solicitor and suitable for filing with the Borough) to
ensure telecommunications services facility tower or antenna
removal and site restoration, including but not limited to the
following:
(a) Safe, timely and complete removal of the entire wireless
telecommunications services facility tower and antenna and
any portion thereof, including any portion above the height of
the tower or antenna.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:670
(b) Revegetation of the area to eliminate all traces and evidence of
the wireless telecommunications services facility, tower and
antenna ever having been there.
(c) A financial surety (acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and the
Borough Engineer) to cover the cost of the remediation of any
damage to the landscape which occurs during the cleaning of
the site.
(d) A financial surety (acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and the
Borough Engineer) to cover the cost of maintaining landscape
plantings.
(e) The financial sureties and security referenced in this section
shall continue in full force and effect as long as the tower,
antenna or facility is in existence.
(2) Further, as a condition precedent to the grant of any permit or use,
the applicant, owner or service provider shall enter into the written
agreement noted in Subsection O(1) of this section and post
security (in a form acceptable to the Borough Solicitor and the
Borough Engineer and in favor of the Borough of Hellertown) in an
amount sufficient to cover the facility, tower and antenna removal
and complete site cleanup costs (plus an additional 15%). In the
event that the applicant, owner or service provider of the facility,
tower or antenna fails to remove the facility, tower or antenna
within six months of written notification by the Borough Zoning
Officer or his designee or the Borough Code Enforcement Officer,
the Borough shall utilize the security to effect removal of the
facility, tower or antenna in a manner consistent with the
regulations set forth in this section.
P. Indemnification and insurance requirements.
(1) Release and indemnification. The Borough shall not grant any
permit or use and shall not authorize an antenna or tower location
or service facilities construction until and unless the Borough
obtains an adequate indemnification from such applicant, owner or
service provider. This indemnification must provide, at the
minimum:
(a) A general release of the Borough from and against any and all
liability and responsibility in or arising out of the construction,
operation, maintenance or repair of the wireless
telecommunications services facility, tower or antenna. Each
applicant, owner or service provider must further agree not to
sue or seek any money or damages from the Borough in
connection with the above.
(b) Indemnify and hold harmless the Borough, its elected and
appointed officers, agents, servants and employees from and
against any and all claims, demands or causes of action of
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:671
whatsoever kind or nature, and the resulting losses (including
personal injury, property damage or death), costs, expenses,
reasonable attorney's fees, liabilities, damages, orders,
judgments or decrees sustained by the Borough or any third
party arising out of or by reason of or resulting from any act
(or failure to act) by an applicant, owner or service provider or
his duly authorized servants, agents, employees or designated
representatives; and
(c) Provide that the covenants and representations relating to the
indemnification provision shall be incorporated into the
written agreement and continue in full force and effect as long
as the tower, antenna or facility is in existence.
(2) Insurance. The Borough shall not grant any permit or use and shall
not authorize a tower or antenna location or service facilities
construction until and unless the Borough obtains assurance that
the applicant, owner or service provider has adequate insurance,
as determined by the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee. At a
minimum, the following insurance requirements shall be satisfied:
(a) A wireless telecommunications services facility applicant,
owner or service provider shall not commence construction of
a tower or antenna or service facility without obtaining all
insurance required under this section and approval of such
insurance by the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee, nor
shall any contractor or subcontractor be permitted to
commence work on its contract or subcontract until all such
similar insurance required of the same has been obtained and
approved by the Borough Zoning Officer or his designee. The
required insurance must be obtained and maintained for the
entire period the wireless telecommunications services facility,
tower or antenna is in existence. If the applicant, owner or
service provider, its contractors or subcontractors do not have
the required insurance, the Borough may order such entities to
cease operation of the wireless telecommunications services
facility, tower or antenna until such insurance is obtained and
approved. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(b) Certificate(s) of such insurance, reflecting evidence of the
required insurance and adding the Borough as additional
insured, shall be filed with the Borough Zoning Officer or his
designee. The certificate(s) shall be filed prior to the
commencement of construction and once a year for each
succeeding year thereafter, and as provided below in the event
of a lapse in coverage.
(c) The certificate(s) of insurance shall contain a provision that
coverages afforded under such policies shall not be cancelled
until at least 30 days' prior written notice has been given to the
Borough. All insurance policies shall be issued by companies
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:672
authorized to do business under the laws of the Commonwealth
of Pennsylvania.
(3) Inspections. Where applicable and in the event that the insurance
certificate provided indicates that the insurance shall expire or
terminate or if the Zoning Officer or his designee shall have reason
to believe that the facility, tower or antenna may have sustained
structural, mechanical or electrical damage, but in no case less
than once annually, the Zoning Officer or his designee shall inspect
a tower or antenna or service facility. A copy of the inspection
report shall be submitted to the Borough Zoning Officer or his
designee and to the Borough Manager or his designee and shall be
kept on file at the Borough office. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
(4) Failure to submit said inspection report either by annual deadline
or other date as may be specified by the Borough Zoning Officer or
his designee will result in the presumption that the facility, tower or
antenna is no longer operational. If the annual inspection report is
not so received, the applicant, owner or service provider must
initiate the dismantling and removal of the facility, antenna and
tower at the applicant's, owner's or service provider's expense as
per this section.
(5) If upon any annual periodic inspection the Borough concludes that
a facility, tower or antenna fails to comply with building codes and
customary standards (generally accepted within the building and
construction industry) or constitutes a danger or threat to persons
or property, then, upon written notice being provided to the
applicant, owner or service provider of the facility, tower or
antenna, the applicant, owner or service provider shall have 30
days to bring such facility, tower or antenna into compliance with
such codes and standards. If the applicant, owner or service
provider fails to bring such facility, tower or antenna into
compliance within 30 days, the applicant, owner or service
provider shall immediately dismantle and remove the facility,
antenna or tower at his own expense as per this section.
Q. Annual application fee. The owner, operator or service provider of the
tower facility, tower or antenna shall apply annually to the Borough for
an operation permit. The annual application will allow the applicable
Borough officials to monitor the use of a particular cellular
communications tower and related equipment. The fee for the permit
fee shall be established by the Hellertown Borough Council by
resolution, either annually or through terms of multiple-year contract.
R. Historic areas and buildings. The placement of commercial
communications towers or antennas, or their related equipment, on any
building or structure that is listed on either the National or
Pennsylvania Registers of Historic Places, or is listed on the official
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:673
historic structures and/or historic districts list maintained by the
Borough, is prohibited. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
S. Public safety communications and other communications services.
Commercial communications towers and antennas shall not interfere
with public safety communications or the reception of broadband,
television, radio or other communications services enjoyed by
occupants of nearby properties. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
T. Gap in coverage or capacity. To the extent permitted by state and
federal law, an applicant for commercial communications tower
construction must demonstrate that a significant gap in wireless
coverage or capacity exists in the applicable area and that the type of
communications facility being proposed is the least intrusive means by
which to fill that gap. The existence or nonexistence of a gap in wireless
coverage shall be a factor in the Borough's decision on an application
for approval of a new tower. [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
U. Time frames for approval. Pursuant to FCC regulations and
Pennsylvania state law, the Borough and the applicant shall adhere to
all applicable time frames with respect to applications for approval.
[Added 3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
(1) For applications that fall under the Pennsylvania WBCA or
substantially change the wireless support structure upon which the
proposed facility is to be mounted, the Borough shall notify the
applicant in writing of any information that may be required to
complete such application within 30 calendar days of the date that
an application for an antenna is filed with the Borough. Within 60
calendar days of receipt of a complete application, the Borough
shall make its final decision on whether to approve the application
and shall advise the applicant in writing of such decision.
(2) For applications for collocated facilities that do not fall under the
Pennsylvania WBCA, the Borough shall notify the applicant in
writing of any information that may be required to complete such
application within 30 calendar days of the date that an application
for an antenna is filed with the Borough. Within 90 calendar days of
receipt of a complete application, the Borough shall make its final
decision on whether to approve the application and shall advise the
applicant in writing of such decision.
(3) All applications for towers shall be acted upon by the Borough
within 150 days of the receipt of a fully completed application and
the Borough shall advise the applicant in writing of its decision. If
additional information was requested by the Borough to complete
an application, the time required by the applicant to provide the
information shall not be counted toward the one-hundred-fifty-day
review period.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:674
V. Commercial communication towers in the public rights-of-way. In
addition to the provisions listed in § 450-55F, H(4), H(6), J, K(3), L(3)(b),
K(5), M(2)(a) and (b), M(2)(d), M(2)(f) through (i), M(2)(k), M(2)(n),
M(3)(a) and (b), M(4), O, R, S, T, and U, the following regulations shall
apply to applications for new commercial communications towers to be
located in the public rights-of-way ("ROW"): [Added 3-6-2017 by Ord.
No. 814]
(1) Special exception required. Applicants for new commercial
communication towers in the ROW shall proceed through the
special exception process, pursuant to the guidelines and
procedures set forth in the Borough Zoning Code. The special
exception application shall demonstrate that the proposed facility
conforms to all applicable requirements and guidelines
enumerated in the Borough Zoning Code.
(2) Height. Towers in the ROW shall not exceed 32 feet in height and
are prohibited in areas in which all utilities are located
underground. To the extent permissible under state and federal
law, any height extensions to an existing tower in the ROW shall
require a permit from the Borough, and shall not increase the
overall height of the tower to more than 36 feet.
(3) Location. Towers shall not be located in the front facade area of any
structure, or within 75 feet of an area in which all utilities are
located underground.
(4) Placement. If co-location on existing utility poles, towers, or other
tall structures is not possible, new towers in the ROW shall be
permitted via special exception along certain collector and arterial
roads, regardless of the underlying zoning district. A listing of
permissible roads is adopted via resolution of Borough Council and
is reviewed on a regular basis.
(5) Distance from curb. Towers and related equipment shall be located
so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to pedestrian
or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety hazards to
pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise inconvenience public
use of the ROW as determined by the Borough. Additionally:
(a) In no case shall ground-mounted related equipment, walls, or
landscaping be located within 18 inches of the face of the curb;
(b) Ground-mounted equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Borough;
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough;
and
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:675
(d) Any graffiti on the tower or on any related equipment shall be
removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(6) Design. The tower shall employ the most current stealth technology
available in an effort to appropriately blend into the surrounding
environment and minimize aesthetic impact. The application of the
stealth technology chosen by the applicant shall be subject to the
approval of the Borough.
(7) Noise standards. The tower shall be operated and maintained so as
not to produce noise in excess of applicable noise standards under
state law and the Borough Code, except in emergency situations
requiring the use of a backup generator, where such noise
standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis only.
(8) Wind. All commercial communications towers shall be designed to
withstand the effects of wind according to the standard designed by
the American National Standards Institute as prepared by the
engineering departments of the Electronics Industry Association,
and Telecommunications Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as
amended).
(9) Replacement and repairs. To the extent permissible under federal
law, the removal and replacement of an antenna and/or related
equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the
communications facility is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of the
wireless support structure or the number of antennas. Any
modification to an existing communications facility shall require
notice to be provided to the Borough, and possible supplemental
permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
(10) Removal. Within 60 days following written notice from the
Borough, or such longer period as the Borough determines is
reasonably necessary or such shorter period in the case of an
emergency, an owner of tower in the ROW shall, at its own expense,
temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position of any tower when the Borough, consistent with its police
powers and applicable Public Utility Commission regulations, shall
determine that such removal, relocation, change or alteration is
reasonably necessary under the following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:676
(11) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every tower in the ROW is subject to the
Borough's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be paid
for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for ROW
use shall be directly related to the Borough's actual ROW
management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Borough. The owner of each tower shall pay an annual fee to
the Borough to compensate the Borough for the Borough's costs
incurred in connection with the activities described above.
(12) Time, place, and manner. The Borough shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all towers in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
W. Commercial communications antennas in the ROW. In addition to the
regulations enumerated in § 450-55F, K(1), N(2)(a) through (c), R, S, T,
and U, antennas in the ROW shall be subject to the following: [Added
3-6-2017 by Ord. No. 814]
(1) Placement. Antennas in the ROW shall be collocated on existing
poles, such as existing utility poles or light poles. If collocation is
not technologically feasible, the applicant, with the Borough's
approval, shall locate its antenna on existing poles or freestanding
structures that do not already act as wireless support structures.
(2) Wind. All antennas shall be designed to withstand the effects of
wind according to the standard designed by the American National
Standards Institute as prepared by the engineering departments of
the Electronics Industry Association, and Telecommunications
Industry Association (ANSI/TIA-222, as amended).
(3) Design. To the extent not prohibited by state or federal law,
antenna installations located above the surface grade in the public
ROW including, but not limited to, those on streetlights and joint
utility poles, shall consist of equipment components that are no
more than six feet in height and that are compatible in scale and
proportion to the structures upon which they are mounted. All
equipment shall be the smallest and least visibly intrusive
equipment feasible.
(4) Appearance. Antennas and related equipment shall be treated to
match the supporting structure (i.e., stealth technology) and may
be required to be painted, or otherwise coated, to be visually
compatible with the support structure upon which they are
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-55
1:677
mounted. The Borough shall have the discretion to approve or deny
the applicant's final design choice.
(5) Time, place, and manner. The Borough shall determine the time,
place and manner of construction, maintenance, repair and/or
removal of all antennas in the ROW based on public safety, traffic
management, physical burden on the ROW, and related
considerations. For public utilities, the time, place and manner
requirements shall be consistent with the police powers of the
Borough and the requirements of the Public Utility Code.
(6) Equipment location. Antennas and related equipment shall be
located so as not to cause any physical or visual obstruction to
pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or to otherwise create safety
hazards to pedestrians and/or motorists or to otherwise
inconvenience public use of the ROW as determined by the
Borough. In addition:
(a) Ground-mounted related equipment shall be located between
the sidewalk and the curb. For reasons of safety and aesthetics,
such equipment shall neither protrude onto the curb, nor
obstruct the sidewalk.
(b) Ground-mounted related equipment that cannot be placed
underground shall be screened, to the fullest extent possible,
through the use of landscaping or other decorative features to
the satisfaction of the Borough.
(c) Required electrical meter cabinets shall the screened to blend
in with the surrounding area to the satisfaction of the Borough.
(d) Any graffiti on any wireless support structures or any related
equipment shall be removed at the sole expense of the owner.
(7) Removal, replacement, and repair. To the extent permissible under
federal law, the removal and replacement of an antenna and/or
related equipment for the purpose of upgrading or repairing the
communications facility is permitted, so long as such repair or
upgrade does not substantially change the overall size of the
wireless support structure or the number of antennas. Any
modification to an existing communications facility shall require
notice to be provided to the Borough, and possible supplemental
permit approval to the original permit or authorization.
(8) Relocation or removal of facilities. Within two months following
written notice from the Borough, or such longer period as the
Borough determines is reasonably necessary or such shorter period
in the case of an emergency, the owner of an antenna in the ROW
shall, at its own expense, temporarily or permanently remove,
relocate, change or alter the position of any antenna when the
Borough, consistent with its police powers and applicable Public
Utility Commission regulations, shall have determined that such
§ 450-55 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-55
1:678
§ 450-56. Lot area, width, building coverage, and height regulations
for cell towers. [Added 7-5-2005 by Ord. No. 676]
Each of the following dimensional requirements shall apply to cell towers in
the following zoning districts:
Zoning District
Minimum
Lot Area
(square
feet)
Minimum
Lot Width
(feet)
Maximum
Coverage
(%)
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)
C (Conservation) 10,000 100 20% 16
I (Industrial) 10,000 100 20% 16
SC (Shopping
Center)
10,000 100 20% 16
HC (Highway
Commercial)
10,000 100 20% 16
§ 450-56.1. Treatment center. [Added 2-7-2011 by Ord. No. 751]
removal, relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary
under the following circumstances:
(a) The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of any
Borough or other public improvement in the right-of-way;
(b) The operations of the Borough or other governmental entity in
the right-of-way;
(c) Vacation of a street or road or the release of a utility easement;
or
(d) An emergency as determined by the Borough.
(9) Reimbursement for ROW use. In addition to permit fees as
described in this section, every antenna in the ROW is subject to
the Borough's right to fix annually a fair and reasonable fee to be
paid for use and occupancy of the ROW. Such compensation for
ROW use shall be directly related to the Borough's actual ROW
management costs including, but not limited to, the costs of the
administration and performance of all reviewing, inspecting,
permitting, supervising and other ROW management activities by
the Borough. The owner of each antenna shall pay an annual fee to
the Borough to compensate the Borough for the Borough's costs
incurred in connection with the activities described above.
A. The applicant shall provide a written description of all types of
residents that the use is intended to include over the life of the permit.
Any future additions or modifications to this list shall require approval
of the Zoning Hearing Board as a special exception.
§ 450-55 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56.1
1:679
§ 450-56.2. Bed-and-breakfast. [Added 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
An applicant who proposes to erect a bed-and-breakfast shall comply with
the following:
B. The applicant shall prove, with the full burden of proof upon the
applicant, to the satisfaction of the Zoning Hearing Board that such use
will involve adequate supervision and security measures to protect
public safety.
C. The Zoning Hearing Board may place conditions on the use as
necessary to protect public safety, including conditions on the types of
residents and security measures.
A. Bed-and-breakfast facilities. An applicant proposing to operate a bedand-
breakfast shall comply with the following:
(1) A bed-and-breakfast facility shall be permitted only in a singlefamily
detached dwelling.
(2) The principal use of the property shall remain that of a singlefamily
residential dwelling.
(3) The owners or a representative of the owner of a bed-and-breakfast
facility must be in the residence when guests are present.
(4) No more than eight guest rooms may be offered on any individual
residential property.
(5) The length of stay for any guest shall not exceed more than 14
uninterrupted days.
(6) Accommodations at the bed-and-breakfast facility may include
meals prepared on the premises for the guests and included in the
charge for the room. Meals prepared on the premises can only be
for the registered guests. The owner shall comply with all federal,
state and local requirements for the preparation, handling and
serving of food.
(7) Any amenities such as tennis court, swimming pool, etc., shall be
solely for the use of the resident owner and guests of the facility.
(8) The owner shall maintain a current register.
(9) Applicant shall provide for the required off-street parking
requirement.
(10) Each bed-and-breakfast facility shall comply with the Federal Life
Safety Code, the rules and regulations of the Pennsylvania
Department of Labor and Industry and all other applicable
building, safety and fire codes of the federal, state and local
government.
§ 450-56.1 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-56.2
1:680
(11) The single-family residential exterior appearance of the residence
shall be maintained. Alterations shall maintain the single-family
exterior character and shall require application and approval by
Planning Commission and Council.
§ 450-56.2 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-56.2
1:681

ARTICLE VII
Zoning Hearing Board
§ 450-57. Zoning Hearing Board. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No.
662]
A. Membership of the Zoning Hearing Board. The membership of the
Board shall, upon determination of the Borough Council, consist of
either three or five residents of the Borough appointed by resolution of
the Borough Council. The terms of office of a three-member Board shall
be three years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of one
member shall expire each year. The terms of office of a five-member
Board shall be five years and shall be so fixed that the term of office of
one member of a five-member Board shall expire each year. If a threemember
Board is changed to a five-member Board, the members of the
existing three-member Board shall continue in office until their term of
office would expire under prior law. The Borough Council shall appoint
two additional members to the Board with terms scheduled to expire in
accordance with the provision of this section. The Board will promptly
notify the Borough Council of any vacancies which occur. Appointments
to fill vacancies shall be only for the unexpired portion of the term.
Members of the Board shall hold no other office in the Borough.
B. The Borough Council may appoint by resolution at least one but no
more than three residents of the Borough to serve as alternate
members of the Board. The term of office of an alternate member shall
be three years. If by reason of absence or disqualification of a member a
quorum is not reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as
many alternate members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be
need to provide a quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall
continue to serve on the Board in all proceedings involving the matter
or case for which the alternate was initially appointed until the Board
has made a final determination of the matter or case. Designation of an
alternate pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis
in rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates. An
alternate shall be entitled to participate in all proceedings and
discussions of the Board to the same and full extent as provided by law
for Board members, including specifically the right to cast a vote as a
voting member during the proceedings, and shall have all the powers
and duties set forth in the Municipalities Planning Code222 and as
otherwise provided by law. Alternates shall hold no other office in the
Borough, including membership on the Planning Commission and
Zoning Officer or his designee.
C. Removal of members. Any Board member may be removed for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office or for other just
cause by a majority vote of the Borough Council which appointed the
member, taken after the member has received 15 days' advance notice
222. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 450-57 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-57
1:683
§ 450-58. Organization of Board. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
§ 450-59. Expenditures for services. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No.
775]
Within the limits of funds appropriated by the Borough Council, the Board
may employ or contract for secretaries, clerks, legal counsel, consultants
and other technical and clerical services. Members of the Board may
receive compensation for the performance of their duties as may be fixed by
the Borough Council, but in no case shall it exceed the rate of compensation
authorized to be paid to the members of the Borough Council. Alternate
members of the Board may receive compensation as may be fixed by the
Borough Council for the performance of their duties when designated as
alternate members pursuant to § 450-58, but in no case shall such
compensation exceed the rate of compensation authorized to be paid to the
members of the Borough Council.
§ 450-60. Hearings. [Amended 7-6-2004 by Ord. No. 662]
The Board shall conduct hearings and make decisions in accordance with
the following requirements:
of the intent to take such a vote. A hearing shall be held in connection
with the vote if the member shall request it in writing.
A. The Board shall elect from its own membership its officers, who shall
serve annual terms as such and may succeed themselves. For the
conduct of any hearing and the taking of any action, a quorum shall be
not less than a majority of all the members of the Board, but the Board
may appoint a hearing officer from its own membership to conduct any
hearing on its behalf, and the parties may waive further action by the
Board as provided in § 450-60.
B. If by reason of absence or disqualification of a member a quorum is not
reached, the Chairman of the Board shall designate as many alternate
members of the Board to sit on the Board as may be needed to provide a
quorum. Any alternate member of the Board shall continue to serve on
the Board in all proceedings involving the matter or cause for which the
alternate was initially appointed until the Board has made a final
determination of the matter or case. Designation of an alternate
pursuant to this section shall be made on a case-by-case basis in
rotation according to declining seniority among all alternates.
C. The Board may make, alter and rescind rules and forms for its
procedure, consistent with ordinances of the Borough and laws of the
commonwealth. The Board shall keep full public records of its business,
which records shall be the property of the Borough, and shall submit a
report of its activities to the Borough Council as requested by the
Borough Council.
§ 450-57 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-60
1:684
A. Public notice shall be given and written notice shall be given to the
applicant, the Zoning Officer or his designee, such other persons as the
Borough Council shall designate by ordinance, and to any person who
has made timely request for the same. Written notices shall be given at
such time and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in
the absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Board. In addition to
the written notice provided herein, written notice of said hearing shall
be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of land at least one week
prior to the hearing.
B. The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings before the Zoning Hearing Board. Fees for said hearings may
include compensation for the Secretary and members of the Zoning
Hearing Board, notice and advertising costs and necessary
administrative overheard connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses of the Zoning Hearing Board,
expenses for engineering, architectural or other technical consultants
or expert witness costs.
C. The first hearing before the Board or hearing officer shall be
commenced within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an extension
of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Board or hearing officer
shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless otherwise
agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An applicant
shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within 100 days of
the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the Board or
hearing officer shall assure that the applicant receives at least seven
hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first hearing.
Persons opposed to the application shall complete the presentation of
their opposition to the application within 100 days of the first hearing
held after the completion of the applicant's case-in-chief. An applicant
may, upon request, be granted additional hearings to complete his casein-
chief, provided the persons opposed to the application are granted an
equal number of additional hearings. Persons opposed to the
application may, upon the written consent on the record by the
applicant and Borough, be granted additional hearings to complete
their opposition to the application, provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of hearings for rebuttal.
D. The hearings shall be conducted by the Board or the Board may appoint
any member or an independent attorney as a hearing officer. The
decision, or where no decision is called for, the findings shall be made
by the Board; however, the appellant or the applicant, as the case may
be, in addition to the Borough, may, prior to the decision of the hearing,
waive decision or findings by the Board and accept the decision or
findings of the hearing officer as final.
E. The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person affected by
the application who has made timely appearance of record before the
Board and any other person, including civic or community
§ 450-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-60
1:685
organizations, permitted to appear by the Board. The Board shall have
power to require that all persons who wish to be considered parties
enter appearances in writing on forms provided by the Board for that
purpose.
F. The Chairman or Acting Chairman of the Board or the hearing officer
presiding shall have power to administer oaths and issue subpoenas to
compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant
documents and papers, including witnesses and documents requested
by the parties.
G. The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and shall
be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence and
argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant issues.
H. Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial or
unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
I. The Board or hearing officer, as the case may be, shall keep a
stenographic record of the proceedings. The appearance fee for a
stenographer shall be shared equally by the applicant and the Board.
The cost of the original transcript shall be paid by the Board if the
transcript is ordered by the Board or hearing officer or shall be paid by
the person appealing from the decision of the Board if such appeal is
made, and in either event the cost of additional copies shall be paid by
the person requesting such copy or copies. In other cases the party
requesting the original transcript shall bear the cost thereof.
J. The Board or the hearing officer shall not communicate, directly or
indirectly, with any party or his representatives in connection with any
issue involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate; shall not take notice of any communication, reports, staff
memoranda or other materials, except advice from its solicitor, unless
the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest the material so
noticed; and shall not inspect the site or its surroundings after the
commencement of hearings with any party or his representative unless
all parties are given an opportunity to be present.
K. The Board or the hearing officer, as the case may be, shall render a
written decision or, when no decision is called for, make written
findings on the application within 45 days after the last hearing before
the Board or hearing officer. Where the application is contested or
denied, each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact and
conclusions based thereon together with the reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provision of the Municipalities Planning Code
or of any ordinance, rule or regulations shall contain a reference to the
provision relied on and the reasons why the conclusion is deemed
appropriate in the light of the facts found. If the hearing is conducted by
a hearing officer and there has been no stipulation that his decision or
findings are final, the Board shall make his report and
recommendations available to the parties within 45 days, and the
§ 450-60 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-60
1:686
§ 450-61. Mediation option. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
parties shall be entitled to make written representations thereon to
the Board prior to final decision or entry of findings, and the Board's
decision shall be entered no later than 30 days after the report of
the hearing officer. Except for challenges filed under § 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code,223 where the Board fails
to render the decision within the period required by this subsection
or fails to commence, conduct or complete the required hearing as
provided in Subsection C, the decision shall be deemed to have been
rendered in favor of the applicant unless the applicant has agreed in
writing or on the record to an extension of time. When a decision
has been rendered in favor of the applicant because of the failure of
the Board to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Board shall give public notice of said decision within 10 days from the
last day it could have met to render a decision in the same manner
as provided in Subsection A of this section. If the Board shall fail to
provide such notice, the applicant may do so. Nothing in this subsection
shall prejudice the right of any party opposing the application to appeal
the decision to a court of competent jurisdiction.
L. A copy of the final decision or, where no decision is called for, of the
findings shall be delivered to the applicant personally or mailed to him
not later than the day following its date. To all other persons who have
filed their name and address with the Board not later than the last day
of the hearing, the Board shall provide by mail or otherwise brief notice
of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at which the full
decision or findings may be examined.
A. Parties to proceedings authorized by this article and Article X-A of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code may utilize mediation as an
aid in completing such proceedings. In proceedings before the Zoning
Hearing Board in no case shall the Zoning Hearing Board initiate
mediation or participate as a mediating party. Mediation shall
supplement, not replace, those procedures in this article and Article X-A
of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code once they have been
formally initiated. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as
expanding or limiting Borough police powers or as modifying any
principles of substantive law.
B. Participation in mediation shall be wholly voluntary. The
appropriateness of mediation shall be determined by the particulars of
each case and the willingness of the parties to negotiate. Any
municipality offering the mediation option shall assure that, in each
case, the mediating parties, assisted by the mediator as appropriate,
develop terms and conditions for:
(1) Funding mediation.
223. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 450-60 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-61
1:687
§ 450-62. Jurisdiction. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(2) Selecting a mediator who, at a minimum, shall have a working
knowledge of municipal zoning and subdivision procedures and
demonstrated skill in mediation.
(3) Completing mediation, including time limits for such completion.
(4) Suspending time limits otherwise authorized in this article,
provided there is written consent by the mediating parties and by
an applicant or Borough decisionmaking body if either is not a
party to the mediation.
(5) Identifying all parties and affording them the opportunity to
participate.
(6) Subject to legal restraints, determining whether some or all of the
mediation sessions shall be open or closed to the public.
(7) Assuring that mediated solutions are in writing and signed by the
parties and become subject to review and approval by the
appropriate decisionmaking body pursuant to the authorized
procedures set forth in the other sections of this article.
C. No offers or statements made in the mediation sessions, excluding the
final written mediation agreement, shall be admissible as evidence in
any subsequent judicial or administrative proceedings.
A. The Zoning Hearing Board shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear and
render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) Substantive challenges to the validity of any land use ordinance,
except those brought before the Borough Council pursuant to
§§ 609.1 and 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code.224
(2) Challenges to the validity of a land use ordinance raising
procedural questions or alleged defects in the process of
enactment or adoption, which challenges shall be raised by an
appeal taken within 30 days after the effective date of said
ordinance. Where the ordinance appealed from is the initial zoning
ordinance of the Borough, and Zoning Hearing Board has not been
previously established, the appeal raising procedural questions
shall be taken directly to court.
(3) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or his
designee, including, but not limited to, the granting or denial of any
permit or failure to act on the application therefor, the issuance of
any cease and desist order, or the registration or refusal to register
any nonconforming use, structure or lot.
224. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10609.1 and 10916.1, respectively.
§ 450-61 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-62
1:688
(4) Appeals from the determination by the Borough Engineer or the
Zoning Officer or his designee with reference to the administration
of any floodplain and/or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions
within a land use ordinance, including but not limited to appeals
from the granting or denial of any permit or the failure to act on the
permit application or from an appeal from the issuance of any
cease-and-desist order. The floodplain administrator, as defined in
any floodplain ordinance or flood hazard ordinance, is the Borough
Zoning Officer or his designee. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No.
783]
(5) Applications for variances from the terms of this chapter and flood
hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use ordinance,
pursuant to § 450-65.
(6) Applications for special exceptions under this chapter or floodplain
or flood hazard ordinance or such provisions within a land use
ordinance, pursuant to § 450-64.
(7) Appeals from the determination of any officer or agency charged
with the administration of any transfer of development rights or
performance density provisions of this chapter.
(8) Appeals from a determination of the Zoning Officer or his designee
under § 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.225
(9) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or his
designee or Borough Engineer in the administration of any land use
ordinance or provision thereof with reference to sedimentation and
erosion control and stormwater management insofar as the same
relate to development not involving Article V or VII applications of
the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.
B. The Borough Council or, except as to Subsection B(3), (4) and (5), the
planning agency, if designated, shall have exclusive jurisdiction to hear
and render final adjudications in the following matters:
(1) All applications for approvals of planned residential developments
under Article VII pursuant to the provisions of § 702 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code.226
(2) All applications pursuant to § 508 for approval of subdivisions or
land development under Article V of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.227 Any provision in a subdivision and
land development ordinance requiring that final action concerning
subdivision and land development applications be taken by a
planning agency rather than the Borough Council shall vest
225. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.2.
226. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10702.
227. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10508.
§ 450-62 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-62
1:689
§ 450-63. Applicability of judicial remedies. [Added 9-17-2012 by
Ord. No. 775]
Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to deny the appellant
the right to proceed directly to court where appropriate, pursuant to the
Pennsylvania Rules of Civil Procedure No. 1091 (relating to action in
mandamus).
exclusive jurisdiction in the planning agency in lieu of the Borough
Council for purposes of the provisions of this subsection.
(3) Applications for conditional use under the express provisions of this
chapter pursuant to § 603(c)(2) of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.228
(4) Applications for curative amendment to a zoning ordinance
pursuant to § 609.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning
Code229 and Subsection A(2) of this section.
(5) All petitions for amendments to land use ordinances, pursuant to
the procedures set forth in § 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.230 Any action on such petitions shall be deemed
legislative acts, provided that nothing contained in this section
shall be deemed to enlarge or diminish existing law with reference
to appeals to court.
(6) Appeals from the determination of the Zoning Officer or his
designee or the Borough Engineer in the administration of any land
use ordinance or provisions thereof with reference to
sedimentation and erosion control and stormwater management
insofar as the same relate to application for land development
under Articles V and VII of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code. Where such determination relates only to
development not involving an Article V or VII application, the
appeal from such determination of the Zoning Officer or his
designee or the Borough Engineer shall be to the Zoning Hearing
Board pursuant to Subsection A(9). Where the applicable land use
ordinance vests jurisdiction for final administration of subdivision
and land development applications in the planning agency, all
appeals from determinations under this section shall be to the
planning agency, and all appeals from the decision of the planning
agency shall be to court.
(7) Applications for a special encroachment permit pursuant to § 405
and applications for a permit pursuant to § 406 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.231
228. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10603(c)(2).
229. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.1.
230. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
231. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. §§ 10405 and 10406, respectively.
§ 450-62 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-64
1:690
§ 450-64. Special exception uses.
Where a use requires a special exception review by the Board, as noted in
§ 450-23, the applicant shall request a hearing by the Board.
§ 450-65. Variances.
A. The Board shall hear and decide on the request in accordance with the
standards and criteria for special exception uses as set forth in Article
VI of this chapter. In determining that a use shall be permitted, the
Board may attach such reasonable conditions and safeguards as it may
deem necessary to implement the purposes of this chapter.
B. The Board may require the submission or presentation of such plans
and other materials as it deems necessary to make a proper
determination. Any subsequent amendment or addition to plans for
which a permit is sought shall be subject to review and public hearing
of the Board.
C. If the special exception use involves the site plan review process, the
following procedure should also be in use. The Board's hearing and
decision shall follow the receipt of the Planning Commission's site plan
review report. The Planning Commission shall have 30 days from the
date of the regular meeting of the Planning Commission next following
the date the application is submitted within which to file its report
thereon. In the event the Planning Commission fails to file its report
within 30 days, such application shall be deemed to have been approved
by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may have
representation at the public hearing held by the Zoning Hearing Board
on such applications. [Amended 12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
(1) The applicant shall submit four sets of the site plans to the
Secretary of the Zoning Hearing Board when filing a request for a
special use.
(2) The plans shall indicate the data cited in § 450-78A(1).
(3) One set of plans shall be submitted to the Planning Commission,
which shall review the plans in accord with the criteria in
§ 450-78A(2) and also the relevant special exception use standards.
(4) One set of plans shall be submitted to the Zoning Officer or his
designee for review relative to Borough zoning standards.
D. A special exception use which is approved by the Zoning Hearing Board
shall be construed to be a conforming use, except when accomplished
by variance.
A. The Board shall hear requests for variances where it is alleged that the
provisions of this chapter inflict unnecessary hardship upon the
applicant, such as appeal from a denial of a building permit by the
Zoning Officer or his designee. The Board may by rule prescribe the
§ 450-64 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-65
1:691
§ 450-66. Borough Council's functions; conditional uses. [Added
9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775; amended 4-18-2016 by Ord. No. 805]
form of application and may require preliminary application to the
Zoning Officer or his designee. The Board may grant a variance,
provided that all of the following findings are made where relevant in a
given case: [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(1) That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions,
including irregularity, narrowness or shallowness of lot size or
shape, or exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary
hardship is due to such conditions and not the circumstances or
conditions generally created by the provisions of this chapter in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
(2) That because of such physical circumstances or conditions there is
no possibility that the property can be developed in strict
conformity with the provisions of this chapter and that the
authorization of a variance is, therefore, necessary to enable the
reasonable use of the property.
(3) That such unnecessary hardship has not been created by the
appellant.
(4) That the variance, if authorized, will not alter the essential
character of the neighborhood or district in which the property is
located, nor substantially or permanently impair the appropriate
use or development of adjacent property, nor be detrimental to the
public welfare.
(5) That the variance, if authorized, will represent the minimum
variance that will afford relief and will represent the least
modification possible of the regulation in issue.
B. In granting any variance, the Board may attach such reasonable
conditions and safeguards as it may deem necessary to implement the
purposes of this chapter. No variance shall be granted to allow a
structure or use in a district in which such structure or use is restricted.
A use permitted as the result of the granting of a variance shall be
construed to be a nonconforming use.
C. The variance shall be considered void unless the construction or use
which necessitated the variance request is undertaken within one year
of the issuance of the variance.
A. Where the Borough Council, in this chapter, has stated conditional uses
to be granted or denied by the Borough Council pursuant to express
standards and criteria, the Borough Council shall hold a hearing on and
decide requests for such conditional uses in accordance with such
standards and criteria. The hearing shall be conducted by the Board or
the Board may appoint any member or an independent attorney as a
§ 450-65 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-66
1:692
hearing officer. The decision or, where no decision is called for, the
findings shall be made by the Board. However, the appellant or the
applicant, as the case may be, in addition to the Borough, may, prior
to the decision of the hearing, waive decision or findings by the Board
and accept the decision or findings of the hearing officer as final.
In granting a conditional use, the Borough Council may attach such
reasonable conditions and safeguards, in addition to those expressed in
this chapter, as it may deem necessary to implement the purposes of
this article in this chapter.
B. Advisory report. No application for a conditional use shall be granted by
the Borough Council until Borough Council has first received and
considered an advisory report thereon from the Hellertown Planning
Commission with respect to the location of such use in relation to the
needs and growth pattern of the Borough and, where appropriate, with
reference to the adequacy of the site area and arrangement of
buildings, driveways, parking areas, off-street truck loading spaces, and
other pertinent features of the site plan. The Planning Commission shall
have 30 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's application
within which to file its report thereon.
C. Filing of conditional use application. For any use permitted by
conditional use, a conditional use must be obtained from the Borough
Council. In addition to the information required to be shown on the
zoning permit application, the conditional use application must show:
(1) Floor plans and elevations of proposed structures;
(2) Names and addresses of adjoining property owners, including
properties directly across a public right-of-way;
(3) A scaled drawing (site plan) of the site with sufficient detail and
accuracy to demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions
of this chapter; and
(4) A written description of the proposed use in sufficient detail to
demonstrate compliance with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
D. General criteria. Each applicant must demonstrate compliance with the
following in addition to those set forth in § 450-66E:
(1) The proposed use shall be consistent with the purpose and intent of
this chapter;
(2) The proposed use shall not detract from the use and enjoyment of
adjoining nearby properties;
(3) The proposed use will not affect a change in the character of the
subject property's neighborhood;
§ 450-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:693
(4) Adequate public facilities are available to serve the proposed use
(e.g., schools; fire, police, and ambulance protection; sewer, water,
and other utilities: vehicular access; etc.);
(5) For development within a floodplain, the application complies with
the requirements of the Borough's Floodplain Ordinance;232
(6) The proposed use shall comply with all applicable regulations of
this chapter; and
(7) The proposed use will not substantially impair the integrity of the
Borough's Comprehensive Plan.
E. Conditions. Borough Council, in approving conditional use applications,
may attach conditions considered by it to be necessary to protect the
public welfare and the purposes listed above, including conditions
which are more restrictive than those established for other uses in the
same zone. These conditions shall be enforceable by the Zoning Officer,
and failure to comply with such conditions shall constitute a violation of
this chapter and be subject to the penalties described in this article.
F. Site plan approval. Any site plan presented in support of the conditional
use pursuant to Subsection A shall become an official part of the record
for said conditional use. Approval of any conditional use will also bind
the use in accordance with the submitted site plan; therefore, should a
change in the site plan be required as part of the approval of the use,
the applicant shall revise the site plan prior to the issuance of a zoning
permit. Any subsequent change to the use on the subject property, not
reflected on the originally approved site plan, shall require another
conditional use approval to be obtained.
G. Hearing procedures.
(1) Before voting on the approval of a conditional use, the Borough
Council shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public
notice. The hearing shall be conducted by the Borough Council. The
Borough Council shall submit each such application to the Borough
Planning Commission at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such
application to provide the Borough Planning Commission an
opportunity to submit recommendations. If, after any public
hearing held upon an application, the proposed application is
revised, the Borough Council shall hold another public hearing,
pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on the
application.
(2) Public notice, as defined herein, shall be published and written
notice given to the applicant, the Zoning Officer, the Borough
Planning Commission, and such other persons as the Borough
Council may designate and to any person who has made timely
request for the same. Written notices shall be given at such time
232. Editor's Note: See Ch. 204, Flood Damage Prevention.
§ 450-66 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-66
1:694
and in such manner as shall be prescribed by ordinance or, in the
absence of ordinance provision, by rules of the Borough Council.
In addition to the written notice provided herein, written notice of
said hearing shall be conspicuously posted on the affected tract of
land at least one week prior to the scheduled date of the hearing.
(3) The Borough Council may prescribe reasonable fees with respect to
hearings. Fees for said hearings may include compensation for the
Secretary, notice and advertising costs, and necessary
administrative overhead connected with the hearing. The costs,
however, shall not include legal expenses, expenses for
engineering, architectural, or other technical consultants, or
expert witness costs.
(4) The first hearing before the Borough Council shall be commenced
within 60 days from the date of receipt of the applicant's
application, unless the applicant has agreed in writing to an
extension of time. Each subsequent hearing before the Borough
Council shall be held within 45 days of the prior hearing, unless
otherwise agreed to by the applicant in writing or on the record. An
applicant shall complete the presentation of his case-in-chief within
100 days of the first hearing. Upon the request of the applicant, the
Borough Council shall assure that the applicant receives at least
seven hours of hearings within the 100 days, including the first
hearing. Persons opposed to the application shall complete the
presentation of their opposition to the application within 100 days
of the first hearing held after the completion of the applicant's
case-in-chief. An applicant may, upon request, be granted
additional hearings to complete his case-in-chief provided the
persons opposed to the application are granted an equal number of
additional hearings. Persons opposed to the application may, upon
the written consent or consent on the record by the applicant and
municipality, be granted additional hearings to complete their
opposition to the application provided the applicant is granted an
equal number of additional hearings for rebuttal.
(5) The hearings shall be conducted by the Borough Council. The
decision, or where no decision is called for, the findings shall be
made by Borough Council.
(6) The parties to the hearing shall be the Borough, any person
affected by the application who has made timely appearance of
record before the Borough Council, and any other person, including
civic or community organizations, permitted to appear by the
Borough Council. The Borough Council shall have power to require
that all persons who wish to be considered parties enter
appearances in writing on forms provided by the Borough Council
for that purpose.
(7) The Borough Council President shall have power to administer
oaths and issue subpoenas to compel attendance of witnesses and
§ 450-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:695
production of relevant documents and papers, including witnesses
and documents requested by the parties.
(8) The parties shall have the right to be represented by counsel and
shall be afforded the opportunity to respond and present evidence
and argument and cross-examine adverse witnesses on all relevant
issues.
(9) Formal rules of evidence shall not apply, but irrelevant, immaterial,
or unduly repetitious evidence may be excluded.
(10) The Borough Council may keep a stenographic record of the
proceedings. The appearance fee for a stenographer shall be
shared equally by the applicant and the Borough Council. The cost
of the original transcript shall be paid by the Borough Council if the
transcript is ordered by the Borough Council or shall be paid by the
person appealing the decision of the Borough Council, if such
appeal is made, and in either event the cost of additional copies
shall be paid by the person requesting such copy or copies. In other
cases, the party requesting the original transcript shall bear the
cost thereof.
(11) The Borough Council shall not communicate, directly or indirectly,
with any party or his representative in connection with any issue
involved except upon notice and opportunity for all parties to
participate, shall not take notice of any communication, reports,
staff memoranda, or other materials, except advice from its
solicitor, unless the parties are afforded an opportunity to contest
the material so noticed, and shall not inspect the site or its
surroundings after the commencement of hearings with any party
or his representative unless all parties are given an opportunity to
be present.
H. Time limitation.
(1) If a conditional use is granted, the necessary permit shall be
secured and the authorized action begun within two years after the
date when the conditional use is finally granted, and the building or
alterations, as the case may be, shall be completed within three
years of said date. For good cause, the Borough Council may at any
time, upon application in writing, extend either of these deadlines.
(2) Should the appellant or applicant fail to obtain the necessary
permits within said two-year period or, having obtained the permit,
should he fail to commence work thereunder within such two-year
period, it shall be conclusively presumed that the appellant or
applicant has waived, withdrawn, or abandoned his application,
and all approvals and permits granted to him shall be deemed
automatically rescinded by the Borough Council.
(3) Should the appellant or applicant commence construction or
alteration within said two-year period but should he fail to
§ 450-66 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-66
1:696
complete such construction or alteration within said three-year
period, the Borough Council may, upon 10 days' notice in writing,
rescind or revoke the granted conditional use, if the Borough
Council finds that no good cause appears for the failure to complete
the construction or alteration within said three-year period and if
the Borough Council further finds that conditions have so altered
or changed in the interval since the granting of the conditional use
that revocation of the action is justified.
(4) As an alternative to the preceding, an applicant can request, as
part of the original application before the Borough Council, the
granting of a timetable associated with the request, which would
supersede the deadlines imposed in Subsection H(1) and (2). In so
doing, the applicant or appellant must demonstrate that the times
requested are logically related to normal and expected progress of
the project. In approving a timetable under this subsection, the
Borough Council must establish a definite time frame for issuance
of a zoning permit and completion of construction of the project.
I. Decisions.
(1) The Borough Council shall render a written decision or, when no
decision is called for, make written findings on the conditional use
application within 45 days after the last hearing before the
Borough Council. Where the application is contested or denied,
each decision shall be accompanied by findings of fact or
conclusions based thereon, together with any reasons therefor.
Conclusions based on any provisions of the Municipalities Planning
Code233 or of any ordinance, rule or regulation shall contain a
reference to the provision relied on and the reasons why the
conclusion is deemed appropriate in the light of the facts found.
(2) Where the Borough Council fails to render the decision within the
period required by this section or fails to commence, conduct or
complete the required hearing as provided in § 450-66G(4), the
decision shall be deemed to have been rendered in favor of the
applicant unless the applicant has agreed in writing or on the
record to an extension of time. When a decision has been rendered
in favor of the applicant because of the failure of the Borough
Council to meet or render a decision as hereinabove provided, the
Borough Council shall give public notice of the decision within 10
days from the last day it could have met to render a decision in the
same manner as required by the public notice requirements of
§ 450-66G(2). If the Borough Council shall fail to provide such
notice, the applicant may do so.
(3) Nothing in this section shall prejudice the right of any party
opposing the application to appeal the decision to a court of
competent jurisdiction. A copy of the final decision or, where no
233. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10101 et seq.
§ 450-66 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-66
1:697
§ 450-67. Parties appellant before Board.234
Appeals under § 450-62A(1) through (9) may be filed with the Board in
writing by the landowner affected, any officer or agency of the Borough,
or any person aggrieved. Requests for a variance under § 450-65 and for
special exception under § 450-64 may be filed with the Board by any
landowner or any tenant with the permission of such landowner.
§ 450-68. Time limitations.235
§ 450-69. Stay of proceedings.236
decision is called for, of the findings shall be delivered to the
applicant personally or mailed to him no later than the day
following its date. To all other persons who have filed their name
and address with the Board not later than the last day of the
hearing, the Borough shall provide, by mail or otherwise, brief
notice of the decision or findings and a statement of the place at
which the full decision or findings may be examined.
A. No person shall be allowed to file any proceeding with the Board later
than 30 days after an application for development, preliminary or final,
has been approved by an appropriate Borough officer, agency or body if
such proceeding is designed to secure reversal or to limit the approval
in any manner, unless such person alleges and proves that he had no
notice, knowledge or reason to believe that such approval had been
given. If such person has succeeded to his interest after such approval,
he shall be bound by the knowledge of his predecessor in interest. The
failure of anyone other than the landowner to appeal from an adverse
decision on a tentative plan pursuant to § 709 of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code or from an adverse decision by a zoning
officer on a challenge to the validity of an ordinance or map pursuant to
§ 916.2 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code shall preclude
an appeal from a final approval, except in the case where the final
submission substantially deviates from the approved tentative approval.
B. All appeals from determinations adverse to the landowners shall be
filed by the landowner within 30 days after notice of the determination
is issued.
A. Upon filing of any proceeding referred to in § 450-67 and during its
pendency before the Board, all land development pursuant to any
challenged ordinance, order or approval of the Zoning Officer or his
designee or of any agency or body, and all official action thereunder,
shall be stayed unless the Zoning Officer or his designee or any other
appropriate agency or body certifies to the Board facts indicating that
234. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
235. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
236. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-66 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-69
1:698
§ 450-70. Enactment of Zoning Ordinance amendments.237
such stay would cause imminent peril to life or property, in which case
the development or official action shall not be stayed otherwise than
by a restraining order, which may be granted by the Board or by the
court having jurisdiction of zoning appeals, on petition, after notice
to the Zoning Officer or his designee or other appropriate agency or
body. When an application for development, preliminary or final, has
been duly approved and proceedings designed to reverse or limit the
approval are filed with the Board by persons other than the applicant,
the applicant may petition the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals to order such person to post bond as a condition to continuing
the proceedings before the Board.
B. After the petition is presented, the court shall hold a hearing to
determine if the filing of the appeal is frivolous. At the hearing,
evidence may be presented on the merits of the case. It shall be the
burden of the applicant for a bond to prove the appeal is frivolous. After
consideration of all evidence presented, if the court determines that the
appeal is frivolous, it shall grant the petition for a bond. The right to
petition the court to order the appellant to post bond may be waived by
the appellee, but such waiver may be revoked by him if an appeal is
taken from a final decision of the court.
C. The question whether or not such petition should be granted and the
amount of the bond shall be within the sound discretion of the court. An
order denying a petition for bond shall be interlocutory. An order
directing the responding party to post a bond shall be interlocutory.
D. If an appeal is taken by a respondent to the petition for a bond from an
order of the court dismissing a zoning appeal for refusal to post a bond,
and the appellate court sustains the order of the court below to post a
bond, the respondent to the petition for a bond, upon motion of the
petitioner and after hearing in the court having jurisdiction of zoning
appeals, shall be liable for all reasonable costs, expenses and attorneys'
fees incurred by the petitioner.
A. For the preparation of amendments to this chapter, the procedure set
forth in § 607 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code for the
preparation of a proposed zoning ordinance shall be optional.238
B. Before voting on the enactment of an amendment, the Borough Council
shall hold a public hearing thereon, pursuant to public notice. In
addition, if the proposed amendment involves a zoning map change,
notice of said public hearing shall be conspicuously posted by the
Borough at points deemed sufficient by the Borough along the tract to
notify potentially interested citizens. The affected tract or area shall be
posted at least one week prior to the date of the hearing.
237. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
238. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10607.
§ 450-69 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-70
1:699
§ 450-71. Procedure for landowner curative amendments.239
(1) In addition to the requirement that notice be posted under
Subsection B, notice of the public hearing shall be mailed by the
Borough at least 30 days prior to the date of the hearing by first
class mail to the addresses to which real estate tax bills are sent for
all real property located within the area being rezoned, as
evidenced by tax records within the possession of the Borough. The
notice shall include the location, date and time of the public
hearing. A good faith effort and substantial compliance shall satisfy
the requirements of this subsection.
(2) This subsection shall not apply when the rezoning constitutes a
comprehensive rezoning.
C. In the case of an amendment other than that prepared by the planning
agency, the Borough Council shall submit each such amendment to the
planning agency at least 30 days prior to the hearing on such proposed
amendment to provide the planning agency an opportunity to submit
recommendations.
D. If after any public hearing held upon an amendment, the proposed
amendment is changed substantially or is revised to include land
previously not affected by it, the Borough Council shall hold another
public hearing, pursuant to public notice, before proceeding to vote on
the amendment.
E. If the county planning commission shall have been created for the
county in which the municipality proposing the amendment is located
then, at least 30 days prior to the public hearing on the amendment by
the Borough Council, the Borough shall submit the proposed
amendment to the county planning commission for recommendations.
F. The Borough may offer a mediation option as an aid in completing
proceedings authorized by this section. In exercising such an option,
the Borough and mediating parties shall meet the stipulations and
follow the procedures set forth in Article IX of the Pennsylvania
Municipalities Planning Code.
G. Within 30 days after enactment, a copy of the amendment to this
chapter shall be forwarded to the County Planning Commission.
A. A landowner who desires to challenge on substantive grounds the
validity of a zoning ordinance or map or any provision thereof which
prohibits or restricts the use or development of land in which he has an
interest may submit a curative amendment to the Borough Council with
a written request that his challenge and proposed amendment be heard
and decided as provided in § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.240 The Borough Council shall commence a hearing
239. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-70 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-71
1:700
thereon within 60 days of the request as provided in § 916.1 of the
Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code. The curative amendment
and challenge shall be referred to the planning agency or agencies as
provided in § 450-72, and notice of the hearing thereon shall be given as
provided in § 450-73 and in § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code.
B. The hearing shall be conducted in accordance with § 908 of the
Municipalities Planning Code241 and all references therein to the zoning
hearing board shall, for purposes of this section, be references to the
Borough Council; provided, however, that the provisions of § 908(1.2)
and (9) shall not apply and the provisions of § 916.1 shall control. If a
municipality does not accept a landowner's curative amendment
brought in accordance with this subsection and a court subsequently
rules that the challenge has merit, the court's decision shall not result
in a declaration of invalidity for the entire zoning ordinance and map,
but only for those provisions which specifically relate to the
landowner's curative amendment and challenge.
C. The Borough Council of the Borough which has determined that a
validity challenge has merit may accept a landowner's curative
amendment, with or without revision, or may adopt an alternative
amendment which will cure the challenged defects. The Borough
Council shall consider the curative amendments, plans and explanatory
material submitted by the landowner and shall also consider:
(1) The impact of the proposal upon roads, sewer facilities, water
supplies, schools and other public service facilities.
(2) If the proposal is for a residential use, the impact of the proposal
upon regional housing needs and the effectiveness of the proposal
in providing housing units of a type actually available to and
affordable by classes of person otherwise unlawfully excluded by
the challenged provisions of the ordinance or map.
(3) The suitability of the site for the intensity of use proposed by the
site's soils, slopes, woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, aquifers,
natural resources and other natural features.
(4) The impact of the proposed use on the site's soils, slopes,
woodlands, wetlands, floodplains, natural resources and natural
features; the degree to which these are protected or destroyed; the
tolerance of the resource to development and any adverse
environmental impacts.
(5) The impact of the proposal on the preservation of agriculture and
other land uses which are essential to public health and welfare.
240. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
241. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10908.
§ 450-71 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-72
1:701
§ 450-72. Procedure for Borough curative amendment.242
If the Borough determines that its Zoning Ordinance or any portion thereof
is substantially invalid, it shall take the following actions:
A. The Borough shall declare by formal action, its Zoning Ordinance or
portions thereof substantively invalid and propose to prepare a curative
amendment to overcome such invalidity. Within 30 days following such
declaration and proposal, the Borough Council of the Borough shall:
(1) By resolution make specific findings setting forth the declared
invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance, which may include:
(a) References to specific uses which are either not permitted or
not permitted in sufficient quantity.
(b) Reference to a class of use or uses which require revision.
(c) Reference to the entire ordinance which requires revisions.
(2) Begin to prepare and consider a curative amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance to correct the declared invalidity.
B. Within 180 days from the date of the declaration and proposal, the
Borough shall enact a curative amendment to validate or reaffirm the
validity of its Zoning Ordinance pursuant to the provisions required by
§ 609 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code243 in order to
cure the declared invalidity of the Zoning Ordinance.
C. Upon the initiation of the procedures, as set forth in Subsection A, the
Borough Council shall not be required to entertain or consider any
landowner's curative amendment filed under § 450-71, nor shall the
Zoning Hearing Board be required to give a report requested under
§ 450-62 or § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code244
subsequent to the declaration and proposal based upon the grounds
identical to or substantially similar to those specified in the resolution
required in Subsection A(1)(a). Upon completion of the procedure as set
forth in Subsections A and B, no rights to cure pursuant to the
provisions of § 450-70 and § 916.1 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities
Planning Code shall, from the date of the declaration and proposal,
accrue to any landowner on the basis of the substantive invalidity of the
unamended zoning ordinance for which there has been a curative
amendment pursuant to this section.
D. The Borough having utilized the procedures as set forth in Subsections
A and B may not again utilize said procedure for a thirty-six-month
period following the date of the enactment of a curative amendment, or
reaffirmation of the validity of its Zoning Ordinance, pursuant to
242. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
243. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10609.
244. Editor's Note: See 53 P.S. § 10916.1.
§ 450-72 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-72
1:702
§ 450-73. Publication, advertisement and availability of
ordinances.245
Subsection B; provided, however, if after the date of declaration and
proposal there is a substantially new duty or obligation imposed upon
the Borough by virtue of a change in statute or by virtue of a
Pennsylvania appellate court decision, the Borough may utilize the
provision of this section to prepare a curative amendment to its
ordinance to fulfill said duty or obligation.
A. Proposed zoning ordinances and amendments shall not be enacted
unless notice of proposed enactment is given in the manner set forth in
this section and shall include the time and place of the meeting at which
passage will be considered, a reference to a place within the Borough
where copies of the proposed ordinance or amendment may be
examined without charge or obtained for a charge not greater than the
cost thereof. The Borough Council shall publish the proposed ordinance
or amendment once in one newspaper of general circulation in the
Borough not more than 60 days nor less than seven days prior to
passage. Publication of the proposed ordinance or amendment shall
include either the full text thereof or the title and a brief summary,
prepared by the Borough Solicitor and setting forth all the provisions in
reasonable detail. If the full text is not included:
(1) A copy thereof shall be supplied to a newspaper of general
circulation in the Borough at the time the public notice is
published.
(2) An attested copy of the proposed ordinance shall be filed in the
County Law Library or other county office designated by the
County Commissioners, who may impose a fee no greater than that
necessary to cover the actual costs of storing said ordinances.
B. In the event substantial amendments are made in the proposed
ordinance or amendment, before voting upon enactment the Borough
Council shall, at least 10 days prior to enactment, readvertise in one
newspaper of general circulation in the Borough a brief summary
setting forth all the provisions in reasonable detail, together with a
summary of the amendments.
C. Zoning ordinances and amendments may be incorporated into official
ordinance books by reference with the same force and effect as if duly
recorded therein.
245. Editor's Note: Added at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-72 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-73
1:703

ARTICLE VIII
Administration and Enforcement
§ 450-74. Interpretation.
A. In applying and interpreting the provisions of this chapter, they shall be
held to be minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, morals, comfort, convenience and general welfare.
The following specific regulations shall apply:
(1) A minimum required lot or yard size for one building or structure
shall not be used as any part of a required lot or yard for a second
structure.
(2) The required lot or yard for an existing building or structure shall
not be diminished below the minimum requirements of this chapter.
(3) The parking spaces required for one building or structure or use
shall not be included in the computation of required parking spaces
for a second building or structure or use.
B. Relation of Zoning Ordinance to other provisions of law and to private
covenants and agreements.
(1) Nothing contained in this chapter shall be taken to repeal,
abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with any
provisions of law or ordinance or regulations existing or as may be
adopted in the future. Nor is it intended by this chapter to interfere
with or abrogate or annul any easements, covenants or other
agreements between parties. Where this chapter imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings, structures, premises, lots or
land or upon the height of buildings or structures, or requires
larger lots, yards, courts or other open spaces than imposed or
required by such other provisions of law, ordinance or regulations,
or by such easements, covenants or agreements, the provisions of
this chapter shall control.
(2) Wherever the provisions of any other law or ordinance or
regulations impose a greater restriction than this chapter, the
provisions of such other law or ordinance or regulations shall
control.
(3) No provisions contained in this chapter shall be construed as
justifying the encroachment of any building or structure within any
street lines now or hereafter laid down on the Official Borough
Map.
(4) Where a lot is formed from part of a lot already improved, the
separation must be made in such a manner as not to impair any of
the provisions of this chapter, whether related to the then-existing
improvement or to a proposed or future new improvement on the
lot so formed, and in such a manner that both the remainder of the
§ 450-74 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-74
1:705
§ 450-75. Enforcement by Zoning Officer or his designee.
former lot and the new lot so formed shall comply with the lot area
and lot width provisions of this chapter.
A. Administration. It shall be the duty of the Zoning Officer or his designee
to administer and enforce the provisions of this chapter in accordance
with its literal terms. Should the said Zoning Officer or his designee be
in doubt as to the meaning or intent of any provisions of this chapter or
as to the location of any district boundary line on the Zoning Map or as
to the propriety of issuing a zoning and building permit in a particular
case related to the provision of this chapter, he shall appeal the matter
to the Zoning Hearing Board for interpretation and decision.
(1) Appointment and powers of Zoning Officer or his designee. For the
administration of this chapter, a Zoning Officer or his designee,
who shall not hold any elective office in the Borough, shall be
appointed. The Zoning Officer or his designee shall meet
qualifications established by the Borough and shall be able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Borough a working
knowledge of municipal zoning. The Zoning Officer or his designee
shall not have the power to permit any construction or any use or
change of use which does not conform to this chapter. The Zoning
Officer or his designee may be authorized to institute civil
enforcement proceedings as a means of enforcement when acting
within the scope of his employment.
(2) Powers and duties. If the Zoning Officer shall find that any of the
provisions of this chapter are being violated, he/she shall notify in
writing the person responsible for such violations, indicating the
nature of the violation, and ordering the action necessary to correct
it. Such action may include ordering the discontinuance of unlawful
use of land or structures, the removal of unlawful structures or
unlawful additions and alterations, the discontinuance of any
unlawful work being done, or such other action as is deemed
necessary to correct the violation. The Zoning Officer shall, with
the approval of the Borough Council or when directed by it,
institute appropriate action or proceedings in the name of the
Borough to prevent, restrain, correct or abate the violation. All of
the enforcement, violations and penalty provisions of the State
Municipalities Planning Code, as amended, are hereby
incorporated into this chapter by reference. As of the adoption date
of this chapter, these provisions were primarily in Sections 616.1
and 617.2 of such Act (53 P.S. §§ 10616.1 and 10617.2). [Amended
3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 757]
(a) Violations. Any person who shall commit or who shall permit
any of the following actions violates this chapter.
[1] Failure to secure a zoning permit prior to a change in use
of land or structure, or the erection, construction or
§ 450-74 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-75
1:706
alteration of any structure or portion thereof, or the
excavation of land to prepare for the erection, construction
or alteration of any structure or portion thereof.
[2] Placement of false statements on or omitting relevant
information from an application for a zoning permit.
[3] Undertaking any action in a manner which does not
comply with a zoning permit.
[4] Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the
Zoning Hearing Board in granting a variance or special
exception or other approval.
[5] Violation of any condition imposed by a decision of the
Borough Council in granting a conditional use.
(b) Enforcement; notice; evidence; causes of actions.
[1] Enforcement. If it appears to the Borough that a violation
of this chapter has occurred, the Borough shall initiate
enforcement proceedings by sending an enforcement
notice. Prior to sending an official enforcement notice, the
Zoning Officer may, at his/her option, informally request
compliance.
[2] Enforcement notice. The enforcement notice shall be sent
to the owner of record of the parcel on which the violation
has occurred, to any person who has filed a written
request to receive enforcement notices regarding that
parcel, and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record. An enforcement notice shall state the
following, at a minimum:
[a] The name of the owner of record and any other person
against whom the municipality intends to take action.
[b] The location of the property in violation.
[c] The specific violation with a description of the
requirements which have not been met, citing in each
instance the applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance.
[d] The date before which the steps for compliance must
be commenced and the date before which the steps
must be completed.
[e] That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal
to the Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed
period of time in accordance with procedures set forth
in the chapter.
§ 450-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-75
1:707
[f] That failure to comply with the notice within the time
specified, unless extended by appeal to the Zoning
Hearing Board, constitutes a violation, with possible
sanctions clearly described.
(c) Evidence; fees. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board, the Borough shall have the
responsibility of presenting its evidence first. If the Zoning
Hearing Board, or any court in a subsequent appeal, rules in
the appealing party's favor, the application fees paid by the
party to the Borough to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party
by the Borough.
(d) Causes of action. If the enforcement notice is not complied
with within the specified time period, the Zoning Officer shall
notify Borough Council. With the consent of Borough Council,
the Zoning Officer, Borough Solicitor or other officer of the
Borough may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to
prevent, restrain, correct or abate such building, structure,
landscaping or land or to prevent, in or about such premises,
any act, conduct, business or use constituting a violation.
Section 617 of the Pennsylvania Municipalities Planning Code
also addresses action by other parties.
B. Complaints regarding violations. Whenever a violation of this chapter
occurs or is alleged to have occurred, any person may file a written
complaint. Such complaint, stating fully the causes and basis thereof,
shall be filed with the Zoning Officer or his designee. The Zoning Officer
or his designee shall record the complaint, investigate immediately and
take action thereon as provided by this chapter. The Zoning Officer or
his designee shall provide written response to the complainant stating
his factual findings regarding the alleged violation and the follow-up
actions taken.
C. Inspection of premises. The Zoning Officer or his designee, and his
deputies and assistants, and the Police Chief and his authorized agents,
following due notification to the owner and occupant and prior
arrangement of a reasonable time acceptable to all parties, shall have
the right and authority to enter any building, structure, premises, lot or
land, whether already erected or put into use or in the course of
erecting and putting into use, for the purpose of determining whether
or not the provisions of this chapter are being complied with.
D. Enforcement notice: [Added 7-2-2007 by Ord. No. 706]
(1) If it appears to the municipality that a violation of any zoning
ordinance enacted under this act or prior enabling laws has
occurred, the municipality shall initiate enforcement proceedings
by sending an enforcement notice as provided in this section.
§ 450-75 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-75
1:708
§ 450-76. Zoning and building permits.
(2) The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has
filed a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding
that parcel and to any other person requested in writing by the
owner of record.
(3) An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(a) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the municipality intends to take action.
(b) The location of the property in violation.
(c) The specific violation, with a description of the requirements
which have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable
provisions of the ordinance.
(d) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(e) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in the chapter.
(f) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly
described.
(4) In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing
Board, the municipality shall have the responsibility of presenting
its evidence first.
(5) Any filing paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by
the municipality if the Zoning Hearing Board, or any court in
subsequent appeal, rules in the appealing party's favor.
A. All procedures with respect to application for and issuance of zoning
and building permits shall be in conformity with the provisions of
Chapter 160, Construction Codes, Uniform, the Hellertown Building
Code, as amended. All such applications shall be accompanied by such
other information as may be necessary to determine and provide for the
enforcement of the Building Code.246
B. No zoning and building permit shall be issued for the erection,
construction, reconstruction, structural alteration or moving of any
building or structure or part thereof unless the plans and intended use
246. Editor's Note: See Chs. 153, Code Enforcement, and 160, Construction Codes, Uniform.
§ 450-75 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-76
1:709
§ 450-77. Fees.
Fees for zoning and building permit applications, appeals to the Zoning
Hearing Board and site plan review shall be as provided by Borough
ordinances.
§ 450-78. Site plan review. [Amended 12-2-2002 by Ord. No. 645]
indicate that such building or structure is designed and intended to
conform in all aspects to the provisions of this chapter.
C. Completion of buildings for which permits have been issued. Nothing in
this chapter shall require any change in the plans, construction or
designated use of a building or structure for which a lawful building
permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this chapter or any
amendment thereto affecting such building or structure or the use
thereof, provided that:
(1) The construction of such building or structure shall have been
begun and diligently prosecuted within three months from the date
of such permit.
(2) The ground-story framework, including the second tier of beams,
shall have been completed within six months from the date of such
permit.
(3) The entire building or structure shall be completed according to
such filed and approved plans upon which the issuance of such
permit was based within three years from the effective date of this
chapter or any such amendment thereto.
(4) In the event that Subsection C(1), (2) or (3) is not complied with,
such building permit shall be revoked by the Zoning Officer or his
designee.
A. In order to assure that certain land use proposals specified in Article IV
do not negatively impact the Borough as a result of the site layout, the
grant of a building permit is conditioned upon the approval of the site
plan by the Borough Planning Commission under the provisions of this
section. The procedure shall apply only when the use is a permitted one.
When the use is a special exception, the procedures of § 450-64 shall
apply.
(1) Procedure.
(a) The applicant shall submit four sets of the site plans to the
Zoning Officer or his designee when making application for the
building permit. The plan shall include the following
information:
[1] A statement as to the proposed use of the building or land.
§ 450-76 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-78
1:710
[2] A site layout drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equal 50 feet, showing the location, dimensions and height
of proposed buildings, structures or uses and any existing
buildings in relation to property and street lines. If the
application relates to property which is scheduled to be
developed in successive stages, such plans shall show the
relationship of the portion scheduled for initial
development to the proposed layout of the entire property.
[3] The location, dimensions and arrangements of all open
spaces and yards and buffer yards, including methods to
be employed for screening.
[4] The location, size, arrangement and capacity of all areas to
be used for motor vehicle access, off-street parking, offstreet
loading and unloading and provisions to be made for
lighting such areas.
[5] The dimensions, location and methods of illumination for
signs, if applicable.
[6] The location and dimensions of sidewalks and all other
areas to be devoted to pedestrian use.
[7] Provisions to be made for treatment and disposal of
sewage and industrial wastes, water supply and storm
drainage.
[8] The capacity and arrangement of all buildings used or
intended to be used for dwelling purposes, including the
proposed density.
[9] A description of any proposed industrial or commercial
operations in sufficient detail to indicate effects of these
operations in producing noise, glare, air pollution, water
pollution, fire hazards, traffic congestion or other safety
hazards.
[10] Description of methods to be employed in controlling any
excess noise, air pollution, smoke, fumes, water pollution,
fire hazards or other safety hazards.
[11] The bounds of any easements of record at the
Northampton County Recorder of Deeds Office.
[12] Any other data deemed necessary by the Zoning Officer or
his designee to enable him to determine the compliance of
the proposed development with the terms of this chapter.
(b) The Zoning Officer or his designee shall review the plans for
conformance to Borough zoning standards and submit the
comments as well as a set of the plans to the Borough Planning
§ 450-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-78
1:711
Commission and the Borough Engineer within 10 working
days.
(c) Within 40 days of the date of the regular meeting of the
Planning Commission next following the date the application is
submitted, the Planning Commission shall approve or
disapprove the plans at a public meeting based on the
considerations contained in Subsection A(2). [Amended
12-2-2013 by Ord. No. 783]
(d) If the Planning Commission fails to act within the required time
period, the plans shall be deemed approved.
(e) If the plans are disapproved, the reasons for such action shall
be written on a set of plans, which shall then be returned to the
applicant.
(f) The applicant may appeal an unfavorable decision to the Court
of Common Pleas of Northampton County.
(2) Site plan review criteria. The Planning Commission shall use the
following criteria in reviewing site plans:
(a) Preservation of natural features. Insofar as practicable, natural
features on the site shall be preserved.
(b) Building arrangement. Elements of the site plan shall be
harmoniously and efficiently organized in relation to existing
desirable trees, topography, views within and beyond the site,
the size and shape of the site, the character of adjoining
property and the size of the buildings.
(c) Access, parking and circulation. With respect to vehicular and
pedestrian circulation, special attention shall be given to
location and number of access points, on-site circulation,
separation of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, and
arrangement and location of parking areas. The need for
adequate signalization, channelization and other traffic control
measures shall be given consideration.
(d) Surface water drainage. Measures to ensure proper site
surface drainage shall be carefully considered. Stormwater
and surface water shall be conveyed and discharged in a
manner which shall not adversely affect neighboring
properties, the public storm drainage system or on-site
pedestrian and vehicular movement.
(e) Special features. Setbacks, buffer yard and other screening
methods shall be carefully considered to minimize the visual
effects of storage areas, service areas, truck loading areas,
utility structures and similar accessory structures.
§ 450-78 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-78
1:712
§ 450-79. Nonconforming lots, structures and uses.
Within the districts established by this chapter or amendments that may
later be adopted there exist lots, structures and uses which would be
prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this chapter or future
amendment. It is the intent of this chapter to permit these nonconformities
to continue until they are terminated. Any existing use which is permitted
by special exception in this chapter shall be deemed to be a "conforming
use" where it has met the standards and criteria of this chapter for that
special exception use.
B. However, and with respect to an application for a proposed permitted
use in the M Mixed, SC Shopping Center and I Industrial Districts, as
addressed in Article IV of this chapter, when the Zoning Officer or his
designee finds that such a proposal does not constitute a significant
departure from the previous use to which a parcel has been put, then
said Officer or his designee may waive the requirements of this section
and may require in their place the submission of a "sketch plan" for the
review and approval of the Zoning Officer or his designee, who, in turn,
shall refer said plan to the Hellertown Borough Planning Commission
for review and comment. Said sketch plan submission shall contain
those elements as may be stipulated by the Zoning Officer or his
designee from among those several elements as required for a site plan
pursuant to Subsection A(1) of this section. For these purposes, a
proposal shall be considered not to constitute a significant departure
from the previous use when said proposal:
(1) Does not entail any physical modifications to the "footprint" of any
existing structures and/or the construction of any new structures.
(2) Is not expected to generate additional traffic volumes and/or
significant changes to traffic patterns.
(3) Is not expected to affect negatively, in any manner, the general area
in which it is to be located.
(4) Will comply with all applicable terms of this chapter and all other
ordinances of the Borough and all pertinent state or federal
statutes.
A. Nonconforming uses. A nonconforming use shall be changed only to a
conforming use. A nonconforming use may not be changed to another
nonconforming use, except as provided in Subsection F. A
nonconforming use may be enlarged or extended only as a result of the
natural expansion of that use up to 50% of its existing floor area if all
proposed structures are in conformance with provisions of this chapter
and no conforming use is displaced. If a structure used by a
nonconforming use is accidentally and unintentionally damaged, it may
be restored or reconstructed and used as before, provided that the floor
area of such structure shall not exceed the floor area which existed
§ 450-78 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-79
1:713
prior to such damage and that it be completed within one year of such
happening.
B. Nonconforming structures. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) Provided, however, that the extension of a nonconforming structure
into side yards (as said side yards may be required pursuant to
provisions found elsewhere in this chapter) shall be permitted so
long as the proposed extension is so constructed so as to constitute
a continuation of the existing side building line, but in no
circumstances shall such an extension encroach any closer than
three feet to a side property line, and, additionally, that the total lot
coverage that may result from the inclusion of the proposed
extension together with the existing structure(s) shall not exceed
the maximum lot coverages as permitted elsewhere in this chapter.
(2) The extension of a nonconforming structure into setback areas
shall be permitted for any and all structures made nonconforming
due to a condemnation of private property, or when a preexisting
nonconforming structure is made more nonconforming due to a
condemnation of private property. Any nonconforming structure so
created or any nonconforming structure made more
nonconforming shall be permitted by right to extend into any front
yard, side yard, and/or rear yard setback to the depth of
encroachment created by the condemnation. The encroachment
into a setback area caused by a condemnation of private property
shall not be a violation of the Borough Zoning Ordinance. This
section applies immediately upon the date of taking.
C. Nonconforming lots. [Amended 4-16-2012 by Ord. No. 763]
(1) Any change made in the configuration of a nonconforming lot shall
be to bring such lot into conformance. A nonconforming lot may be
used for the erection of a dwelling within the standards of
§ 450-18C.
(2) The requirement that a change in the configuration of a
nonconforming lot shall be to bring such lot into conformance shall
not apply to any change made in the configuration of a
nonconforming lot if the change in configuration was caused by a
condemnation of private property. In that event, the configuration
of a nonconforming lot after condemnation shall be permitted as of
right immediately upon the date of taking.
D. Termination. A nonconforming use shall be deemed to have been
terminated and shall not thereafter be reinstated:
(1) When it is changed to a conforming use.
(2) When it has been discontinued for a period of 12 consecutive
months.
§ 450-79 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-79
1:714
§ 450-80. Enforcement notice. [Added 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
E. Registration of nonconforming uses and structures. The Zoning Officer
or his designee shall, upon adoption of this chapter, identify and
register nonconforming uses and structures in the Borough as an aid to
the enforcement of this chapter. Upon identifying a nonconformity, the
Zoning Officer or his designee shall send notice to the owner of record
that a nonconformity exists on his property and with which provisions of
this chapter it does not conform. Failure by the Zoning Officer or his
designee to identify and register a nonconforming use or structure is
not to be construed as a recognition that a use or structure is in
conformance with this chapter.
F. Change of use. A lawfully existing nonconforming use may be changed
to another nonconforming use if, upon petition, the Zoning Hearing
Board shall have made a determination that such change will be
beneficial to the general neighborhood; and, further, provided that the
nonconforming use to which it is changed is of the same or more
restricted classification which is more appropriate to the neighborhood
in which it is situated than the original nonconforming use.
A. If it appears to the Borough that a violation of any zoning ordinance
enacted under this chapter or prior enabling laws has occurred, the
Borough shall initiate enforcement proceedings by sending an
enforcement notice as provided in this section.
B. The enforcement notice shall be sent to the owner of record of the
parcel on which the violation has occurred, to any person who has filed
a written request to receive enforcement notices regarding that parcel,
and to any other person requested in writing by the owner of record.
C. An enforcement notice shall state at least the following:
(1) The name of the owner of record and any other person against
whom the Borough intends to take action.
(2) The location of the property in violation.
(3) The specific violation with a description of the requirements which
have not been met, citing in each instance the applicable provisions
of this chapter.
(4) The date before which the steps for compliance must be
commenced and the date before which the steps must be
completed.
(5) That the recipient of the notice has the right to appeal to the
Zoning Hearing Board within a prescribed period of time in
accordance with procedures set forth in this chapter. The recipient
shall file an appeal within 30 days of receipt of the enforcement
notice. [Amended 10-16-2017 by Ord. No. 820]
§ 450-79 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-80
1:715
§ 450-81. Causes of action. [Amended 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
In the case any building, structure, landscaping or land is, or is proposed to
be, erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, maintained or
used in violation of this chapter, the Borough Council or, with the approval
of the Borough Council, an officer of the Borough, or any aggrieved owner
or tenant of real property who shows that his property or person will be
substantially affected by the alleged violation, in addition to other remedies,
may institute any appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, restrain,
correct or abate such building, structure, landscaping or land, or to prevent,
in or about such premises, any act, conduct, business or use constituting
a violation. When any such action is instituted by a landowner or tenant,
notice of that action shall be served upon the Borough at least 30 days prior
to the time the action is begun by serving a copy of the complaint on the
Borough Council of the Borough. No such action may be maintained until
such notice has been given.
§ 450-82. Enforcement remedies. [Amended 7-2-2007 by Ord. No.
706; 9-17-2012 by Ord. No. 775]
(6) That failure to comply with the notice within the time specified,
unless extended by appeal to the Zoning Hearing Board,
constitutes a violation, with possible sanctions clearly described.
D. In any appeal of an enforcement notice to the Zoning Hearing Board,
the Borough shall have the responsibility of presenting its evidence
first.
E. Any filing fees paid by a party to appeal an enforcement notice to the
Zoning Hearing Board shall be returned to the appealing party by the
Borough if the Zoning Hearing Board or any court in a subsequent
appeal rules in the appealing party's favor.
A. Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated or
permitted the violation of any zoning ordinance enacted under this
chapter shall, upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement
proceeding commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more
than $500 plus all court costs, including reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the Borough
may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable rules of civil
procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation, unless the Magisterial District Judge determining
that there has been a violation further determines that there was a good
faith basis for the person, partnership or corporation violating the
ordinance to have believed that there was no such violation, in which
event there shall be deemed to have been only one such violation until
the fifth day following the date of the determination of a violation by the
§ 450-80 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-82
1:716
Magisterial District Judge, and thereafter each day that a violation
continues shall constitute a separate violation. All judgments, costs
and reasonable attorney's fees collected for that violation of a zoning
ordinance shall be paid over to the Borough whose ordinance has been
violated.
B. The Court of Common Pleas, upon petition, may grant an order of stay,
upon cause shown, tolling the per-diem fine pending a final adjudication
of the violation and judgment.
C. Nothing contained in this section shall be construed or interpreted to
grant to any person or entity other than the Borough the right to
commence any action for enforcement pursuant to this section.
D. Violations and penalties.
(1) Any person, partnership or corporation who or which has violated
or permitted the violation of the provisions of this chapter shall,
upon being found liable therefor in a civil enforcement proceeding
commenced by the Borough, pay a judgment of not more than $500
plus all court costs, including the reasonable attorney's fees
incurred by the Borough as a result thereof. No judgment shall
commence or be imposed, levied or be payable until the date of the
determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge. If the
defendant neither pays nor timely appeals the judgment, the
Borough may enforce the judgment pursuant to the applicable
rules of civil procedure. Each day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate violation, unless a Magisterial District Judge
determining that there has been a violation further determines that
there was a good faith basis for the person, partnership or
corporation violating this chapter to have believed that there was
no such violation, in which event there shall be deemed to have
been only one such violation until the fifth day following the date of
the determination of a violation by the Magisterial District Judge,
and thereafter each day that a violation continues shall constitute a
separate violation. All judgments, costs and reasonable attorney's
fees collected for the violation of this chapter shall be paid over to
the Borough. Imprisonment shall not be authorized by this chapter.
[Amended 3-21-2011 by Ord. No. 757]
(2) Any unlawful activities shall constitute separate and distinct
offenses for each and every day in which said activities are
conducted.
(3) In addition to any monetary penalties involved, the Borough of
Hellertown shall revoke the zoning permit required upon
conviction of any unlawful activities.
(4) In the event of any unlawful activities conducted by or in the name
of a corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm or
association, in addition to entity liability, the officers, agents or
§ 450-82 GENERAL PROVISIONS § 450-82
1:717
§ 450-83. Exemptions.247
This chapter shall not apply to any existing or proposed building or
extension thereof used or to be used by a public utility corporation if, upon
petition, the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission shall, after a public
hearing, decide that the present or proposed situation of the building in
question is reasonably necessary for the convenience or welfare of the
public. It shall be the responsibility of the Pennsylvania Public Utility
Commission to ensure that both the corporation and the municipality in
which the building or proposed building is located have notice of the
hearing and are granted an opportunity to appear, present witnesses, crossexamine
witnesses presented by other parties and otherwise exercise the
rights of a party to the proceedings.
§ 450-84. Public records.
Duly certified copies of this chapter and of the Zoning Map, which forms a
part hereof, together with copies of all amendments hereof, together with
copies amendments hereto, shall be filed in the Borough Secretary's office
and in the Zoning Officer's or his designee's office and shall be open to
public inspection.
principals of said corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, firm
or association shall be deemed in violation as well as the person or
persons engaged in the unlawful activity.
247. Editor's Note: Amended at time of adoption of Code (see Ch. 1, General Provisions, Art. I).
§ 450-82 HELLERTOWN CODE § 450-84
1:718
Appendix
Chapter A460
ANNEXATIONS
§ A460-1. Annexation of territory.
Ord./Res. Date Description
79 5-12-1919 Annexing a part of Lower Saucon Township,
Northampton County, Pennsylvania, adjacent to
and adjoining the Borough of Hellertown on the
northern, southern and eastern and western
boundary lines thereof.
122 10-20-1930 Annexing a portion of Lower Saucon Township,
situate along the present easterly Borough line,
between the road leading from Hellertown to
Durham and the point of intersection along the
said boundary line made by the extension of the
center line of Walnut Street in said Borough of
Hellertown.
153 10-8-1940 Annexing to the Borough of Hellertown a portion
of Lower Saucon Township, adjacent to and east
of the said Borough, describing the said portion
and authorizing and directing the Borough
Solicitor to perform the necessary acts to carry
out the said annexation.
Chapter A470
STREET ORDINANCES
§ A470-1. Streets and sidewalks.
This appendix chapter contains an alphabetical listing of streets and, under
each street, a listing of all ordained activities.
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Ackerman
Street
Defining Between Main Street and
Hughes Street
89 10-16-1922
Alley Accepting 20 feet wide, located
parallel to Main Street,
extending from the alley
south of and parallel to
Thomas Avenue
96 4-7-1924
§ 450-84 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:719
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Alley Accepting 17 feet wide, parallel to
Depot Street, extending
from the alley parallel to
and west of Main Street
96 4-7-1924
Alley Accepting 17 feet wide, parallel to
Main Street, extending
from Depot Street to
another alley located
parallel to Chestnut
Street
96 4-7-1924
Alley Accepting 20 feet wide, between
Chestnut Street and
Thomas Avenue
96 4-7-1924
Alley Accepting 20 feet wide, located
parallel to Thomas
Avenue, extending from
Main Street to the alley
located west of Main
Street
96 4-7-1924
Alley Extending East of and parallel to
Main Street between
Wilson Avenue and High
Street
99 10-6-1924
Bachman
Street
Defining Between Main Street and
Hughes Street
89 10-16-1922
Balsam Alley Opening Between Oak Alley and
Hoffert Alley
112 10-10-1927
Birch Alley Opening Between Coke Alley and
Cherry Lane
112 10-10-1927
Bleyler Street Defining Between High Street and
the north Borough line
89 10-16-1922
Brick Street Opening Between Main Street and
Front Street and
extending between
Magnolia Road and Pine
Street
243 7-23-1957
Brick Street Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Pine Street is hereby
changed to Harris Street
244 7-23-1957
Burkhardt
Street
Defining Between High Street and
the north Borough line
89 10-16-1922
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:720
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Center Alley Vacating Reserving to the Borough
a right-of-way for utility
purposes
164 4-3-1944
Center Street Opening Between Easton Road
and New York Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Center Street Improving From Easton Road to
Detwiller Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Cherry Alley Opening Between Penn Street and
Detweiler Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Cherry Lane Opening Between Main Street and
Easton Road
112 10-10-1927
Cherry Lane Renaming From Main Street to
Easton Road is hereby
changed to Kiernan
Avenue
244 7-23-1957
Cherry Street Opening,
curbing
From Durham Street to
Green Street
32 10-7-1885
Cherry Street Vacating Between Saucon Street
and Green Street
120 5-12-1930
Cherry Street Widening Between Magnolia Road
and Walnut Street
227 8-23-1955
Chestnut
Street
Accepting Between Main Street and
Easton Road
96 4-7-1924
Chestnut
Street
Opening Between Main Street and
lands formerly of Tobias
Rentzheimer, now of the
Bethlehem Steel Realty
Corporation
112 10-10-1927
Chestnut
Street
Improving From Easton Road to
New Jersey Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Chestnut
Street
Improving From Main Street to
Front Street
151 10-1-1940
Church Street Opening Between Water Street
and Penn Street and
extending from Main
Street to Northampton
Street
243 7-23-1957
Clarke Street Opening Between the right-of-way
line of the North Penn
Branch of the Reading
Railroad and Second
Avenue
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:721
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Clarke Street Vacating A ten-foot alley east of
and parallel and adjacent
to the eastern right-ofway
line of the
Philadelphia and Reading
Railroad from the
northern curbline of
Clarke Street
168 10-1-1945
Clauser
Street
Opening Between High Street and
Splitdorf-Bethlehem
Electrical Co.
112 10-10-1927
Clauser
Street
Vacating Running 180 feet in a
southerly direction from
the northern boundary
line of the property of
Jerry A. Horst towards
Hemlock Street
689 5-15-2006
Coke Alley Opening Between Main Street and
the easterly line of the
Wagner Terrace
112 10-10-1927
Courtright
Avenue
Opening Between High Street and
Leonard Street
112 10-10-1927
Deemer Alley Opening Between Delaware
Avenue and the
parklands of the Borough
112 10-10-1927
Deemer
Street
Opening Between Penn Street and
Water Street and
extending from Delaware
Avenue to Cherry Street
243 7-23-1957
Delaware
Avenue
Opening Between Detweiler
Avenue and Saucon
Street
112 10-10-1927
Delaware
Avenue
Improving From Durham Street to
Detwiller Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Delp Street Opening From Fehr Street south
for a distance of 185 feet
and thence 20 feet wide
to Oliver Street
243 7-23-1957
Depot Street Amending Between Main Street and
Easton Street
24 5-15-1882
Depot Street Curbing Main Street to the North
Pennsylvania Railroad
property
17 6-11-1877
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:722
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Depot Street Curbing From Main Street to
Easton Street or Easton
Road
33 10-16-1874
Depot Street Curbing From Main Street to the
North Pennsylvania
Railroad
43 6-22-1895
Depot Street Opening Between Easton Road
and land of the
Bethlehem Steel Realty
Corporation
112 10-10-1927
Depot Street Vacating From Front Street to the
Reading Company rightof-
way
229 12-19-1955
Depot Street Opening Between Main Street and
Easton Road
243 7-23-1957
Detweiler
Avenue
Opening Between Northampton
Street and Apple Street
112 10-10-1927
Detweiler
Avenue
Opening Between Apple Street
and a point 295 feet
north thereof
243 7-23-1957
Detwiller
Alley
Renaming From Easton Road to
Harwi Street is hereby
changed to Plaza Lane
244 7-23-1957
Detwiller
Avenue
Improving From Northampton
Street to Depot Street
151 10-1-1940
Detwiller
Avenue
Improving From Chestnut Street to
Linden Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Diamond
Street
Opening Between High Street and
Clarke Street
112 10-10-1927
Diehl Alley Opening Between Oliver Alley and
Keilman Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Division
Street
Defining From Front Street to
Main Street, parallel to
the southern boundary of
the Geissinger estate
63 3-4-1912
Durham
Street
Curbing From Main Street to
Laubach's Alley
6 11-6-1874
Durham
Street
Curbing From Main Street to the
east Borough line
20 3-11-1881
Durham
Street
Opening Between Cherry Street
and the easterly Borough
limits
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:723
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Easton Road Opening From Main Street to the
northeastern boundary
line of the Borough
39 8-20-1888
Easton Road Opening Between Third Avenue
and Cherry Lane, the
northerly Borough limits
112 10-10-1927
Easton Road Improving From the building line on
the south side of Phillips
Street to the northern
boundary line of the
Borough at Cherry Lane
127 9-8-1931
Easton Road Grading From Station 0+00 to
Station 60+15 a distance
of 6,015 feet
280 12-4-1961
Ellen Street Opening Extending from Cherry
Street to Tobias Drive
243 7-23-1957
Elm Alley Opening Between Oak Alley and
Front Street
112 10-10-1927
Fehr Street Opening Between Depot Street
and Hampton Avenue
and extending from
Harwi Street to Oak
Street
243 7-23-1957
Fehr Street Opening South of Depot Street
and extending from Main
Street to Easton Road
243 7-23-1957
Fir Alley Opening Between Oak Alley and
Hoffert Alley
112 10-10-1927
First Avenue Opening Between High Street and
Chestnut Street
112 10-10-1927
Foundry Alley Amending Between Main Street and
Easton Street
24 5-15-1882
Foundry Alley Opening Main Street to Easton
Street or Easton Road
33 10-16-1874
Foundry
Street
Opening Between Depot Street
and Chestnut Street and
extending between Main
Street and Easton Road
243 7-23-1957
Fox Alley Opening Between Delaware
Avenue and Apple Street
112 10-10-1927
Franklin
Street
Opening Between Kichline Avenue
and the Splitdorf-
Bethlehem Electrical Co.
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:724
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Friendensville
Road
Grading From Station 85+96 to
Station 98+11 a distance
of 1,215 feet
260 7-14-1958
Front Street Curbing From Depot Street to
Green Street
44 12-7-1896
Front Street Opening From Water Street to
Depot Street
27 11-13-1882
Front Street Opening From Water Street to
Walnut Street
40 5-13-1889
Front Street Changing From a point where it
intersects the property of
Mann Bros. to Walnut
Street
56 8-4-1902
Front Street Opening From Green Street to
Walnut Street
58 11-2-1903
Front Street Accepting Between Depot Street
and Thomas Avenue
96 4-7-1924
Front Street Vacating From Sycamore Avenue
to Thomas Avenue
688 3-20-2006
Furnace
Street
Opening Between Thomas Avenue
and Bachman Street
112 10-10-1927
Furnace
Street
Relocating Between Thomas Avenue
and Bachman Street
121 10-20-1930
Gary Lane Opening South of High Street and
extending from
Washington Street to
Oak Street
243 7-23-1957
Gold Street Opening Between Whitaker Street
and the right-of-way of
the Reading Railroad
112 10-10-1927
Gold Street Vacating Between building lines
from the western side of
Whitaker Street west to
the eastern right-of-way
of the Philadelphia and
Reading Railroad
168 10-1-1945
Green Street Curbing Between the eastern
boundary of the Borough
and the North
Pennsylvania Railroad
52 8-6-1900
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:725
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Green Street Opening From the eastern
boundary of the Borough
to the North
Pennsylvania Railroad
37 8-20-1888
Green Street Renaming Renamed to Magnolia
Road from Cherry Street
west to the Reading
Company right-of-way
181 9-19-1949
Gum Alley Opening Between Main Street and
Clauser Street
112 10-10-1927
Hampton
Avenue
Defining From Front Street to
Main Street, parallel to
Depot Street
63 3-4-1912
Hampton
Avenue
Improving From Main Street to
Front Street
151 10-1-1940
Harris Alley Changing The center line of Harris
Alley between Water
Street and Green Street
R. 7-1-1907
Harris Alley Opening From Green Street to
Water Street
34 10-7-1885
Harris Street Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Pine Street is hereby
changed from Brick
Street to Harris Street
244 7-23-1957
Harwi Alley Opening From Water Street to
Depot Street
36 8-20-1888
Harwi Alley Defining From Division Street to
Depot Street, the east
line being parallel to and
155 feet east of the east
line of Front Street
63 3-4-1912
Hemlock
Alley
Opening Between Oak Alley and
Clauser Street
112 10-10-1927
Hemlock
Street
Vacating Between Franklin Street
and Oak Street
590 6-7-1993
Henry Street Opening Extending from Cherry
Street to Tobias Drive
243 7-23-1957
Herman Alley Opening Between Cherry Street
and the property line of
lands of Dr. W.H.
Rentzheimer
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:726
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Hess Avenue Defining Between Main Street and
the east right-of-way line
of the North Penn Drive
of the Reading Railroad
89 10-16-1922
High Street Defining Between Easton Road
and the east right-of-way
line of Reading Railroad,
from Easton Road to
Main Street
89 10-16-1922
High Street Defining Between Main Street and
Easton Road
98 6-23-1924
High Street Defining Between Main Street and
the right-of-way line of
the North Penn Drive of
the Reading Railroad
98 6-23-1924
Hillcrest
Court
Opening Extending north 162 feet
from Apple Street, the
northern 80 feet being a
circle with forty-foot
radius
243 7-23-1957
Hoffert Alley Opening Between Roth Avenue
and Kiernan Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Ilona Drive Accepting As indicated on Willow
Park Subdivision Plan
Number 8669800
606 12-4-1995
Jefferson
Street
Opening Between High Street and
Clarke Street
112 10-10-1927
John Street Opening Between Easton Road
and New Jersey Avenue
112 10-10-1927
John Street Renaming From Easton Road to
New Jersey Avenue is
hereby changed to
Wilson Avenue
244 7-23-1957
Keilman
Avenue
Opening Between High Street and
Leonard Street
112 10-10-1927
Kern Alley Opening Between Herman Alley
and the line of Dr. W.H.
Rentzheimer
112 10-10-1927
Kichline
Avenue
Defining Between Main Street and
Clauser Street
89 10-16-1922
Kiernan
Avenue
Defining Between Main Street and
Clauser Street
89 10-16-1922
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:727
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Kiernan
Avenue
Renaming From Main Street to
Easton Road is hereby
changed from Cherry
Lane to Kiernan Avenue
244 7-23-1957
Laubach
Street
Opening Between Main Street and
Northampton Street and
extending between
Magnolia Road and
Church Street
243 7-23-1957
Laubach
Street
Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Spruce Street is hereby
changed from South
Street to Laubach Street
244 7-23-1957
Laubach
Street
Renaming From Spruce Street to
Walnut Street is hereby
changed from Sterner
Street to Laubach Street
244 7-23-1957
Leonard
Street
Opening Between Easton Road
and the lot layout of O.E.
Roth
112 10-10-1927
Leonard
Street
Opening The center line to be
continuation of the
present center line of
Leonard Street
171 1/2 12-2-1946
Lime Alley Opening Between Third Avenue
and Easton Road
112 10-10-1927
Limestone
Alley
Opening Between Tobias Alley and
Cherry Street
112 10-10-1927
Linden
Avenue
Opening Between Main Street and
lands now or late of Allen
Henn
112 10-10-1927
Linden
Avenue
Improving From Easton Road to
Detwiller Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Lois Street Opening North of Chestnut Street
and extending between
Easton Road and Quintus
Street
243 7-23-1957
Madison Alley Opening Between Coke Alley and
Cherry Lane
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:728
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Magnolia
Drive
Vacating That portion running
through the property of
Steel City containing
1,476 square feet or
0.0339 acres of land
609 7-15-1996
Magnolia
Road
Renaming Renamed from Green
Street from Cherry
Street west to the
Reading Company rightof-
way
181 9-19-1949
Magnolia
Road
Opening Extending from Cherry
Street 1,210 feet to the
Mountainview Tract
243 7-23-1957
Main Street Curbing From Spruce Street to
center of the stone
bridge
7 1-11-1877
Main Street Curbing From Walnut Street to
Spruce Street
7 1-11-1877
Main Street Curbing From Depot Street to the
north Borough line
7 1-11-1877
Main Street Curbing From Walnut Street to
the north Borough line
19 7-15-1880
Main Street Curbing From the bridge to Depot
Street
7 1-11-1877
Main Street Extending Northwardly to the
public road leading to
Seidersville
85 4-10-1922
Main Street Paving From the southern to the
northern limits of the
Borough
95 4-7-1924
Main Street Amending Main Street from the
southern to the northern
limits
100 11-17-1924
Main Street Grading Department of Highways
plan
222 8-18-1954
Main Street Opening Extending from Walnut
Street to McAdoo Avenue
243 7-23-1957
Main Street Grading Station 126+93 to
Station 136+62 a
distance of 969 feet
270 5-4-1960
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:729
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
McAdoo
Avenue
Opening South of Walnut Street
and extending from Main
Street 1,550 feet east to
the Borough line
243 7-23-1957
Miller Street Opening Between Easton Road
and line of lands now or
late of Allen Henn
112 10-10-1927
Miller Street Opening Extending from Third
Avenue to Easton Road
243 7-23-1957
Milton Alley Opening Between Diemer Alley
and Chestnut Street
112 10-10-1927
Monroe Alley Opening Between Coke Alley and
Cherry Lane
112 10-10-1927
Morris Alley Opening Between Coke Alley and
Cherry Lane
112 10-10-1927
New Jersey
Avenue
Opening Between Delaware
Avenue and Apple Street
112 10-10-1927
New Jersey
Avenue
Improving From Chestnut Street to
Delaware Avenue
151 10-1-1940
New Street Curbing From Penn Street to
Walnut Street
28 8-4-1844
New Street Opening From Spruce Street to
Walnut Street
29 8-4-1884
New York
Avenue
Opening Between Durham Street
and Linden Avenue
112 10-10-1927
North Street Opening Between Main Street and
Easton Road and
extending from High
Street to Gary Lane
243 7-23-1957
North Street Renaming From Fehr Street to
Plaza Lane is hereby
changed to Oliver Street
244 7-23-1957
Northampton
Street
Changing Between Saucon Street
and Durham Street
35 8-20-1888
Northampton
Street
Curbing Between Durham Street
and Saucon Street
33 10-16-1874
Northampton
Street
Curbing From Walnut Street to
Penn Street
3 10-16-1874
Northampton
Street
Opening From Walnut Street to
Penn Street
33 10-7-1885
Northampton
Street
Opening From Walnut Street to
Saucon Street
33 10-7-1885
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:730
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Northampton
Street
Opening Saucon Street to Durham
Street
33 10-7-1885
Northampton
Street
Opening From Durham Street to
Penn Street
33 10-7-1885
Northampton
Street
Opening From Penn Street to
Easton Road
77 9-16-1918
Northampton
Street
Curbing Between Walnut Street
and Easton Road
102 7-29-1925
Northampton
Street
Opening Between Walnut Street
and the Springtown
Public Road
112 10-10-1927
Oak Alley Defining From Front Street to
Main Street, being
parallel to and 138 feet
west of Main Street
63 3-4-1912
Oak Alley Opening Between High Street and
the property of Splitdorf-
Bethlehem Electrical
Company
112 10-10-1927
Oak Alley Vacating West side of Main Street
between Chestnut Street
and Thomas Avenue
631 5-1-2000
Oak Street Opening Between Main Street and
Washington Street and
extending from High
Street to Gary Lane
243 7-23-1957
Oak Street Vacating Between the northern
boundary line of
Hemlock Street and the
southern boundary line
of the property of the
Hellertown
Manufacturing Company
253 12-4-1957
Oliver Alley Opening Between Linden Avenue
and Diehl Alley
112 10-10-1927
Oliver Street Opening Between Main Street and
First Avenue and
extending from Linden
Avenue to Chestnut
Street
243 7-23-1957
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:731
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Oliver Street Renaming From Fehr Street to
Plaza Lane is hereby
changed from North
Street to Oliver Street
244 7-23-1957
Oliver Street Opening Between Main Street and
First Avenue extended
from High Street to Diehl
Street
256 3-3-1958
Park Lane Renaming From Wilson Avenue to
Lime Alley is hereby
changed from Shilling
Alley to Park Lane
244 7-23-1957
Parson Street Opening West of Main Street and
extended southwardly
from Walnut Street for
732 feet to land of the
American Stores
Company
255 3-3-1958
Parson Street Vacating West of Main Street and
extended southwardly
from Walnut Street for
732 feet to land of the
American Stores
Company
255 3-3-1958
Parson Street Opening West of Main Street and
south of Walnut Street
595 7-21-1994
Paul Street Renaming From Spruce Street to
Walnut Street is hereby
changed from Roth
Street to Paul Street
244 7-23-1957
Peach Street Opening Between Saucon Street
and Durham Street and
extending from Cherry
Street to Laubach Street
243 7-23-1957
Pearl Street Opening Between High Street and
Clarke Street
112 10-10-1927
Penn Street Curbing From Main Street to the
east Borough line, 35
feet wide, with ten-footwide
sidewalk areas on
each side
2 9-17-1874
Phillips Street Opening Between Third Avenue
and lands now or late of
Allen Henn
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:732
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Pine Street Opening Between Magnolia Road
and Walnut Street and
extending from Main
Street to Harris Street
243 7-23-1957
Plaza Lane Renaming From Easton Road to
Harwi Street is hereby
changed from Detwiller
Alley to Plaza Lane
244 7-23-1957
Polk Valley
Road
Renaming From approximately
1,550 feet in length
along the common
municipal boundary
between Hellertown
Borough and Lower
Saucon Township at the
southern border of the
Borough is hereby
changed from McAdoo
Avenue to Polk Valley
Road
700 8-7-2006
Preston Alley Opening Between Delaware
Avenue and Miller Street
112 10-10-1927
Preston Alley Vacating Between a point 300 feet
south of the south street
line of Depot Street and
the north street line of
New York Avenue
184 6-5-1950
Preston
Street
Vacating Between the north street
line of Deemer Street
and the north line of New
York Avenue
296 12-7-1964
Quintus Alley Opening Between Diehl Alley and
Linden Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Quintus
Street
Opening Between First Avenue
and Second Avenue and
extending from Linden
Avenue to Lois Street
243 7-23-1957
Reiss Alley Opening Between Magnolia Street
and Spruce Street
223 9-20-1954
Reiss Alley Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Spruce Street is hereby
changed to Strauss
Street
244 7-23-1957
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:733
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Rentzheimer
Drive
Opening Extending from Durham
Street to Walnut Street
243 7-23-1957
Rentzheimer
Drive
Opening Between Durham Street
and New York Avenue
341 3-4-1965
Riegel Street Defining Between High Street and
the north Borough line
89 10-16-1922
Rohn Road Naming Between Locust Road
and Constitution Avenue
having access to Juniper
Road and Constitution
Avenue
387 5-4-1970
Roth Avenue Defining Between Main Street and
Clauser Street
89 10-16-1922
Roth Street Opening Between Main Street and
New Street and
extending from Spruce
Street to Walnut Street
243 7-23-1957
Roth Street Renaming From Spruce Street to
Walnut Street is hereby
changed to Paul Street
244 7-23-1957
Ruch Alley Opening Between Diehl Alley and
Linden Avenue
112 10-10-1927
Ruch Street Locating Between Wilson Avenue
and Leonard Street
180 9-19-1949
Ruch Street Opening Between Second Avenue
and Third Avenue and
extending from Linden
Avenue to Lois Street
243 7-23-1957
Sand Alley Opening Between Third Avenue
and Easton Road
112 10-10-1927
Saucon Street Amending From Main Street to
Cherry Street
25 9-4-1882
Saucon Street Curbing Main Street to the east
Borough line
9 1-11-1877
Saucon Street Opening From Main Street to the
east Borough line
5 11-6-1874
Saucon Street Opening From Main Street to the
North Penn Railroad
26 11-13-1882
Saucon Street Opening Extending from Tobias
Drive to Cherry Street
243 7-23-1957
Schilling
Alley
Opening Between Wilson Avenue
and Lime Alley
112 10-10-1927
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:734
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Scott Alley Opening Between Northampton
Street and Apple Street
112 10-10-1927
Second
Avenue
Opening Between High Street and
the former Borough line
112 10-10-1927
Second
Avenue
Extending Across Silver Creek on
Delaware Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Second
Avenue
Extending Between Wilson Avenue
and Clarke Street
151 10-1-1940
Second
Avenue
Extending Southerly end to connect
with Easton Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Second
Avenue
Improving From Wilson Avenue to
Clarke Street
151 10-1-1940
Seidersville
Road
Opening Between Main Street and
the right-of-way of the
North Penn Branch of the
Reading Railroad
112 10-10-1927
Shilling Alley Renaming From Wilson Avenue to
Lime Alley is hereby
changed to Park Lane
244 7-23-1957
South Street Opening Between Main Street and
Northampton Street and
extending from Magnolia
Road to Spruce Street
243 7-23-1957
South Street Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Spruce Street is hereby
changed to Laubach
Street
244 7-23-1957
Spruce Street Curbing From Penn Street to
Walnut Street
28 8-4-1884
Spruce Street Opening From Main Street to the
eastern boundary of the
Borough
30 8-4-1884
Spruce Street Opening Extending from Cherry
Street to Tobias Drive
243 7-23-1957
Spruce Street Opening Between Cherry Street
and Northampton Street
295 9-18-1964
Sterner
Street
Opening Between Northampton
Street and Cherry Street
and extending from
Spruce Street to Walnut
Street
243 7-23-1957
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:735
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Sterner
Street
Renaming From Spruce Street to
Walnut Street is hereby
changed to Laubach
Street
244 7-23-1957
Strauss
Street
Opening Between Northampton
Street and Cherry Street
and extending from
Spruce Street to Walnut
Street
243 7-23-1957
Strauss
Street
Renaming From Magnolia Road to
Spruce Street is hereby
changed from Reiss Alley
to Strauss Street
244 7-23-1957
Sycamore
Alley
Opening Between Main Street and
Front Street
112 10-10-1927
Third Avenue Opening Between Wilson Avenue
and Easton Road
112 10-10-1927
Thomas
Avenue
Accepting Between Main Street and
Front Street
96 4-7-1924
Thomas
Avenue
Opening Between Main Street and
lands now or late of Allen
Henn
112 10-10-1927
Thomas
Avenue
Improving From Easton Road to
Detwiller Avenue
151 10-1-1940
Thomas
Avenue
Opening Extending from a point
556 feet west of Main
Street for a distance of
194 feet to the east rightof-
way line of the
Reading Railroad
243 7-23-1957
Thomas
Street
Vacating From the east side of
New York Avenue east to
the land of the
Bethlehem Steel Club
198 11-5-1951
Tobias Alley Opening Between Herman Alley
and Limestone Alley
112 10-10-1927
Tobias Drive Opening Extending from Durham
Street to Walnut Street
243 7-23-1957
Unnamed
alley
Vacating West side of Main Street
between Chestnut Street
and Thomas Avenue
631 5-1-2000
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:736
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Unnamed
alley
Vacating Running 193 feet from
the northern boundary
line of the property of
Jerry A. Horst which
borders Paikes
Enterprises in a
southerly direction
towards Hemlock Street
ending at the northern
boundary of the property
owned by Anna Chase
692 5-15-2006
Unnamed
street
Vacating Between the intersection
of Kiernan Avenue and
Clauser Street and a
Pennsylvania Railroad
right-of-way
445 3-4-1974
Wagner
Avenue
Defining Between Main Street and
the east property line of
Wagner Terrace
89 10-16-1922
Wagner
Street
Renaming From Front Street to
Harris Street is hereby
changed to Weidner
Street
244 7-23-1957
Walker Street Opening Between Saucon Street
and Magnolia Road and
extending from Front
Street to Harris Street
243 7-23-1957
Walnut Street Curbing From Penn Street to
Walnut Street
28 8-4-1844
Walnut Street Opening From the western
boundary of the Borough
to the eastern boundary
of the same
31 8-4-1844
Walnut Street Opening Extending from Cherry
Street for a distance of
1,501 feet east to the
Mountainview Tract
243 7-23-1957
Warren Street Opening Between Division Street
and Hampton Avenue
and extending from
Harwi Street to Oak
Street
243 7-23-1957
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § A470-1
1:737
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Warren Street Opening South of Depot Street
and extending from
Easton Road to Main
Street
243 7-23-1957
Washington
Avenue
Opening Between High Street and
Clarke Street
112 10-10-1927
Washington
Street
Opening Extending from High
Street to Roth Avenue
243 7-23-1957
Water Street Opening From Main Street to the
North Pennsylvania
Railroad
38 8-20-1888
Water Street Improving Extending from Station
85+96 to Station 90+78,
a distance of 482 feet
139 3-17-1938
Water Street Vacating From Front Street west
to the Reading Company
right-of-way
178 6-6-1949
Weidner
Street
Opening North of Saucon Street
and extending from
Front Street to Harris
Street
243 7-23-1957
Weidner
Street
Renaming From Front Street to
Harris Street is hereby
changed from Wagner
Street to Weidner Street
244 7-23-1957
Whitaker
Street
Opening Between High Street and
Bachman Street
112 10-10-1927
Whitaker
Street
Aligning Between Clarke Street
and Gold Street
169 10-1-1945
Whitaker
Street
Aligning Between Clarke Street
and Gold Street
169 10-1-1945
William
Street
Vacating From the north boundary
of the Wagner Terrace
tract to the south side of
the Seidersville Road,
aka Silvex Road
189 1-22-1951
Williams
Street
Opening Between Kichline Avenue
and Seidersville Road
112 10-10-1927
Wilson
Avenue
Opening Between Main Street and
Easton Road
112 10-10-1927
Wilson
Avenue
Improving From Quintus Alley to
Second Avenue
151 10-1-1940
§ A470-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § A470-1
1:738
Name Activity Location Ord./Res. Date
Wilson
Avenue
Renaming From Easton Road to
New Jersey Avenue is
hereby changed from
John Street to Wilson
Avenue
244 7-23-1957
Disposition List
Chapter DL
DISPOSITION LIST
§ DL-1. Disposition of legislation.
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
766 6-16-2014 Fire prevention Ch. 200
772 3-3-2014 Flood damage prevention Ch. 204
774 Not yet adopted
775 9-17-2012 Adoption of Code Ch. 1, Art. I
776 9-4-2012 General obligation note NCM
777 10-15-2012 General obligation note
amendment
NCM
778 12-3-2012 Tax rate 2013 NCM
779 2-4-2013 Licensing of rental premises
amendment
Ch. 326, Art. I
780 5-19-2014 Cats Ch. 112, Art. IV
781 4-15-2013 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
782 7-1-2013 Sex offenders residency and
work restrictions repealer
Ch. 343,
reference only
783 12-2-2013 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 390; Ch. 450
784 11-4-2013 Police Pension Plan
amendment
See Ch. 55, Art.
II
785 10-21-2013 Intergovernmental
agreement
NCM
786 11-18-2013 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 291
787 Not adopted
§ A470-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:739
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
788 12-16-2013 Tax rate 2014 NCM
789 4-7-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
790 4-21-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
791 6-16-2014 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
792 6-16-2014 Temporary businesses
amendment
Ch. 140, Art. I
793 7-7-2014 Fire safety and emergency
equipment inspections
program
Ch. 202, Art. I
794 9-2-2014 Participation in Delaware
Valley Workers'
Compensation Trust
NCM
795 10-6-2014 Parks and recreation
amendment
Ch. 291
796 12-1-2014 Tax rate 2015 NCM
797 3-16-2015 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
798 4-6-2015 General obligation note NCM
799 8-17-2015 Alarm systems amendment Ch. 100
800 8-17-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
801 10-5-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
802 10-19-2015 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
803 11-2-2015 Solid waste: recycling
amendment
Ch. 367, Art. II
804 12-7-2015 Tax rate 2016 NCM
805 4-18-2016 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
806 4-18-2016 General provisions: adoption
of Code amendment
Ch. 1, Art. I
807 5-5-2016 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
808 6-20-2016 Nuisances amendment;
property maintenance
amendment
Ch. 278; Ch. 310
809 Not adopted
§ DL-1 HELLERTOWN CODE § DL-1
1:740
Ordinance
No.
Adoption
Date Subject Disposition
810 8-1-2016 Transient retail businesses
amendment
Ch. 411
811 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
812 2-21-2017 Streets and sidewalks
amendment
Ch. 385
813 3-6-2017 Subdivision and land
development amendment;
zoning amendment
Ch. 390; Ch. 450
814 3-6-2017 Zoning amendment Ch. 450
815 12-5-2016 Tax rate 2017 NCM
816 2-21-2017 Fire prevention amendment Ch. 200
817 3-20-2017 Junked and abandoned
vehicles amendment
Ch. 430
818 4-3-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
819 6-5-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment
Ch. 425
820 10-16-2017 Vehicles and traffic
amendment; zoning
amendment
Ch. 425; Ch. 450
821 12-4-2017 Tax rate 2018 NCM
822 4-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment; Junked and
Abandoned Vehicles
Amendment
Ch. 425; Ch. 430
823 7-16-2018 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 425
824 9-4-2018 Fireworks Ch. 203
825 8-20-2018 Parks and Recreation
Amendment
Ch. 291
826 Not adopted
827 12-3-2018 Tax Rate 2019 NCM
828 1-7-2019 Vehicles and Traffic
Amendment
Ch. 425
§ DL-1 GENERAL PROVISIONS § DL-1
1:741